Citation Nr: A25030626
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-454953
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served on active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from February 2009 to July 2009, with additional Reserve service. As the appellant has only performed periods of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, and is not service connected for a disease or injury incurred during one of those periods, he is currently not considered a Veteran for VA disability compensation purposes.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101(2), (24).

The Board acknowledges that the appellant has not appointed a representative and proceeds pro se.

The June 2024 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the June 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found that the appellant has been diagnosed with tinnitus (with citation made to a June 2024 VA examination) and that evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, noting that the appellant's military occupational specialty (MOS) as petroleum supply specialist has a low probability of noise exposure.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the appellant elected Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge as the Board Review option.  As such, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  As the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The appellant seeks entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, which he contends was incurred due to military noise exposure when a C4 went off in a bunker near him and as a result of being around loud vehicles during training.  See March 2024 Fully Development Claim

The appellant underwent a VA audiological examination in June 2024.  He reported that his tinnitus onset post active-duty during Reserve service.  He described onset as gradual and that his symptoms are constant and have increased in intensity since onset.  The appellant endorsed noise exposure from C4, vehicles, pumps, machinery, and M16, M249 weapons during service and that his ears were typically protected.  The examiner noted that the appellant's military occupational specialty (MOS) of petroleum supply specialist had a low probability for hazardous noise exposure.  The examiner concluded that it is less likely than not that the appellant's tinnitus was caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  As rationale, the examiner noted that onset was following separation from active-duty, STRs on active-duty are silent as to tinnitus, and the appellant's MOS is low probability for noise exposure.  Therefore, the examiner determined that a nexus is not established.

The Board finds that remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the June 2024 rating decision on appeal.  

In a March 2024 correspondence, the AOJ asked the appellant to provide the name, mailing address, and telephone number of the Reserve unit he was assigned to and to indicate whether he was currently assigned to the unit or when he was last assigned.  The AOJ further requested that the appellant provide a copy of any separation document that he had received for the reported period of service.  See March 12, 2024, Subsequent Development Letter

It appears that the appellant electronically submitted the name of his unit, address, and term of his reserve service on March 12, 2024.  See Military Personnel Record (uploaded March 12, 2024).  The AOJ conducted no further development to attempt to verify any periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).

In light of the appellant's report that his tinnitus onset during his Reserve service, the Board finds that AOJ's failure to attempt to verify the appellant's specific periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires remand.  

The Board additionally finds the February 2024 opinion to be inadequate as the examiner did not address the appellant's March 2024 report that his tinnitus is due to military noise exposure when a C4 went off in a bunker near him and the result of being around loud vehicles during training.  Moreover, the examiner's failure to elicit from the appellant an approximate date of onset of his tinnitus symptoms further renders the examination inadequate.

The AOJ's failure to failure to obtain an adequate VA examination and opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires remand.

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Verify all periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA in a memorandum for the claims file that expressly indicates the dates (month, day, year) of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA from all appropriate sources.  See information appellant electronically submitted on March 12, 2024.

If such information is not available, or the search for any such information otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile.  The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified, and this should be documented for the record.

2. Then, schedule the appellant for a VA examination by a medical professional of appropriate expertise to determine the etiology of his currently-diagnosed tinnitus.  The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, must be provided to the examiner and reviewed in full.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion addressing the following:

(a)	Elicit from the appellant the approximate date of onset of tinnitus symptoms.

(b)	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the appellant's tinnitus was incurred in or aggravated by any verified period of ACDUTRA including from February 2009 to July 2009, or due to injury from any verified period of INACDUTRA?

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must specifically consider and address the following pertinent evidence:

"	The appellant's March 2024 report that his tinnitus is due to military noise exposure when a C4 went off in a bunker near him and the result of being around loud vehicles during training.  See March 2024 Fully Developed Claim

"	The appellant's report during his VA examination that his tinnitus onset post active-duty during Reserve service.

A complete rationale must be provided.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board                                                                    C. Gates	

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.