Citation Nr: A25030890
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240724-458007
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) to include as secondary to a service connected depressive disorder is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that OSA is due to obesity resulting from service-connected depressive disorder. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea due to service or service-connected depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1992 to July 1999.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for sleep apnea most recently addressed in an October 2022 rating decision/Board decision/CAVC decision.  In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Because the Board is bound by the favorable finding regarding new and relevant evidence, it need not adjudicate the reopening of the claim again and may proceed to the merits of the service connection claim.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).  In a July 2023 statement in support of claim he alleged that OSA is secondary to a service connected psychiatric disorder and specifically alleged his psychiatric disorder led him to make poor food choices and eat high calorie foods. He pointed out that he weighed 165 pounds at military entrance and currently weighed 210 pounds. 

Additionally, service connection associated with in-service toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) participation in service has been raised.  

Favorable findings identified in January 2024 include a concession of participation in TERA, per the Memorandum dated September 7, 2023.  An additional favorable finding was the diagnosis of a disability. A sleep study at the VA Medical Center on May 26, 2021 diagnosed sleep apnea. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Additionally, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) added new examination requirements where toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) are implicated. 38 U.S.C. § 1119. The PACT Act provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity. 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

In a September 2023 TERA Memorandum, exposure to TERA was confirmed due to non-deployment related exposure in the eFolder consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service.  Per his duties as Field Artillery Fire Support Coordinator (with MOS of fire support field artillery) he had exposure to organic pollutants including polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), as well as hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), and hexachlorobenzene (HCB) (Radonic), military activity is associated with environmental contamination with chromium, copper, zinc, lead, and cadmium due to Infantryman uploaded on 02/03/2021.  See Memorandum received 9/7/23.

Although VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a TERA and of a disability, VA has identified several exceptions to this general obligation where there is no indication of an association between the disability and the TERA. 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (b). Specifically, a TERA opinion is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure. See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Although not a disability recognized by the VA, obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability subject to secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that is due to service including exposure to TERA, or proximately due to or the result of, or was aggravated beyond its natural progress by service-connected disability.

Service treatment records are silent for any findings or complaints consistent with a diagnosis of OSA.  Regarding the Veteran's claimed weight gain, he is noted to have been of slender build in an October 1992 Airborne/Ranger examination, where he weighed 162 pounds.  In November 1992 he weighed 169 pounds.  Later, he weighed 195 pounds and was of medium build in an undated portion of an exam to "continue service" directly above a January 1997 5-year examination.  

Post-service records reveal that in September 2020 the Veteran underwent consultation and testing at a private sleep center for symptoms of loud snoring, witnessed apneic episodes, and excessive daytime sleepiness.  He was noted to be overweight, with hypertension. He had high pretest probability for OSA based on loud snoring, witnessed apneas, daytime sleepiness, and elevated body mass index (BMI).  Test results confirmed the diagnosis of OSA, and nocturnal hypoxemia as noted in December 2020.  On follow-up in March and April 2021 he was noted to be using CPAP therapy for moderate OSA.  He was also noted to be overweight in these records, with the September 2020 sleep record noting he was overweight with a somewhat increased neck size and BMI of 28.  

VA treatment records show continued followup for OSA treated by usage of CPAP including March 2021, April 2021, May 2021, June 2021, and May 2022. The records showed that the Veteran was overweight with a high BMI, and he was counseled regarding his diet in March 2021 with BMI of 29 noted, and May 2022, with BMI of 32 noted.  

Regarding his psychiatric disorder, which the sleep apnea is alleged to be secondary to, service connection was awarded for depressive disorder in a June 2023 rating decision.  The May 2023 VA examination forming the basis for such grant diagnosed depressive disorder due to tinnitus with depressive features and anxious distress.  Findings from this examination included occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Among psychiatric symptoms endorsed, include depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood.  His mental health history revealed he was not taking any medications nor attending therapy.  The examination did not include any findings or opinions regarding any possible links between the psychiatric disorder and the onset or progression of his overweight status or any development or progression of his OSA.  VA and private treatment records are silent for any evidence of treatment for psychiatric symptoms, while acknowledging the diagnosis of OSA, with a March 2021 screening negative for the Veteran feeling unhappy, depressed, or anxious.  A May 2022 depression screen was negative. 

The Veteran submitted a July 2023 private medical opinion addressing the etiology of the OSA, which was noted to have been diagnosed in September 2020. This opinion was drafted by N.K., MSN, APRN, FNP-C.  A history was obtained from the Veteran where he stated he gained 45 pounds of weight due to inactivity and his service-related condition to include Depressive Disorder. The examiner stated that obesity/weight gain is the number one risk factor of developing OSA and studies further show a relationship between mental health conditions and chronic sleep impairment. Additionally, the Veteran was noted to have difficulty sleeping due to insomnia. He subsequently developed persistent daytime hypersomnolence, snoring, apneic episodes, trouble falling/staying asleep, insomnia, fatigue, headaches, and poor concentration/difficulty completing tasks. He was noted to have been prescribed a CPAP machine.  

The examiner first opined that it is at least as likely as not (a 50-50% probability) that the veteran's weight gain is due to and/or related to his service-related condition to include Depressive Disorder.  The second opinion was that it is at least as likely as not (a 50-50% probability) that the veteran's OSA with CPAP is secondary to, related to and/or aggravated by the weight gain from the SC conditions to include Depressive disorder.  Lastly, the third opinion was that it is at least as likely as not (a 50-50% probability) that without the veteran's weight gain his OSA with CPAP would not have occurred. 

The private examiner's rationale for this favorable opinion noted the Veteran to have a current, formal diagnosis of OSA as substantiated by his current VA medical records. The Veteran has been prescribed a CPAP for treatment to his OSA due to reported symptomatology to include trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings, daytime fatigue, witnessed loud snoring, difficulty completing tasks, poor concentration, headache s upon awakening, and pauses in respirations while sleeping. The examiner noted the Veteran's Depressive Disorder is service related which is service-related, inclusive of commonly known symptomatology to include: a depressive mood, and an associated sleep disturbance.  Progressive weight gain was noted, with the Veteran having reported that he weighed 165 pounds upon military entrance, 195 pounds upon military separation, and has a current weight of 210 pounds with a BMI of 29.3, meeting the national standard by the CDC for being overweight. This is evidence of overall progressive weight gain and a current overweight condition which chronologically developed after the mental health stressors related to his service-related disability condition.

The rationale further cited recent studies in the medical literature to support that depression induces weight gain and obesity, even when adjusting for socio-demographic characteristics, depression, substance and alcohol abuse/dependence, and psychotropic medications usage. The remainder of the rationale cited to numerous published studies and medical treatises showing the associations between obesity and psychiatric disorders as well as the causes of OSA to include obesity.  

Conflicting with the favorable private opinion were unfavorable VA opinions obtained in September 2023 following examination of the Veteran and review of the record.  The examination and opinion obtained by R.W., PA-C, General Practice.  

Following examination, the September 2023 VA examiner gave an opinion that the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition.  In the rationale the examiner pointed to the fact that sleep apnea and depressive disorder are not medically related, but the sleep apnea is an entirely separate entity from the depressive disorder and unrelated to it. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. A nexus has not been established. Factors that increase the risk of this form of sleep apnea include excess weight. Obesity greatly increases the risk of OSA. Fat deposits around the upper airway can obstruct breathing. The examiner then cited to medical treatise literature to support this opinion.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's claimed condition, sleep apnea, and his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea are less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by a depressive disorder but more likely due to excessive lax oropharyngeal tissues. This is based on his history of weight gain and physical exam.

In December 2023, additional VA examination and opinions were obtained to further clarify the relationship between the OSA, and the service connected disability of depressive disorder to include obesity claimed as an intervening step.  Additionally, an opinion was obtained regarding any relationship of the OSA to TERA. The DBQ examination was conducted by M.V.A., FNP.  

The December 2023 opinion regarding TERA was obtained from N.T., Nurse Practitioner, General Practice.  Following review of the evidence the examiner gave an opinion that the claimed condition of OSA was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  In the rationale, the examiner noted that no medical literature is available to support the claims of sleep apnea caused by toxic exposures. 

The December 2023 opinion regarding secondary service connection was obtained by M.V.A., FNP.  It was found that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition.  The rationale pointed out that the veteran is claiming service connection for obstructive sleep apnea secondary to obesity as an intermediate step between a service connected mental health disorder diagnosed as depressive disorder associated with tinnitus and his OSA.  The rationale explained that OSA occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax too much to allow for proper breathing. Common risk factors were noted to include excess weight or obesity, older age, narrowed airway, hypertension (HTN), hyperlipidemia (HLD), smoking, being of male gender, and chronic nasal congestion, among others. 

Review of the veteran's medical records noted significant risk factors to OSA and/or obesity such as male sex, advancing age (obesity is prevalent among 44.3% among adults aged 40 to 59 years), HLD, HTN, CKD and diabetes. Therefore, his obesity is clearly multifactorial. Furthermore, the examiner noted that it is a common fact that obesity (as what the nexus is claiming his OSA to be secondary to), is not only due to inactivity or lack of motivation due to mental health condition, but as well as caloric intake, and most importantly, genetic predisposition and family history. The examiner noted the Veteran has family history of diabetes. The examiner acknowledged that although obesity could be a strong risk factor for OSA, so was HTN, Diabetes, heart, lungs, musculoskeletal conditions, and other numerous medical conditions.  

The December 2023 examiner indicated that the majority of the time, obesity is multifactorial. After pointing out factors for obesity including sociocultural, and discussing the prevalences in certain populations, the examiner concluded that obesity is a chronic, complex, relapsing disease and is generally multifactorial. It is caused by the interplay of genetic, physiologic, behavioral, sociocultural, and environmental factors and not solely or mainly due to inactivity or lack of motivation (due to mental condition).  The examiner cited to medical literature to support the rationale. 

The December 2023 examiner next addressed aggravation, noting that a pre-aggravation baseline level of severity of the claimed condition (OSA) could not be determined.  Regardless of this the examiner stated that the claimed condition of OSA was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond it's natural progression by the service connected psychiatric disability. In the rationale, the examiner noted that although records confirm a diagnosis of OSA, there is insufficient evidence in the medical records documenting treatment failures or worsening of the symptoms/condition. The examiner did not believe there is enough evidence or reasons to suggest the veteran's service connected depressive disorder aggravated the condition beyond its natural progression. 

Finally, in December 2023 the VA examiner provided an opinion which confirmed review conflicting medical evidence regarding the OSA as secondary to obesity as an intermediate step between the service connected psychiatric disorder of depressive disorder associated with tinnitus.  Following such review, the examiner again cited to the same rationale as to the multifactorial causes of obesity as had been discussed when addressing the secondary service connection for OSA.  Again, the examiner concluded that obesity is a chronic, complex, relapsing disease and is generally multifactorial. It is caused by the interplay of genetic, physiologic, behavioral, sociocultural, and environmental factors and not solely or mainly due to inactivity or lack of motivation (due to mental condition).

Taken together, the Board assigns the greatest probative value to the September 2023 and December 2023 VA opinions regarding the etiology of the OSA including as due to TERA and on a secondary basis including based on an intermediate step of obesity claimed to be due to his service connected depressive disorder.  These opinions were supported by adequate rationale that was based on sound medical reasoning and included references to medical literature to support the opinions.  The examiners also considered conflicting medical evidence. The examiners are shown to have medical credentials comparable to the private examiner who provided the favorable medical opinion in July 2023.  These opinions are also based on an examination of the Veteran and review of his claims file.  

By contrast, the July 2023 private medical opinion appears to be based primarily on interview and examination of the Veteran and the examiner appeared to rely on the Veteran's stated history rather than review of the record.  The opinion did include citation to medical treatise evidence and relied heavily on such evidence.  However, this opinion is outweighed by the stronger probative evidence provided by the sum of the VA examination and opinions provided in September 2023 and December 2023.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current disability of OSA in light of Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), including any applicable diagnoses], the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's OSA is proximately due to or the result of, or aggravated by service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  The evidence likewise does not support a grant of service connection on a direct basis to include based on TERA. 

The Veteran believes the claimed OSA is proximately due to, or the result of/aggravated by a service-connected disability. However, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that the Veteran has the skills or medical training to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). 

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eckart, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.