Citation Nr: A25030934
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 190703-22527
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

REASONS FOR REMAND

In December 2023, the Veteran testified before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). Following the hearing, the Board denied the appeal in April 2024. The Veteran appealed to the Veterans' Claims Court. In December 2024, the Court Clerk granted a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR), vacated the Board's decision, and remanded the appeal to the Board. Pursuant to the JMR, a remand is required to obtain an addendum medical opinion. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Direct the claims file to a clinician in order to obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the etiology of OSA. 

Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following: 

"	What is the medical probability (that is, the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that OSA is causally or etiologically related to service? 

The clinician is asked to specifically address the complaints of frequent trouble sleeping and sleep disturbances in the service treatment records, including a complaint of frequent trouble sleeping during the February 1997 separation examination. 

It would be helpful to the Board if the clinician could explain in layman's terms i) the pathophysiology of OSA, and ii) explain why the medical evidence is either consistent with or inconsistent with a finding that OSA is related to complaints of trouble sleeping during service.

A rationale for all opinions must be provided.

An examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one.

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kokolas, Thomas

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.