Citation Nr: A25030812
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-416151
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused his service-connected disabilities, to include obesity as an intermediate step.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to his service-connected disabilities. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2003 to December 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of a February 2022 rating decision.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In addition to service connection on a direct basis, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

To prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show (1) evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence of a service-connected disability, and (3) evidence that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability.

Obesity, while not a disability for VA purposes, can be an "intermediate step" between a current disability and a service-connected disability if it is found that "(1) the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese; (2) the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the claimed secondary disability; and (3) the claimed secondary disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected disability." VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 at 9; see also Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 155, 158 (2018); Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020) (the Board must also consider aggravation in the context of "intermediate step" analysis when the theory is explicitly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record); Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241 (2021) (the critical commonality among the nonprecedential decisions surveyed on the issue was that "there is some evidence in the record which draws an association or suggests a relationship between the veteran's obesity, or weight gain resulting in obesity, and a service-connected condition").

1. Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran asserts that his obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected disabilities. Specifically, the Veteran argues that his service-connected disabilities caused him to become obese, which led to his obstructive sleep apnea disability.

In the June 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea, participation in a toxic risk exposure activity is acknowledged and the claimed primary disabilities of depressive disorder, status post ORIF left wrist, lumbar degenerative disc disease and chronic right knee strain are service-connected. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the first and second element of secondary service connection have been established. 

Turning to the evidence, the record shows that the Veteran's weight in November 2003 was 160 pounds. His weight was 200 pounds in September 2007 during his medical board examination at separation. When the home sleep study was conducted in March 2019, the Veteran weighed 241 pounds.

In September 2020, the Veteran submitted a private opinion report to support his claim for secondary service connection. The clinician explained that obstructive sleep apnea is a chronic disorder characterized by repetitive collapse of the upper airway during sleep causing significant hypoxemia and sleep fragmentation. She noted that chronic pain is also associated with sleep fragmentation and weight gain is also commonly associated with orthopedic conditions causing an inability to properly exercise, and thus, weight gain may contribute to the development or worsening of obstructive sleep apnea. The clinician relied on medical literature which found a strong correlation between obstructive sleep apnea and chronic pain with associated medication use and weight gain and relied on additional studies which showed that while depression does not cause obstructive sleep apnea, each condition may be a risk factor for the development of the other. 

The clinician stated that being overweight or obese are also strong risk factors for developing obstructive sleep apnea and noted the Veteran's reports of fluctuating weight gain since activity duty. Specifically, the Veteran reported being unable to exercise regularly due to pain and decrease of mobility due to his back and knee conditions. He reported that his depression also contributes to his lack of motivation. The clinician stated that this pattern of decreased mobility and lack of exercise is quite common in those with chronic pain from orthopedic conditions and depression, which can contribute to the development and/or worsening of underlying obstructive sleep apnea relying on additional studies which showed that depressed compared to non-depressed people were at significantly higher risk for developing obesity. The clinician noted that the combination of chronic pain and depression has led to excessive fatigue, which reduces the Veteran's ability to exercise even more. 

Additionally, the clinician noted that while weight gain is often considered to be multifactorial, medical research indicates that one's ability or lack of exercise is often a primary cause of weight gain for the majority of individuals. The clinician further noted that the Veteran currently takes opioids and according to research, anywhere from 75 percent to 85 percent of those taking opioids have at least mild sleep apnea and up to 40 percent have severe apnea because opioids suppress medullary reflex ventilatory drive during sleep, which can precipitate or worsen underlying obstructive sleep apnea. Thus, medications used to manage pain and sleep disturbances have the potential of worsening obstructive sleep apnea.

After a review of the medical records and medical literature, the clinician opined that "it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is secondarily linked to his service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with depression with chronic opioid use, and right knee strain, from an aggravation standpoint." The clinician again noted that the Veteran has reported a history of fluctuating weight gain contributing to his worsening obesity since service enlistment, which she found was corroborated by his service and outpatient treatment records. She further opined that the Veteran's inability to properly exercise due to chronic pain from his service-connected orthopedic disabilities and excessive daytime fatigue from depression have more likely than not contributed to his current worsening obesity. Thus, she concluded that his obstructive sleep apnea is related to his orthopedic disabilities precipitating worsening obesity and his opiod use to manage his chronic service-connected back pain. 

The Veteran had a VA examination for his sleep disorder in September 2020. He reported that his symptoms began in approximately 2008. He reported having a hard time exercising which he believed may be contributing to his weight gain. The examiner provided an unfavorable nexus opinion, noting that weight gain has multiple causes in addition to physical activity or lack thereof. The examiner determined that it is speculative to state that the Veteran's service-connected back and knee disabilities, which he states prevents him from exercising, is the primary cause of his significant weight gain which led to developing obstructive sleep apnea. However, the examiner did not provide an explanation for that determination or indicate that an opinion was unable to be rendered. Rather, the examiner concluded that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's choice of diet and quantity of food intake played a more significant role in his weight gain compared to his inability to exercise.

In May 2021, an opinion regarding whether obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating obstructive sleep apnea was obtained. The examiner opined that the conditions of obstructive sleep apnea and right knee strain, lumbar degenerative disc space narrowing at multiple levels, and depressive disorder, are not medically related because they are separate entities entirely. The examiner stated that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship and thus, a nexus has not been established. Regarding the Veteran's obesity, the examiner opined that the Veteran's service-connected conditions do not preclude all forms of exercise stating that, for example, "paraplegics exercise and maintain appropriate BMI." The examiner stated that obesity is most commonly caused by a combination of excessive food intake, and lack of physical activity, which is a choice. She noted that during his entrance examination the Veteran had a BMI or 26.5 which is overweight, and he had increasing weight over the years before the start of his service-connected left wrist fracture and lumbar condition. The examiner further stated that obesity can cause obstructive sleep apnea which contributes with constricting breathing, however, obesity was not only caused by lack of physical exercises due to service-connected conditions, rather it is a combination of different lifestyle choices as mentioned. 

In a December 2021 statement, the Veteran asserted that the May 2021 VA examiner discounted his need for opioids to maintain his chronic pain over the years and how it impacts his anxiety and depression. 

During his February 2022 informal conference, the Veteran asserted that VA did not properly consider obesity as an intercurrent cause of disability. Specifically, he stated that VA did not consider the impact of his depression on his motivation to exercise and the food he eats. The VA also failed to consider his in-service weight gain. The Veteran asserted that the private providers statement, his own lay statements and internet articles have not been adequately considered. 

In March 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. He reported that he was unsure of the exact year of onset of his sleep apnea but attributed the weight gain after his service-connected disabilities to his inability to be active during service, which he identified as the main contributing factor. The examiner stated that obstructive sleep apnea is not a presumptive diagnosis associated with exposure to burn pits and other specific environmental hazards, and based on this finding, he opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities. 

The Board finds the September 2020 private opinion to be probative. The opinion was based on a thorough review of the Veteran's history including consideration of the Veteran's statements and supported by an adequate rationale. The Board finds that the opinion persuasively demonstrates that the Veteran's inability to exercise due to his service-connected disabilities contributed to his obesity, and is the most probable etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.

The Board has considered the unfavorable nexus opinions provided by the VA examiners in September 2020, May 2021, and March 2023, but affords the opinions lesser probative value for several reasons. First, the September 2020 examiner determined that it is speculative to state that the Veteran's service-connected back and knee disabilities, which he states prevents him from exercising, is the primary cause of his significant weight gain which led to developing obstructive sleep apnea. However, the examiner did not explain the basis for such an opinion. Next, the May 2021 examiner noted that obesity can cause obstructive sleep apnea, but that obesity was not only caused by lack of physical exercises due to service-connected conditions, rather it is a combination of different lifestyle choices. Here, the examiner's opinion appears to suggest that the Veteran's inability to exercise due to service-connected conditions contributed at least in part to his obesity. Finally, the March 2023 examiner based his unfavorable nexus opinion solely on the fact that obstructive sleep apnea is not a presumptive diagnosis associated with exposure to burn pits and other specific environmental hazards. However, the examiner did not consider whether his obstructive sleep apnea was directly related to his toxic exposures.

Thus, as the September 2020, private opinion report is the most probative evidence of record, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that the most probative and persuasive evidence supports that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused his obesity which, in turn, caused obstructive sleep apnea.  Accordingly, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310; VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 at 9; see also Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 155, 158 (2018); Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  

As a final note, the Board wishes to underscore that the Veteran's appealed issue is being granted under the causation prong of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 and Allen, and thus, the initial rating shall not be subject to offset upon implementation by the AOJ.  

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.