Citation Nr: A25030789
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432600
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service condition for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1982 to September 1982.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 for the Veteran's claimed, acquired psychiatric disorder to include major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, with psychosis; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. By way of procedural background, in November 2023, the Veteran filed a request for higher level review seeking review of the October 2023 rating decision. Following the high-level review decision in March 2024, in an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Direct review is the appeal option to the Board in which a Board decision is issued based on evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  The Board cannot hold a Board hearing or accept into the record additional evidence in its direct review. 

Entitlement to service condition for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his acquired psychiatric disorder to include major depressive disorder with psychosis disability is related to his military service.

Under the AMA a remand is proper only when there is a duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of an AOJ decision on appeal, or if another error fails to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a). 

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for this claimed disability. A medical examination or opinion is necessary if the information and evidence does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but contains competent evidence of a current diagnosed disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; establishes that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or certain disease manifested during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and indicates that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease in service or with another service-connected disability.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

VA treatment records in September 2018 show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with major depressive disorder with psychosis and alcohol abuse disorder. The Board notes that the Veteran stated that he experienced difficulty with mental health issues while on active duty and those problems have continued to this day. See e.g., May 2017 statement. As such, the Board notes that there is an indication that the Veteran may have a current disability that is related to his military service. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran must be scheduled with an examination before the claim can be decided on the merits.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159 (c).

Accordingly, the Board finds a remand is needed for an examination and opinion to determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.  Failure to obtain a VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder.  The electronic claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. All indicated studies and testing must be conducted, and all pertinent symptomatology must be reported in detail.  After a review of the claims file, the examiner should provide answers to the following questions.

(a.) Following a psychiatric examination, list all psychiatric disorders pertaining to the Veteran.  See VA treatment records showing diagnosis of major depressive disorder with psychosis disability and alcohol abuse disorder. 

(b.) Then, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.

(c.) A complete rationale for all opinions rendered must be provided.

 

 

R. Casadei

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Taylor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.