Citation Nr: A25030851
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452852
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis, as secondary to service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The competent and probative evidence of record establishes a nexus between the Veteran's right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis and his service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis, as secondary to service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from December 1981 to October 2003. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

The August 2023 rating decision noted that new and relevant evidence had been received, and the claim would be reconsidered. The Board finds this to be an inherent favorable finding by which it is bound and will proceed to address the merits of the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability if it is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that a current disability exists and that the current disability was either proximately caused by or proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability as secondary to left knee disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis ("right knee disability") as secondary to service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia ("left knee disability"). See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138. Because the Veteran has not raised, and the record does not reasonably raise, entitlement to direct service connection, the Board's adjudication will consider only entitlement to secondary service connection as contended by the Veteran. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

For the claimed secondary condition of right knee disability, the AOJ has made favorable findings that there was evidence of a current disability (right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis), and that the primary disability (left knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia) was service-connected. See August 2023 rating decision. Absent clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by those findings. Thus, the question before the Board is whether the disability is caused by (direct result) or aggravated (worsened to any degree) by the service-connected left knee disability.

In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, and the examiner was asked to render a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed right knee disability and its relation to the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability. The examiner stated that knee chondromalacia could lead to degenerative joint disease. However, the examiner did not offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's right knee diagnosis was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability. This opinion lacks sound reasoning and does not provide the requested opinion on secondary service connection. Therefore, the examination lacks probative value.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (noting that the probative value of a medical opinion is derived from its factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for the conclusion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA medical examination that was unfavorable as to nexus. The VA medical opinion states that the Veteran's right knee disability existed prior to service, but the later states that the enlistment exam showed no findings related to the claimed condition, and further states that there is no medical rationale to establish chondromalacia in the contralateral knee from left knee issues, without explaining the basis for this opinion. The Board finds this opinion unpersuasive and not probative because the opinion is inconsistent and lacks logical reasoning. Nieves-Rodriguez, supra.

The Veteran submitted a July 2023 private opinion which indicated that it was at least as likely as not that his current right knee patellar chondromalacia is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected conditions to include left knee degenerative arthritis with associated antalgic gait. After a review of the Veteran's right and left knee diagnoses, and medical literature, the non-VA medical professional found that the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability caused the Veteran the develop an antalgic gait to compensate for the pain and impairment in the affected extremities. Subsequently, the gait from his service-connected left knee disability caused and/or contributed to his current right knee condition. The Board finds this opinion probative, as it provided a clear conclusion with supporting data, and reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. Id. at 304.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's complaints of right knee pain, and his statement that the issue was aggravated by service-connected disabilities. See Statement in Support of Claim received March 2023. The Veteran reported symptoms in his right knee of pain, cracking, popping, and knee stiffness. The Veteran also reported the pain causes him to shift his weight back and forth to alleviate discomfort. The Veteran also reported using a knee brace taking over the counter medicine for his right knee symptoms. 

Here, there are three medical opinions of record, two negative and one positive. However, the Board affords more probative weight to the private medical professional's opinion from July 2023. While the April 2023 and July 2023 VA medical opinions lack sound reasoning and do not appear to be based on a full consideration of the evidence, the July 2023 private medical opinion demonstrates a thorough review of contentions of the Veteran and relevant medical literature. The private medical opinion also considers multiple sources of information and offers a detailed explanation, explaining the connection between the Veteran's service-connected disability causing his right knee condition. Based on the foregoing, the Board affords the private medical professional's medical opinion great probative weight.

In sum, the competent and credible medical evidence of record has established that the Veteran's right knee condition was the result of his service-connected left knee disability.  Accordingly, service connection for right knee patellar chondromalacia with osteoarthritis on a secondary basis is warranted. To that extent only, the appeal is granted.

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bryan, Sydny L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.