Citation Nr: A25030055
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-438901
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim for service connection for hypertension is warranted.

Readjudication of the claim for coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction and coronary artery bypass graft (CAD) is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction and coronary artery bypass graft (CAD), to include as due to participation in a TERA, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence was received after the unappealed July 2007 rating decision that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

2. New evidence was received after the unappealed April 2011 rating decision that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for CAD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for hypertension have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.156.

2. The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction and coronary artery bypass graft (CAD) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.156.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from May 1971 to May 1974.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran included claims of diabetes and kidney disease on his May 2024 Form 10182. In a June 2024 BVA NOD Clarification Letter, VA informed the Veteran that the inclusion of both claims on the May 2024 Form 10182 was not proper as the diabetes claim was last denied in July 2007 and has never been re-opened and kidney disease has never been previously claimed by the Veteran. As such, neither of those two claimed issues are addressed here. If the Veteran would like VA to address either issue, he may submit a Supplemental Claim including new and relevant evidence regarding his diabetes claim and include evidence related to a kidney disease claim or submit a Supplemental Claim regarding solely diabetes and file a claim for kidney disease in a new Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

1. Whether readjudication of the claim for service connection for hypertension is warranted.

2. Whether readjudication of the claim for CAD is warranted.

By way of background, the Veteran's original claims seeking entitlement to service connection for hypertension and CAD were denied in a July 2007 and April 2011 rating decision, respectively. Thereafter, the Veteran filed a June 2023 supplemental claim seeking to have the previously denied service connection claim be readjudicated by the AOJ. In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied the request to readjudicate the previously denied service connection claim.

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). The Board finds that new evidence was received after the June 2007 and April 2011 rating decisions that is relevant to the claims for service connection for hypertension and CAD. Specifically, the Board highlights two September 2023 VA medical opinions which details the link between the Veteran's claimed toxic exposure at Camp Lejeune and his hypertension and CAD. These medical opinions were not already of record at the time of the prior final denial and may prove or disprove the nexus element of the claim for service connection. Thus, readjudication of the claims is warranted, and these claims are further addressed in the section below.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to participation in a TERA.

2. Entitlement to service connection for CAD, to include as due to participation in a TERA.

The Veteran contends that he was exposed to toxic water at Camp Lejeune, as well as exposed to toxic chemicals, to include herbicides, while at Kadena Air Force Base (AFB) in 1972 and such exposure resulted in his diagnosed hypertension and CAD.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a remand is only available in order to correct a (1) duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of the decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In September 2023 VA issued a TERA Memorandum regarding the Veteran confirming that he was exposed to toxic Water at Camp Lejeune. However, Question 5A of the memorandum, which asks "Is there evidence of other deployment related exposure in the eFolder and/or ILER (not already depicted in the questions above) which is consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service?" was left blank.

Upon a thorough review of the Veteran's military personnel records, the Veteran was flown from Norton AFB, California to Kadena AFB, Okinawa and arrived on March 17, 1972. The Veteran then left from White Beach Naval Facility, Okinawa and arrived at Numazu Beach Training Group, Japan on April 27, 1972. The Veteran then departed from Kadena AFB on March 12, 1973 and returned to Travis AFB, California. Therefore, records show the Veteran was at Kadena Air Force base at least twice between the period of March 17, 1972 and March 12, 1973. 

While Kadena AFB has not been conceded by VA as storing and/or deploying toxic chemicals, to include herbicides, the Veteran provided information which, after resolving all doubt in his favor, point to his potential exposure to such. Specifically, the Veteran claims to have "transported barrels of Agent Orange" while at Kadena AFB. Evidence in favor of such involvement is the Veteran's MOS at the time, which was Motor Vehicle Operator. Additionally, the Veteran submitted an article in June 2023 entitled "The basics: Agent Orange and military defoliants on Okinawa" which cited information from a 2012 report issued by the Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC) and contributed to by the then Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System Site Project Manager for the Department of the Army entitled "An Ecological Assessment of Johnston Atoll" which stated "in 1972, the US Air Force brought about 25,000 55-gallon drums of the chemical, Herbicide Orange (HO) to Johnston Island that originated from Vietnam and was stored on Okinawa." Additionally, the article cites to a 1971 report titled "Historical, logistical, political and technical aspects of the herbicide/defoliant program" published by Ft. Detrick, Maryland which includes a section entitled "Herbicide stockpiles elsewhere in PACOM-U.S. Government Restricted Materials Thailand and Okinawa (Kadena)." Finally, the article cites to The Asia-Pacific Journal (APJ) which published an article entitled "All Agent Orange Ingredients Unearthed at U.S. Military Dumpsite on Okinawa" on the 2013 discovery of 61 barrels of "the three signature components of Agent Orange: the herbicides 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D as well as highly toxic TCDD dioxin" on former land belonging to Kadena AFB.

As all of this evidence submitted by the Veteran was present before the issuance of the September 2023 TERA Memorandum and the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds that a duty-to-assist error has been committed for not properly verifying the Veteran's potential participation in a TERA at Kadena AFB between March 17, 1972 and March 12, 1973.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Conduct all necessary development to attempt to verify any active-duty service, including TDYs, at Kadena Air Force Base, and the Veteran's alleged exposure to herbicide agents and/or dioxides during his active-duty service at Kadena Air Force Base, to include:

(a.) Contacting any appropriate custodian (i.e., the Records Management, and Declassification Agency (RMDA); the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC); the Records Management Center (RMC); the Defense Personnel Records Information Retrieval System (DPRIS); the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA); or any other appropriate entity) and requesting an additional search for service records pertaining to the Veteran, including from alternate sources, as appropriate; and

(b.) Undertaking any additional action necessary for independent verification of the Veteran's purported exposure to herbicide agents and/or dioxides, to include follow up action or the submission of additional requests for information to any other appropriate entity, and to include addressing the 2012 DTIC report, the 1971 Ft. Detrick report, and the 2014 APJ article.

All records requests and responses, and any records received in response to such requests, should be associated with the claims file.

The nonexistence or unavailability of the information and/or records must be verified by each Federal department or agency from which they are sought. Such verification should be documented for the record and the Veteran and his representative should be provided notice of that fact. Efforts to obtain these records should only end if they do not exist or further efforts to obtain them would be futile. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wood, Paul T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.