Citation Nr: A25030271
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240530-448284
DATE:  April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Service connection for a pain and/or fatigue disability, claimed as chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia, to include a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI) and/or undiagnosed illness, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) with nephrolithiasis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from January 2011 to January 2015, to include service in Afghanistan. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of February 2024 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims currently on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was previously denied service connection for left and right shoulder disabilities and a back disability, most recently in October 2022. In the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made the favorable finding that new and relevant evidence sufficient for readjudication of those claims was received. The Board shall not disturb this finding. 

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed before an adjudication on the merits of the following claims can be made. 

Service Connection - Hypertension 

The Veteran asserts that he has hypertension that is related to his active service. 

A review of the record shows that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. At that time, the examiner did not confirm a diagnosis of hypertension. However, a review of the examination report shows that the Veteran's blood pressure was recorded as 120/90, 120/88, and 118/90. At the same time, the Veteran was noted to have started on Lisinopril, a hypertension medication, but that it had been prescribed for treatment of his kidney disease and not a diagnosis of hypertension. 

The Board notes that hypertension for VA compensation purposes is defined as diastolic blood pressure that is predominantly 90mm, or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension is defined as systolic blood pressure that is predominantly 160mm or greater, with a diastolic pressure of less than 90mm. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, Note 1.

The Board notes that the November 2023 VA examiner failed to discuss any impact the prescribed Lisinopril may have on the Veteran's blood pressure. This is especially important in light of the fact that the Veteran's recorded blood pressure readings at the time of the November 2023 VA examination were very close to the criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension as defined for VA purposes. In light of this failure, the Board finds that the November 2023 examination report is inadequate for adjudication purposes. Failure to assure the adequacy an VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist failure and remand is required for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

Service Connection - Shoulder and Back Disabilities

The Veteran contends that he has shoulder and back disabilities related to his active service. 

The Veteran's STRs indicate that on his separation report of medical history, the Veteran endorsed shoulder pain and back trouble. See September 2014 STRs. 

The only VA examination afforded to the Veteran regarding his shoulders and back occurred in December 2014, when it was indicated that the Veteran did not have any current shoulder and/or back disability and noted that "pain" was a symptom and could not be considered a disability. 

Since then, treatment records indicate that the Veteran has been treated for moderate lower back pain, shoulder pain, and shoulder weakness/decrease range of motion. The Veteran has attended physical therapy in an effort to decrease his pain and restrengthen his shoulders. See April 2023 VA Treatment Records. 

The Board finds that given the foregoing, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit's holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018), the AOJ should have obtained a more recent VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed shoulder and back complaints. The AOJ's failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring corrective action. Therefore, remand is necessary to obtain examinations to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed shoulder and back disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Entitlement to service connection - Fatigue/Pain

The Veteran claims that he has chronic headaches, joint pain, and fatigue, claimed as chronic fatigue syndrome and/or fibromyalgia, that is related to his active service. 

The Veteran's STRs indicate that he reported systemic joint pain and headaches that began sometime during his service in Afghanistan. See October 2014 STRs. 

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations regarding chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia in November 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported pain, tiredness, and headaches. That being said, the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have other symptoms consistent with chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia, such as joint stiffness or weakness, and also indicated that the Veteran recently was diagnosed with depression which was a likely cause of the symptoms. 

The Board finds the November 2023 medical examination is inadequate for adjudication purposes. The examiner failed to address and consider the Veteran's STRs indicating onset of his headaches, joint pain, and fatigue during his active service in Afghanistan, which predated his depression diagnosis. The examiner likewise failed to address the Veteran's post-separation medical records indicating treatment for joint pain/weakness. Sklar v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 140 (1993). Moreover, though the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a formal diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia diagnosis, they did not explore whether the Veteran's symptoms were considered a MUCMI and/or an undiagnosed illness. 

The Board concludes that the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error and a remand is warranted for correction. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Service Connection - ADPKD

The Veteran contends that his ADPKD is related to his active service, to include his service in Afghanistan.

STRs are silent for any kidney injury, diagnosis, or disorder.

Post-separation medical records indicate that the Veteran was diagnosed with ADPKD sometime around 2015. In these records, it appears the Veteran's mother had a history of polycystic kidney disease. See August 2016 VA Treatment Records. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. The examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's ADPKD was related to his active service. The examiner indicated that "ADPKD is least (sic) likely than not to be a genetic problem." The examiner also stated that there was a lack of medical literature to "support Gulf War TERA as a cause of ADPKD."

The Board finds the November 2023 medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. The examiner's indication that a genetic mutation is at least as likely as any other cause of ADPKD insinuates that there could be multiple other causes of the disability. Moreover, to the extent that the examiner's finding that the Veteran's ADPKD was genetic implies that it pre-existed his active service, there was no rationale as to whether his active-duty service and/or any associated TERA aggravated his ADPKD. Moreover, the Board notes that as the Veteran did not have a kidney disability that was noted at the time of his entry into active service, the Veteran is presumed to have been sound at entry. In order to rebut the presumption of soundness, the burden is on VA to determine that the Veteran's disability clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, and if so, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service (emphasis added). 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b). If both findings cannot be made, then the presumption of soundness is not rebutted.

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring corrective action. Therefore, remand for an addendum opinion is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with the appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed hypertension, to include whether the Veteran has sufficiently elevated blood pressure to constitute a diagnosis of hypertension. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and a thorough review of the record, the examiner must first determine whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of hypertension as defined in VA regulations. 

If the examiner determines that the Veteran does not have elevated blood pressure sufficient to establish a diagnosis of hypertension, the examiner must comment on the impact the Veteran's diagnosed Lisinopril has on his elevated blood pressure and whether the Veteran would meet the criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension but for the effects of the medication prescribed for his kidney disease. 

If a diagnosis of hypertension is established, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such diagnosis had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with the appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed left and right shoulder disabilities. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed, to specifically include diagnostic imagining.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, the examiner should first identify all left and/or right shoulder disabilities present during the pendency of the claim or proximate thereto, to include pain.

Then, for each identified disability, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the documented in-service reports of shoulder pain, and the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with the appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed, to specifically include diagnostic imagining.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, the examiner should first identify all back diagnoses present during the pendency of the claim or proximate thereto, to include pain.

Then, for each identified disability, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the documented in-service reports of back pain, and the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed fatigue, headache, and joint pain symptoms. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed.

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must first identify all pain/fatigue disabilities present during the pendency of the appeal or proximately thereto, to include whether the Veteran meets the criteria for a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome and/or fibromyalgia. If there is no pathophysiology upon which to base a diagnosis of a disability to account for the Veteran's reported symptoms, or the Veteran has additional symptoms that are not accounted for by any provided diagnoses, the examiner must state whether such symptoms constitute an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness.

For all identified disabilities that are not considered presumed related to the Veteran's active service, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include service in Afghanistan and associated TERAs.

In providing this opinion, the examiner must consider and discuss: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

5. Obtain an addendum opinion by a nephrologist, or other qualified specialist, to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed ADPKD with nephrolithiasis. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

With regard to the Veteran's ADPKD with nephrolithiasis, the examiner must address the following:

(a)	Clarify whether the ADPKD with nephrolithiasis is a congenital or developmental disease or defect, or neither. 

NOTE: In determining whether a condition is a defect, as opposed to a disease or injury, the examiner should consider that the term "disease" is broadly defined as any deviation from or interruption of the normal structure of function of any part, organ, or system of the body that is manifested by a characteristic set of symptoms and signs whose etiology, pathology, and prognosis may be known or unknown. On the other hand, the term "defects" are defined as structural or inherit abnormalities or conditions that are more or less stationary in nature.

(b)	If ADPKD with nephrolithiasis is a congenital or developmental disease, whether such disease clearly and unmistakably existed prior to the Veteran's active service, and if so, was clearly and unmistakably NOT aggravated by such service, to include by all identified toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs). 

NOTE: "clearly and unmistakably" means "undebatable". 

(c)	If ADPKD with nephrolithiasis is a congenital or developmental defect, whether the condition was subject to superimposed disease or injury during service, to include by all identified TERAs.

(d)	If ADPKD with nephrolithiasis is not deemed congenital or developmental in nature, but rather is an acquired disease, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include all identified TERAs.

In providing the requested medical opinions, the examiner must consider and discuss: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

A complete and detailed rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. Another VA examination of the Veteran must only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinions.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Davis, Alexandra J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.