Citation Nr: A25030462
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-439108
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with mild alcohol use disorder is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD, with mild alcohol symptoms, did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD, with mild alcohol use disorder, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty with the United States Army from May 2000 to May 2005.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The March 2024 rating decision granted the Veteran a 70 percent disability rating for PTSD, with mild alcohol use disorder.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4 § 4.1

When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Ratings given in accordance with the General Formula for Mental Disorders are assigned according to the manifestation of symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in the General Rating Formula demonstrates that the symptoms after the phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Neither the number of symptoms nor the type of symptoms controls in determining whether the criteria for the next higher rating have been met.  It is the effect of the symptoms, rather than the presence of symptoms, pertaining to the criteria for the next higher rating, that is determinative, and the Board must draw fact-based conclusions as to whether those symptoms, and their severity, frequency, and duration, have caused the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a rating.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017). 

The March 2024 rating decision increased the Veteran's disability rating from 50 percent to 70 percent for PTSD with mild alcohol use disorder, effective March 6, 2023.  Therefore, during the entire period of appeal, the Veteran's PTSD has been rated at 70 percent disabling under DC 9411, which rates in accordance with the General Formula for Mental Disorders.  

Under the General Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411. 

Under the formula, a 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

Factual Background

The January 2023 official transcript provides the Veteran's academic transcript in health and human services, social work.  The Veteran earned all hours attempted with a GPA of 3.93 for fall 2022. 

The March 2024 VA medical exam reviewed the Veteran's record and conducted an in-person examination.  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of PTSD, with mild alcohol use disorder, as a result of combat and military sexual trauma (MST).  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's symptoms were overlapping to both diagnoses.  The examiner found the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking and/or mood.  The examiner recorded in recent history (since prior exam) the Veteran lives with her active-duty husband, 5 children aged between 20 and 10, and the Veteran's parents.  The examiner noted the Veteran is a graduate student expected to complete her studies May 2024.  The Veteran reported she attends class, practicums, and completes assignments on time.  The Veteran sees a therapist twice a month and is prescribed Lexapro.  The Veteran also has a medical marijuana card to help with anxiety and sleep.  The examiner noted the Veteran has sleep onset insomnia and disturbed sleep, nightmares, flashbacks, and intrusive memories.  The Veteran is noted to be highly reactive, very anxious, and depressed.  The Veteran is noted to have had intense suicidal ideation in the past but is currently not experiencing this due to the medication.  The examiner recorded the Veteran's MST caused the Veteran to have issues with intimacy, however the medical cannibis use has helped reduce the aversion to touch.  The examiner noted the Veteran has eliminated the use of hard liquor but continues to have up to four (4) drinks per day of wine and flavored alcohol spritzer type beverages.  The examiner found the Veteran's symptoms to include recurrent involuntary and intrusive memories, recurrent distressing dreams, intense or prolonged psychological distress, marked physiological reactions, avoidance of distressing thoughts, memories, reminders, persistent and exaggerated beliefs or expectations, persistent distorted cognitions about cause and consequence, persistent negative emotional state, feelings of detachment, persistent inability to experience positive emotions, depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks weekly, near continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, impaired judgement, impaired abstract thinking, disturbance of mood or motivation, difficulty in establishing and maintaining work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stress in work or work like setting, obsessional rituals, and impaired impulse control.  The examiner found the Veteran oriented in all spheres, and capable of managing her own affairs. 

Analysis

For the reasons set out below, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms most closely reflect a 70 percent disability rating for mental disorders.  DC 9411. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's February 2024 statement in support of claim for PTSD secondary to MST.  However, the Veteran's service connection for PTSD, with mild alcohol symptoms, is not in issue.  Therefore, there is no need to recount the Veteran's experiences on active duty.

The Board finds the March 2024 VA medical exam competent and credible.  The March 2024 VA medical exam was completed by an appropriately qualified medical professional, following review of the Veteran's record and an in-person examination.  The March 2024 VA medical exam is consistent with the evidence of record.  The Board affords the March 2024 VA medical exam probative weight.

The Board finds, that while the Veteran experiences multiple significant distressing symptoms, the Veteran's reports of her situation do not present symptoms causing total occupational and social impairment.  In the March 2024 VA medical exam, the Veteran reported continuing to live with her husband, 5 children, including adult children, and her parents.  The Veteran further reported she is a full-time graduate student.  The Veteran reported attending all classes and submitting assignments on time.  The January 2023 official transcript supports the Veteran maintained a 3.93 GPA for fall 2022.  The March 2024 VA medical exam found the Veteran oriented in all spheres, and capable of managing her own affairs.  The March 2024 VA medical exam did not find any impairment with the Veteran's memory, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, or grossly inappropriate behavior.  The Veteran reported in the March 2024 VA medical exam that she had stopped using hard liquor, although continued to drink alcohol daily.  The March 2024 VA medical exam noted the Veteran had suicidal ideation in the past but at present there was no danger of hurting self or others.  The Board finds there is no evidence of record the Veteran experiences intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living such as maintenance of personal hygiene.  

The Board finds the Veteran has not demonstrated symptomatology equivalent in severity, frequency, or duration to that required for a 100 percent rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms are fully contemplated by the assigned schedular rating, and the persuasive weight of the evidence is against any increase over what has been assigned.  As a result, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the Veteran's claim is adjudicated in accordance with the evidence and the schedular criteria.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; 4.3; 4.7.  The Board therefore finds that the Veteran's PTSD, with mild alcohol use disorder, has not been shown to be productive of total social and occupational impairment.  As such, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim and the appeal for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with mild alcohol use disorder must be DENIED.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

(This space intentionally left blank.  VLJ signature on next page.)

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Shepherd DeRosa, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.