Citation Nr: A25030173
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-440589
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2008 to September 2009, with additional service in the Army National Guard from March 2006 to February 2012.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 higher level review (HLR) rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision that was subsequently subject to HLR.  38?C.F.R. ยง 20.301.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

The AOJ favorably found the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current disability.  In this case, a VA examination dated August 29, 2023, reflects a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus.  Also, the claimed primary disability, restless leg syndrome, is service-connected.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis referable to bilateral pes planus, and his military records do not indicate the Veteran received a profile for a foot condition.  Additionally, military deployment health assessments dated between November 2008 to August 2009 noted the Veteran experienced no numbness or tingling in the hands or feet, nor did he experience swollen, stiff, or painful joints.  Further, a medical physical dated September 2008 showed no findings related to the Veteran's feet.

A treating VA physician in October 2018 noted the Veteran's chronic pain had continued for years while on active duty and gradually worsened.  Further, a January 2024 treatment record shows the Veteran reported painful feet since active duty. 

The Veteran was afforded an examination in August 2023, wherein the VA examiner noted the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral pes planus (flat foot), metatarsalgia, corns, and callosities.  The Veteran reported that he began developing bilateral foot pain while participating in physical training and that he running in boots caused callus formation.  The August 2023 VA examiner opined the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The examiner's rationale was that bilateral pes planus and restless leg syndrome, right lower extremity (sciatic) are not medically related conditions.  The VA examiner also noted that in this case, the Veteran's medical records and service treatment records were silent for the claim of bilateral pes planus. The examiner explained that bilateral pes planus is a separate entity from and unrelated to restless leg syndrome, right lower extremity (sciatic) and that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.  

In support of his claim, the Veteran provided lay statements who served with him and could corroborate his claim of experiencing issues with his feet while serving in the military.  The Veteran submitted a lay statement in April 2023 written by a friend who knew him since high school when he played varsity football.  His friend stated that once the Veteran enlisted, he began to complain about his feet and how they seemed to always feel like they were burning.  The friend further stated that when he suggested the Veteran go to the clinic, he stated they would think he was soft since it (the discomfort) was just from marching and running.  The Veteran's friend asserted that the complaints continued and seemed to get worse.  Eventually, the Veteran started telling him how stiff his feet felt frequently, and how he would leave his boots a little loose due to the swelling of his heels.  Further, the Veteran's friend attested to the Veteran spending money excessively on shoe insoles to find something to help him function throughout the day.  An April 2023 lay statement was submitted by the Veteran's battle buddy who served with him and attested that on many occasions the Veteran went to sick call in regard to his foot.  The Veteran's battle buddy further stated that he remembered him talking about trying to get a profile for his foot, but he did not want to get one and as a result miss mandatory training.  Also, the battle buddy stated that on a few runs, he remembered the Veteran falling to the rear due to his foot pain.

The Board finds that a remand is necessary for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  In the August 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner opined that bilateral pes planus and the Veteran's service-connected restless leg syndrome, right lower extremity (sciatic) are not medically related.  However, the VA examiner did not provide a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's bilateral pes planus has been aggravated by his restless leg syndrome disorder.  Additionally, the examiner did not provide a medical opinion regarding the theory of direct service connection, which the Board finds relevant in light of the lay statements provided by the Veteran regarding his in-service and post-service symptoms. In sum, the Board finds the August 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for the purpose of determining entitlement to service connection as it does not appear that the Veteran's complete medical history and lay statements were considered in connection with the opinion, and the failure to obtain an adequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion addressing such matters.

The matter is remanded for the following:

Forward the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of any current foot disorder. The clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) For each current foot disorder, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that such had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service.  Please explain why or why not.

(b.) For each current foot disorder, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that such is aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected restless leg syndrome.

In providing the aforementioned, the clinician must address the lay statements of record concerning the Veteran's in-service and post-service symptoms.  The clinician should note an absence of documentation cannot serve as the sole basis for an unfavorable opinion.

A rationale for any opinion expressed must be provided. 

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Simmons, Shanita K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.