Citation Nr: A25030691
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240512-438777
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1997 to April 2001 and from March 2003 to March 2004 in the United States Marine Corps with subsequent reserve service. Among other awards, the Veteran received the Combat Action Ribbon for his combat service.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  In May 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the decision by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing direct review by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §20.301. Any evidence submitted after the rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has left and right knee disabilities that are related to his military service. Specifically, he notes that bilateral knee pain began during his deployment while on active-duty service and has continued since. See November 2023 VA 21-526EZ.

In disability compensation claims, the Secretary must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet.App. 79, 81 (2006).  

The Board notes that there are no post-service treatment records associated with the Veteran's claims file.  Nevertheless, the Veteran reports that his bilateral knee conditions manifest in pain. It is unclear if the Veteran's reported bilateral knee pain is manifested by a functional impairment in earning capacity.  In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 Fed. Cir. 1356 (2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that pain could constitute a disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 if it amounted to a functional impairment. Even if a specific diagnosis is not rendered, the Veteran's pain and other symptoms alone may serve as a disability if they cause a functional impairment in earning capacity. See Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1356.  And, all that 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2)(A) requires is "persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability."  

Additionally, although the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for treatment for, complaints, symptoms, or diagnoses of bilateral knee disabilities, the lack of documentation of an injury or treatment in service is not dispositive of the issues on appeal.  In that regard the Veteran has indicated that his bilateral knee pain began during service and continued since.  The Veteran's statements regarding bilateral knee pain are "competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology and 'may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection.'" Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 303, 307 (2007) (quoting Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 465, 469 (1994).  

There is no examination or opinion on record addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee pain and the evidentiary record at the time of the rating decision on appeal did "not contain sufficient medical evidence for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim."  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2)(C).  Accordingly, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran with an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right and left knee conditions, to include his complaints of knee pain which began in-and has continued since-active-duty service. The record must be made available to the examiner and the examiner should indicate in his or her report that the record was reviewed. 

The examiner should note all applicable diagnoses and provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that a right and left knee condition, to include pain, began in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty military service.   

The examiner is advised that, even in the absence of a diagnosis, knee pain, in and of itself, may constitute a disability if it reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity. So, if a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" in providing the above requested medical opinion.  

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. Here, the Veteran states that he has bilateral knee pain which began during his deployment while on active-duty and has continued since service.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.   

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Costello, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.