Citation Nr: A25030902
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240308-422072
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for osteoarthritis, left knee, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1989 to February 1993.

The matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 higher-level review decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decisions (October 11, 2023, for the Veteran's left knee disability, and October 20, 2023, for his hip disabilities), which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for osteoarthritis, left knee, as well as service connection for both right and left hip conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for osteoarthritis, left knee, is remanded.

Additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claim of entitlement to service connection for osteoarthritis, left knee.

The Veteran has asserted that he is entitled to service connection for his osteoarthritis of the left knee as secondary to his service-connected osteoarthritis of the right knee. See May 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. Specifically, he has stated that because of his "pain" he has to shift his weight back and forth to alleviate discomfort. 

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, wherein he stated that he was seeking service connection for his left knee condition secondary to his service-connected osteoarthritis- right knee. He stated that he experienced locking, buckling, weakness, and a feeling of his knee giving out. He further described that his pain was exacerbated when he had to use stairs, run, or jog, squat, jump, move fast from side to side, or carry heavy objects. He stated that even plain walking or standing still can cause pain in his knee. He said that his knee pain caused him to shift his weight back and forth to alleviate discomfort. In addition, he said that knee stiffness makes it so that he cannot sit in one place for very long, and he has to get up and walk around to relieve pain. He also stated a number of treatments or methods that he used to try and help, including a prescription for Indomethacin, over-the-counter Tylenol, and injections. Lastly, he stated that he required a knee brace and a cane to walk with. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA knee and lower leg examination in June 2023. A diagnosis of tricompartmental osteoarthritis was noted for his left knee, with a diagnosis date of June 14, 2023. He reported that his left knee pain started after his right knee injury, and that the onset was 2015. He also reported symptoms of popping and pain. He stated that he was using Tylenol, Icy Hot, and a knee brace as treatment. He also stated that his left knee disability had a functional impact of making it difficult for him to have prolonged running, standing, sitting, or walking. He did report flare-ups. He stated the flare-ups occurred daily for around 30 minutes, and involve pain when running, sitting, standing, or walking for extended periods, and are helped by the Tylenol, Icy Hot, and knee brace. The examiner reported that his left knee range of motion measurements were abnormal or outside of normal range, but that this didn't contribute to functional loss. The examiner did note a functional impact of 0-1 week of missed work time due to the disability and the aforementioned inability to run, sit, stand, or walk for a prolonged period, which the examiner noted was longer than 20 minutes. The June 2023 examination did not include an opinion, so an addendum was produced.

A September 2023 addendum opinion stated that the Veteran's left knee disability was not due to his right knee service-connected condition. The examiner provided the rationale that there was no objective evidence of this occurring, and that peer reviewed medical literature did not show that a right knee condition causes a left knee condition and stated that osteoarthritis did not spread to other joints.

When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Board finds the September 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate and necessitates a remand. To begin, the Board finds that a pre-decisional error occurred when the September 2023 addendum opinion did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis aggravated his left knee osteoarthritis. 

In addition, the September 2023 addendum opinion writer based its rationale solely on an uncited group of "peer reviewed medical literature". The September 2023 addendum writer also did not refer to the Veteran's medical record other than to say that there was not objective evidence that the right knee osteoarthritis could not have led to the left knee osteoarthritis.

The Board notes that the September 2023 VA opinion writer did not address the Veteran's competent May 2023 lay statement that he shuffles his weight between his knees and legs because of pain and discomfort. The May 2023 lay statement was submitted prior to this opinions and was not addressed.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain symptoms and the time period that those symptoms appeared). These competent lay statements cannot be dismissed solely due to the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 133637 (Fed. Cir. 2006). As the September 2023 VA opinion improperly dismissed the Veteran's competent lay statements, it is inadequate for that reason as well. Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311. Thus, remand for an adequate addendum opinion must be provided. See Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). 

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

Additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip conditions.

The Veteran asserted that his right and left hip pain were both secondary to his service-connected right knee osteoarthritis. Specifically, he asserted that he often shifted his weight as a result of his knee issues, and that this led to his hip pain. See May 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.  Also of note, the Veteran has previously asserted that he hurt his left hip as the result of a fall while on active duty. See January 2014 VA examination.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, wherein he stated that he was seeking service connection for both hip conditions secondary to his service-connected osteoarthritis- right knee. He stated that his right knee caused him to walk unevenly, stand unevenly, and lean to one side, which led to his symptoms in his hips. Those statements included pain and weakness. He further described that his pain was exacerbated when he had to use stairs, stand, or walk for a prolonged period, or when he had to make quick side-to-side movements. This limited his ability to walk around a store, complete yard work, play with his children, compete in sports, or do many household chores. He also stated a number of treatments or methods that he used to try and help, including that he tried to stay off his feet, that he sometimes took Tylenol or Indomethacin, used heat and/or stretching, and switched his weight from side to side when standing still to help with pain. Lastly, he stated that he required a cane to walk with. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA hip and thigh conditions examination in October 2023, with a medical opinion to follow for each hip condition that same month. No hip disability was diagnosed, and ultimately the examiner determined that there was not a nexus between the Veteran's service and his current hip conditions. He reported experiencing hip pain in 2017. He stated that he had issues walking up stairs, standing or walking for too long. He stated that his pain is getting worse, that there is a constant pain in the groin and hip areas when walking up stairs or standing or walking for prolonged periods. He stated he does not have flare-ups. The examiner noted a number of ranges of motion measurements for both hips but did not determine that any of these measurements warranted a diagnosis of a hip disability. The examiner stated that all initial range of motion measurements were "normal." The examiner also noted that objective evidence pain was not present on any measurements. The examiner did not discuss the pain that the Veteran reported or his stated inability to climb stairs or walk or stand for a prolonged period. He did state that the Veteran's hip issues did not present any functional impact. No other symptoms were noted. 

When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The October 2023 VA medical opinions are inadequate and require a remand. To begin, the Board finds that a pre-decisional error occurred when the October 2023 VA medical opinions did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis aggravated his right and left hip disabilities. 

The October 2023 VA examination and opinion also did not address the Veteran's competent lay statements. His lay statements in his examination related to the amount of pain he was in when doing basic daily activities and how he needed to treat this pain with medication. In addition, the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement, which included the statement that he shuffles his weight between his knees and legs because of pain and discomfort, amongst many other statements about symptoms and treatment, was submitted prior to his examination, and was not addressed. Rather, the October 2023 VA examiner concluded that he did not have any functional impact from his hip disability and did not provide a rationale. In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that pain, a symptom, may constitute a disability if it produces functional limitation or impairment without identification of the underlying cause of pain. 

As a result, in addition to the October 2023 VA medical opinions being inadequate because of not addressing aggravation, the VA examination is inadequate because the examination is incomplete. Reliance on an inadequate VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error on the part of the AOJ, which must be corrected upon remand.

Based on the above, the Board remands this matter for a new examination and medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's asserted right hip and left hip disabilities.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriately qualified examiner to determine etiology of the left knee osteoarthritis. The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to be reviewed by the examiner. While all of the record should be reviewed and that review should be noted in the addendum opinion, the examiner should make sure to review the Veteran's lay statements, particularly his May 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, regarding his left knee osteoarthritis. The Veteran should be scheduled for a physical examination if determined necessary. The examiner is asked to opine:

(a.) Is the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis?

The opinion must address aggravation. Under Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), when addressing aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities, it is enough to show that "but for" the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis any incremental-increase in severity of his left knee osteoarthritis would not have occurred.

(b.) If the service-connected right knee osteoarthritis did not cause, but aggravated, the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis, specify, to the extent possible, the degree of disability (pathology or impairment) that has resulted from such aggravation.

Provide a full rationale to support all opinions, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature with application to the Veteran's medical history, as appropriate.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for both the left and right hip disabilities.  The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to be reviewed by the examiner. While all of the record should be reviewed and that review should be noted in the addendum opinion, the examiner should make sure to review the Veteran's lay statements, particularly his May 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, regarding his right and left hip disabilities. 

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment that results in decreased earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Are the Veteran's right and left hip disabilities at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee osteoarthritis?

The opinion must address aggravation. Under Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), when addressing aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities, it is enough to show that "but for" the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis any incremental-increase in severity of his right and left hip disabilities would not have occurred.

(b.) If the service-connected right knee osteoarthritis did not cause, but aggravated, the Veteran's right and left hip disabilities, specify, to the extent possible, the degree of disability (pathology or impairment) that has resulted from such aggravation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Provide a full rationale to support all opinions, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature with application to the Veteran's medical history, as appropriate.

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	McLaughlin, Paul J. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.