Citation Nr: A25030737
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240425-435385
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent, but no higher, for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder, effective September 21, 2022, is granted.

REMAND

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms resulted in deficiencies in most areas. Total occupational and social impairment was not shown by the evidence.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent, for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disabilities have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 2004 to November 2008. His military decorations include an Iraq Campaign Medal and a Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in April 2024, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the rating decision was promulgated. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As for the issue being remanded by the Board, the AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD with major depressive disorder, effective September 21, 2022, is granted.

The Veteran is currently rated at 70 percent for his service-connected acquired psychiatric disabilities. He contends that his initial rating should be 100 percent.

By way of background, a December 2022 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD with major depressive disorder, at a 50 percent rating, effective September 21, 2022. In November 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim, seeking a higher rating. In March 2024, the AOJ increased the Veteran's evaluation from 50 percent to 70 percent and assigned an effective date of July 17, 2023. In April 2024, the Veteran appealed. Accordingly, the entire initial rating period is on appeal. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The percentage ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity as a result of a service-connected disability, and separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411, PTSD is to be rated under the General Rating Formula for evaluating psychiatric disabilities other than eating disorders. The regulation sets forth scheduled ratings at 10, 30, 50, 70 and 100 percent described below. 

A 10 percent rating is granted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 30 percent rating is granted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near- continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The specified factors for each incremental psychiatric rating are not requirements for a particular rating but are examples providing guidance as to the type and degree of severity, or their effects on social and work situations. Analysis should not be limited to whether the symptoms listed in the rating scheme are exhibited; rather, consideration must be given to factors outside the rating criteria in determining the level of occupational and social impairment. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

All ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id. However, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation on the basis of social impairment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

All reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. In Lynch v. McDonough, the Federal Circuit held that the benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor when the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal," and does not require exact equipoise. 21 F.4th 776, 780 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, in August 2022, the Veteran was evaluated by a board-certified private psychiatrist for his PTSD symptoms related to his service in the Iraq war. The Veteran described experiencing nightmares, hypervigilance, dissociative episodes, relational problems, dealing with frequent negative emotions such as anger and fear, diminished interest in activities, irritability, and anger with verbal outbursts. He stated that he had dealt with recklessness and self-destructive behavior, but that has improved somewhat over the years. He reported being easily startled by noises, ongoing problems with concentration and focus, and sleep disturbances. Lastly, he described being depressed though he denied severe depression. Roughly two years prior to his claim, he attempted suicide and was admitted to the hospital for treatment. He reported being placed on Lithium and Seroquel shortly after returning from Iraq for mood instability. 

The psychiatrist diagnosed him with chronic PTSD and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. During the evaluation, the psychiatrist observed that the Veteran's appearance was neat and clean, he was cooperative, his mood and affect were neutral. His insight and judgment were good, and his general attitude, thought process, and thought content were generally unremarkable. The psychiatrist assessed that the Veteran did not have current suicidal or homicidal ideation. The chart documents that the Veteran had substance abuse issues after his tour in Iraq and that he took Zoloft and Xanax for PTSD. Socially and relationally, the Veteran was married with a daughter prior to going to Iraq. That marriage apparently ended. As of August 2022, he had a girlfriend of two years. In addition to his daughter, he has another son from a different relationship. The Veteran reported being an electrician and having completed the Journeyman's Wireman training program. He also reported working out regularly. 

In November 2022, the Veteran was afforded another a VA examination in association with this claim. The VA examiner, a psychologist, determined that the Veteran had multiple mental disorder diagnoses the effects of which could not be differentiated from each other. The Veteran reported persistent low mood since his discharge. He said he feels "numb on a bunch of activities I really loved," such as "creative stuff, trying to draw, even want to be into it." He noted he was previously social and had close friends, but he now struggles to connect. Additionally, the Veteran reported that he was experiencing intrusive thoughts frequently, which make him tearful, anxious, and angry. He said he experiences persistent feelings of guilt over things for which he has no control. He also described that after his 2019 suicide attempt, he got rid of his firearm and made a safety plan with his providers. The VA psychologist identified the following symptoms associated with the Veteran's mental condition: depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The examiner concluded that the Veteran was experiencing occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity as a result of his mental condition. The VA examiner determined that the Veteran met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD and major depressive disorder. She explained that the Veteran had previously been diagnosed with cyclothymia and bipolar disorder in a 2017 VA examination. She believed that his earlier diagnosis was in error because it was not consistent with the conclusions of his treating providers and because she believed that his symptoms of irritability and recklessness were better accounted for by a diagnosis of PTSD. 

The Veteran submitted a statement in support of his claim dated July 2023. In this statement he provided a detailed explanation of his current symptoms as follows: every day he battles with whether or not he should take his own life and with feelings of worthlessness. "There have been nights" he stated, where "[he] sat with a pistol in [his] mouth crying." The anger and guilt he experiences is unbearable. He expressed frustration with not being able to maintain a romantic relationship. His marriage ended in divorce. He had five failed relationships after that, and his current relationship is "in shambles" because of his explosiveness. He has become violent at times including smashing, throwing, or breaking things as well as becoming verbally and emotionally abusive. He described his anxiety as intensely crippling; social isolation; depression. For days at a time, he will not take care of himself including not showering, not eating, not washing his clothes, and leaving his clothes in piles on the floor around the house. He avoids crowds due to noise and movement-based triggers; he views those around him as hostile threats; he constantly locks and re-locks his doors at night. He states that he has had a new job every year since separating from the Marine Corps. 

From July 2023 to September 2023, the Veteran attended a 10-week intensive outpatient program to address his trauma. A private licensed professional counselor summarized his progress in the therapeutic program in a report from October 2023 and determined that despite progress, the Veteran still struggled with panic, anxiety, hypersensitivity, hypervigilance, and reactivity. The private counselor further concluded that the Veteran's symptoms created significant impairment in his ability to function at necessary and appropriate levels in major life areas. He explained that the Veteran was unable to regulate his mood, had impulsive and destructive behaviors, difficulty in regulating aggression and violent response, and experience with intrusive thoughts that create cognitive impairment and poor judgment. 

The mental health evaluations from the 10-week course are somewhat variable. At all times, the Veteran's appearance, dress, speech, eye contact, and the like are within normal limits according to the evaluator, but he is reported as having an anxious mood on at least two occasions; and, dysphoria and anger on separate occasions. At one point he reports an uptick in anger with an inability to control outbursts. At the subsequent meeting, however, he reports having an altercation at a doctor's office but being able to refrain from violent behavior. His judgment and impulse control was assessed as poor in July 20223, and his functional status was documented as impaired on one occasion and moderately impaired on another. During these sessions, the Veteran reported symptoms consistent with those identified in the VA examinations. His suicidal ideation was assessed at each of these visits and was consistently negative. 

In December 2023, the Veteran received another VA examination. At this evaluation, the Veteran reported working as an electrician, but having difficulty holding down jobs and having difficulty getting along with people. He reported having been locked up for belligerence, having episodes of public intoxication, and having domestic violence charges in the past. The VA examiner identified the following symptoms as being associated with his condition: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbance of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The VA examiner observed that the Veteran was pleasant and cooperative. He was oriented in all spheres. His thought processes were logical and goal oriented. He reported no hallucinations, delusions, or suicidal ideation. Based on his overall picture, she determined that the Veteran's occupational and social impairment had deficiencies in most areas. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms are most closely approximated by the 70 percent rating schedule. It is clear from the medical evidence that his symptoms have been persistent and are deeply disruptive to his occupational, social, and familial relationships. His medical documentation show that he continues to struggle with hypervigilance which makes it difficult for him to be in large crowds, around loud noises or triggering movements. It also makes it difficult for him to relax in his own home in the evenings due to having to constantly lock and relock the doors. He continues to struggle with nightmares causing sleep impairment. He has explosive mood lability with occasional violent outburst, impulsivity, and destructive behavior which negatively impacts his relationships. His suicidal ideation is somewhat improved, but according to his statement from July 2023 continues to be an issue. He also stated that for days at a time, he has difficulty maintaining adequate hygiene. All of these symptoms are consistent with a 70 percent evaluation. This conclusion is consistent with the determination of the VA examiner who issued the December 2023 report. There, the examiner determined that the Veteran's clinical picture was consistent with occupational and social impairments with deficiencies in most areas. Because this latter VA examination has the benefit of the Veteran's intensive outpatient records, the Board finds that it carries more probative weight to the extent that it benefits from a more complete clinical picture. 

The Board does not find gross impairment, however. Firstly, no medical evidence concludes that the Veteran is grossly impaired. And, the record does not show evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication, delusions, hallucinations, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss. Of the symptoms that do cross into the 100 percent category, such as being a danger to self or others, the Veteran's condition does not rise to the level of degree or persistence. 

For instance, while the Veteran reported tendencies of violent outbursts and even attests to domestic violence charges and public belligerence, he has more recently shown the ability to refrain from resorting to violence such as with the altercation he reported at a doctor's office. While the Veteran's suicidal ideation is a serious symptom, none of his recent providers reported a positive indication for an acute risk of suicide upon a specific assessment for that very risk. The Veteran credibly reported taking mitigating risks including getting rid of his firearm and creating a plan with his providers. In his August 2022 evaluation, the Veteran reported improvement with his reckless and self-destructive behavior. As for a lack of an ability to maintain hygiene, this also appears to be a neglect of personal appearance rather than an inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene. In fact, through the series of evaluations over the course of two years, no provider observed him to have poor hygiene, inappropriate attire, or an ill-maintained appearance. While the Veteran credibly attests to struggling with maintaining employment, he reports working as an electrician throughout the appeal period and successfully completed the Journeyman's Wireman training program. He has likewise been in his current relationship throughout the duration of the appeal period. 

In sum, the Board finds that the evidence supports the assignment of an initial 70 percent rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, and that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a schedular rating greater than 70 percent.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

As a final matter, the Board acknowledges that in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the Court held that a claim for a TDIU is part of an increased rating claim when such claim is raised by the record. Specifically, where a veteran (1) submits evidence of a medical disability; (2) makes a claim for the highest rating possible; and (3) submits evidence of unemployability, the requirements in 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (a) that an informal claim "identify the benefit sought" has been satisfied and VA must consider whether the veteran is entitled to TDIU. Id. 

Here, in his statement in support of this claim, the Veteran reported that he has had difficulty holding down a job and has had a new job every year since separating from the Marine Corps. See July 2023 VA Form 21-4138. Because this potentially indicates that certain mental health symptoms that he may have experienced during the period on appeal could be sufficient to result in job loss, the Board finds there is sufficient evidence to raise entitlement to a TDIU. Accordingly, this issue is remanded for the AOJ to undertake appropriate development as this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

(Continued on the next page)

?

1. Undertake appropriate action to develop the issue of entitlement to a TDIU, to include providing the Veteran with a VA Form 21-8940.

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	King, Laura E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.