Citation Nr: A25030174
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240619-449015
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1993 to November 1996.  

As a matter of background, the Veteran first filed a claim of entitlement to service connection, in pertinent part, for a left shoulder condition and a right knee condition in December 2021.  In a February 2022 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim.  The Veteran then submitted a November 2022 request for a higher-level review of the February 2022 rating decision.  During the higher-level review process, the AOJ determined that it had erred in fulfilling its duty to assist prior to the February 2022 rating decision.  As a result, the AOJ engaged in additional development and continued to process the matters as a supplemental claim.  

Then, in July 2023, the AOJ issued a new rating decision in which it confirmed and continued the denials of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition and right knee condition.  The Veteran submitted a June 2024 VA Form 10182 to appeal the July 2023 decision to the Board.  In doing so, the Veteran elected to have his appeal adjudicated under the Direct Review docket.  As a result, the Board may consider only the evidence that was of record at the time of the July 2023 rating decision.  The Board may consider argument raised at any time.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

Remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Whenever VA undertakes to either provide an examination or to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  An adequate medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

Here, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2023.  At that time, the examiner diagnosed left rotator cuff tendonitis, left rotator cuff tear, left acromioclavicular (AC) joint separation, and left AC sprain.  

The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left shoulder disabilities were caused by or incurred in service.  By way of rationale, the examiner stated that there was "scant data supporting a nexus" between the current disabilities and service.  The examiner went on to state that, "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology."  The only evidence the VA examiner cited was the Veteran's January 1997 Five-Year Physical Examination where records show the Veteran answered "No" to a question asking if he had a painful or trick shoulder or elbow.  The VA examiner did not discuss the relevance of that evidence.  

Notably, the Veteran's service treatment records document treatment for left upper arm pain in September 1995.  The Veteran complained of injury or muscle strain at his left upper arm and biceps muscle that was aggravated with lifting heavy things.  He described feeling as if the condition was getting worse with lifting, noting that his job required him to lift a lot.  He was assessed with a deltoid strain.  

The Veteran also submitted a December 2021 statement in which he alleged to have injured both shoulders during physical training exercises and a combat-related incident.  He reported that he had experienced issues with his shoulders ever since active duty.  Although the Board makes no findings regarding the credibility of this statement at this time, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he experienced.  

In the April 2023 VA examination report, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's competent lay statements-which describe chronicity of symptoms-in their medical opinion.  Further, the examiner did not provide any explanation as to how the January 1997 physical examination informed their conclusory opinion, nor did the examiner identify or explain what post-service injury or event was the more likely cause of the Veteran's current disabilities.  As a result, the medical opinion does not contain sufficient rationale and is therefore inadequate.  On remand, an adequate medical opinion should be obtained.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

As with the Veteran's left shoulder conditions, remand is necessary to afford the Veteran an adequate medical opinion, which was not obtained prior to rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran underwent a VA knee examination in April 2023.  At that time, the VA examiner diagnosed right knee instability and patellofemoral pain syndrome.  The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the right knee disabilities were caused by or incurred in service.  By way of rationale, the examiner stated that there was "scant data supporting a nexus" between the current disabilities and service.  The examiner went on to state that, "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology."  The only evidence the VA examiner cited was the Veteran's January 1997 Five-Year Physical Examination where records show the Veteran answered "No" to a question asking if he had a trick or locked knee.  The VA examiner did not discuss the relevance of that evidence.

Notably, the Veteran's service treatment records document a March 1995 complaint of pain in the right knee that had been ongoing for one week.  The Veteran reported his belief that the injury was possibly due to carrying a heavy toolbox and that he had no history of the problem prior to that incident.  There was occasional pain and swelling in the right knee.  The treating provider assessed patellofemoral pain syndrome.  

The Veteran also submitted a December 2021 statement in which he alleged to have injured both knees during physical training exercises.  He reported that he had experienced issues with his knees ever since active duty.  Although the Board makes no findings regarding the credibility of this statement at this time, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he experienced.

In the April 2023 VA examination report, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's competent lay statements-which describe chronicity of symptoms-in their medical opinion.  Further, the examiner did not provide any explanation as to how the January 1997 physical examination informed their conclusory opinion, nor did the examiner identify or explain what post-service injury or event was the more likely cause of the Veteran's current disabilities.  In light of the Veteran's in-service diagnosis of patellofemoral pain syndrome, this is an especially significant oversight.  As a result, the medical opinion does not contain sufficient rationale and is therefore inadequate.  On remand, an adequate medical opinion should be obtained.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate examiner regarding the Veteran's documented left shoulder disabilities.  The examiner should review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and the opinion should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.    

The examiner should render an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any of the Veteran's left shoulder disabilities had onset in, or are otherwise related to service.  

In doing so, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's September 1995 in-service treatment for a condition assessed as a left deltoid strain, as well as the Veteran's December 2021 statement describing a chronicity of symptoms.  The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he has experienced.  Further, the examiner is reminded that lack of chronicity of treatment, on its own, is not a sufficient basis for a negative nexus opinion without explanation as to why such absence of treatment is relevant to the opinion.  

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with complete rationale for the conclusions reached, in a printed report.  Complete rationale should include an explanation of the evidence used in support of the conclusion, as well as an explanation as to why such evidence supports the conclusion.

2. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate examiner regarding the Veteran's documented right knee disabilities.  The examiner should review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and the opinion should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions.    

The examiner should render an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any of the Veteran's right knee disabilities had onset in, or are otherwise related to service.  

In doing so, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's March 1995 in-service treatment for a condition assessed as patellofemoral pain syndrome, as well as the Veteran's December 2021 statement describing a chronicity of symptoms.  The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to describe the symptoms he has experienced.  Further, the examiner is reminded that lack of chronicity of treatment, on its own, is not a sufficient basis for a negative nexus opinion without explanation as to why such absence of treatment is relevant to the opinion.

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with complete rationale for the conclusions reached, in a printed report.  Complete rationale should include an explanation of the evidence used in support of the conclusion, as well as an explanation as to why such evidence supports the conclusion.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Giaquinto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.