Citation Nr: A25030107
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240117-408979
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

 Entitlement to service connection for bilateral finger disabilities is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1978 to May 1995, with additional service in the Army Reserve.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Within the framework of the AMA, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge in January 2024.  See January 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  The Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2(d), 20.301.

In his January 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that he wanted to appeal two issues, namely entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and for a leg condition manifested by muscle pain, joint pain, and stiffness, that were not decided by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in the December 2023 rating decision.  See November 2024 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  

In this regard, the Board recognizes that the Veteran submitted a claim of entitlement to service connection for a right leg condition manifested by muscle pain and stiffness in October 2022 and that he subsequently filed a supplemental claim for tinnitus in December 2022.  See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation); December 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  However, the Board lacks jurisdiction to review an issue that is not the subject of an initial adjudication by the AOJ.  See, e.g., Godfrey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 398, 408-10 (1995) (finding that the Board lacked jurisdiction to address the merits of a claim that had not been adjudicated by an AOJ in the first instance); Bernard v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 382, 384-91 (1993) (noting that the laws and regulations governing VA claims establish "a series of very specific, sequential, procedural steps that must be carried out by a claimant and the RO . . . before a claimant may secure 'appellate review' by the [Board]" and thus holding that "the Board's jurisdiction is limited to deciding questions in 'appeals' of 'a matter which . . . is subject to decision by the Secretary' and which has been the subject of a decision by an AOJ").  Therefore, the Board cannot adjudicate the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and for a leg condition manifested by muscle pain, joint pain, and stiffness in the first instance.

Moreover, under the AMA, the Board does not have the authority to refer any issues to the AOJ for initial development and adjudication.  Instead, the Veteran or his agent must resubmit his claims for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and a leg condition to the AOJ or notify the AOJ that the issues are still pending.

Lastly, the Board has re-characterized the claim of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (The scope of a claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record.).

1. Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and that he last submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for hearing loss and tinnitus in March 2012.  See March 2012 VA examination.

In this regard, the AOJ sent a letter to the Veteran in November 2022 to advise him that VA was unable to locate a provider in his country to complete the examination needed to properly adjudicate his claim of entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.  The AOJ further explained that the Veteran was responsible for finding a medical provider to complete the necessary DBQ and indicated that he could contact his embassy for assistance in locating a provider, if he did not already have one.  The letter further stated that the completed DBQ, or verification that the Veteran received an examination, needed to be received within 60 days from the date of the letter, and cautioned that his claim would be decided based on the existing evidence of record if the requested evidence was not received within the applicable timeframe.  See November 2022 Claim Examination Enclosure.  

Thereafter, an examination scheduling request contention cancellation form, dated in July 2023, shows that a VA examination for bilateral hearing loss was cancelled because the examiner contracted to perform the examination was unable to contact the Veteran.  See July 2023 Examination Request.

In this regard, the AOJ sent an email to the Veteran in October 2023 to ask whether he was willing and able to attend the requested VA examination.  See October 2023 Email Correspondence.  The following day, the Veteran responded to the October 2023 email and reported that he spoke to the VA contract examiner twice and informed the examiner that he was unavailable to attend medical examinations in the United States because he was living in the Western Cape area of South Africa on both occasions.  He further explained that he would have to drive approximately 13 hours each way to attend an examination with a provider in Johannesburg and noted that doing so would necessitate paying for fuel and to stay at a hotel.  In addition, the Veteran stated that he provided medical treatment records, to include diagnostic testing records related to his claimed disabilities, to support his claim but acknowledged that he would be willing to attend an examination, to include an examination with a provider in Johannesburg, if VA was able to reimburse him for expenses related to mileage, fuel, and accommodations.  See October 2023 Email Correspondence.  Significantly, there is no indication that the AOJ responded to the Veteran's October 2023 email, and there is no evidence that any attempts were made to find a provider closer to the Veteran's residence to perform an examination or to schedule him for a VA telehealth examination with a provider in the United States.  Moreover, it is unclear whether the AOJ notified the Veteran of the consequences of not submitting the DBQ included with the November 2022 letter or of failing to report for a VA examination.

Thus, as the Veteran is living out of the country and in consideration of the financial and temporal demands of attending a VA examination in the United States or Johannesburg, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a provider closer his residence or conducted via telehealth and by not notifying him of the consequences of not submitting the DBQ included with the November 2022 letter or of failing to report for a VA examination.  Thus, the Board finds that a remand is required to schedule the Veteran for a VA examination or telehealth interview (if an in-person examination is not feasible) to determine the nature and severity of his service-connected bilateral hearing loss.

In addition, a March 2018 audiology note shows that the Veteran underwent an audiological evaluation during which pure tone thresholds and speech recognition scores were recorded.  However, the medical evidence of record does not include a copy of the pure tone testing results, and the examiner did not indicate whether the Maryland CNC protocol was used during speech recognition testing.  See January 2021 CAPRI.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is required to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error with regard to obtaining VA medical records identified prior to the December 2023 rating decision that are relevant to the issue on appeal.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

The Veteran states that his diagnosed cervical spine and bilateral wrist disabilities were caused by wear and tear from his Military Occupational Specialties (MOSs) as a track vehicle mechanic, M60 A1-A3 tank systems mechanic, and Abrams tank system mechanic, which is supported by his service personal records (SPRs) and DD-214.  See November 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application; November 2022 DPRIS Report; April 2023 Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty (e.g. DD 214, NOAA 56-16, PHS 1867).

A review of the service treatment records (STRs) shows an August 1978 enlistment report of medical examination, which notes the Veteran's upper extremities, neck, spine, and other musculoskeletal system to be normal.  His upper extremities, neck, spine, and other musculoskeletal system were also noted to be normal on his May 1985 school and August 1987 lost records reports of medical examination. 

An August 1988 screening note of acute medical care shows that the Veteran sought treatment for right hand pain.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had an obvious deformity but indicated that an x-ray was negative for any fractures.  In June 1990, the Veteran sought medical treatment for neck pain.  He further explained that he fell and hit the back of his neck on the edge of a stair approximately nine hours prior and indicated that his pain had worsened since he sustained the injury.  The assessment was upper area cervical muscle strain.  

The Veteran's upper extremities, neck, spine, and other musculoskeletal system were subsequently found to be normal on his retirement report of medical examination, and although he endorsed swollen or painful joints on his June 1994 retirement report of medical history, neither he nor the examiner noted any findings related to his upper extremities, neck, spine, or other musculoskeletal system.  See February 2010 STR - Medical; September 2011 Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility; November 2022 DRPIS Response.

A review of the post-service treatment records shows that the Veteran underwent a nerve conduction study in February 2022.  The conclusion included a clinical diagnosis of very early onset bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  See December 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

In addition, the Veteran underwent a bone densitometry and vertebral deformity assessment in June 2023.  The interpretation shows that the Veteran had osteopenia on both sides of his femoral neck as determined by World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.  See June 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain VA examinations and medical opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine and bilateral wrist disabilities to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations with respect to his service connection claims and that there are no medical opinions of record as to whether his cervical spine and bilateral knee disabilities are etiologically related to his active duty service.  Under McLendon, VA is obligated to provide an examination when the record contains (1) competent evidence of a current disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability), (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file to decide the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

In this regard, the Board notes that post-service treatment records, which were associated with the evidentiary record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome and osteopenia on both sides of his femoral neck, which he relates to wear and tear he sustained from his MOSs as a track vehicle mechanic, M60 A1-A3 tank systems mechanic, and Abrams tank system mechanic during service.  Thus, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain VA examinations constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the evidence currently meets the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination as to this claim.  See McLendon, supra.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain a VA examination, or telehealth interview, review of the record, etc., if an in-person examination is not feasible, addressing whether the Veteran's diagnosed cervical spine and bilateral wrist disabilities are etiologically related to his active duty service.

4. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral finger disabilities is remanded.

Lastly, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain private medical records identified by the Veteran prior to the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, a review of the Veteran's post-service treatment records shows that he attended regular medical check-ups while he was employed as an independent contractor in the Middle East, and VA treatment records dated in November 2018 show that he was seen by a physician overseas and that he had been referred to a private physician, non-VA clinic, or non-VA hospital.  See January 2021 CAPRI.  Moreover, in October 2023, the Veteran reported that he received treatment at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany in or around January 2021.  See November 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  However, no records from the physician in the Middle East who performed the Veteran's check-ups or from Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany have been associated with the claims file.  Thus, the Board finds that a remand is required to obtain these records to cure the duty to assist error with regard to obtaining private medical records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for all outstanding treatment records related to his claims, to include all relevant records from Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany dated in or around 2021, all relevant records from the Veteran's private physicians in the Middle East, and any other outstanding records from overseas and private physicians, non-VA clinics, and non-VA hospitals related to the claims on appeal.

2. Obtain a copy of the pure tone threshold testing results and speech recognition scores, if any, referenced in the March 2018 audiology note, and to the extent possible, undertake appropriate development to determine whether the Maryland CNC protocol was used to determine any speech recognition scores recorded in connection therewith.

If a copy of the results is not available, such should be documented in the claims file, and the Veteran should be afforded the opportunity to provide such.

3. After completion of the above development, schedule the Veteran for an examination (or telehealth interview, review of the record, etc., if an in-person examination is not feasible) by an appropriate examiner to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected bilateral hearing loss.

4. After completion of the development in #1 and #2, schedule the Veteran for an examination (or telehealth interview, review of the record, etc., if an in-person examination is not feasible) by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his diagnosed cervical spine disability.  The examiner should provide the following opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed cervical spine disability had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to his active duty service, to include as due to wear and tear in his MOSs as a track vehicle mechanic, M60 A1-A3 tank systems mechanic, and Abrams tank system mechanic.  Please explain why or why not.

A complete rationale for all opinions rendered is requested.

5. After completion of the development in #1 and #2, schedule the Veteran for an examination (or telehealth interview, review of the record, etc., if an in-person examination is not feasible) by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his diagnosed bilateral wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome.  The examiner should provide the following opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to his active duty service, to include as due to wear and tear in his MOSs as a track vehicle mechanic, M60 A1-A3 tank systems mechanic, and Abrams tank system mechanic.  Please explain why or why not.

A complete rationale for all opinions rendered is requested.

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Justis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.