Citation Nr: A25030236
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240920-475397
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asbestosis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1958 to July 1961.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  However, in November 2024, the Veteran requested to switch to the evidence submission lane.  The Veteran was notified in a December 2024 correspondence that his appeal had been placed on the evidence submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days following VA's notice that the appeal was switched to the evidence submission docket.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303 (b)(2).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following VA's notice the appeal was switched to the evidence submission docket, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asbestosis, is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a respiratory disability, claimed as asbestosis or COPD, which he contends is due to asbestos exposure while on active duty.

The Board notes that under the AMA, remands are generally only permissible to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors and "for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim."  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The Board observes that the claims file contains a positive Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum, however, it is unclear from the record what toxins the Veteran may have been exposed to as the record does not contain an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) report.  Further, it is unclear whether a complete copy of the Veteran's official military personnel file (OMPF) for his period of military service has been obtained.  As the potential exists that documentation showing the Veteran's asserted exposure to asbestos on active duty may be within his OMPF, these records should be obtained.  Since the missing service records may be determinative as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for the above-referenced disability, the Board finds that failure to obtain them or make a formal finding of unavailability constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and that all indicated development to obtain those records must be accomplished.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request from the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC), or any other appropriate source, the Veteran's complete official military personnel file (OMPF) and service treatment records (STRs), to specifically include a PIES 050 request, to determine whether any additional service records are available.

2. Prepare an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) for the Veteran.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Gorum, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.