Citation Nr: A25030259
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434148
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Prior to August 3, 2022, entitlement to a rating for total disability based on unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's right hip strain is not secondary to service-connected left ankle tendinitis and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The Veteran's right knee strain is not secondary to service-connected left ankle tendinitis and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for right hip strain due to service or left ankle tendinitis are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for right knee strain due to service or left ankle tendinitis are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1988 to October 1997. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 higher-level review decision, following the December 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket. See April 2024 VA Form 10182. This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that evidence was associated with the claims file after the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, which was during a period of time that is outside the applicable evidentiary window. Therefore, the Board has not considered that evidence in its present decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a). If the Veteran would like VA to consider the additional evidence that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and identify the evidence for the AOJ's consideration. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

However, as the Veteran's claims for entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain and a TDIU rating, prior to August 3, 2022, is being remanded, the AOJ will consider the claim in light of the entire claims file upon remand.

SERVICE CONNECTION

1. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is denied.

In the October 2022 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran submitted new and relevant evidence. The Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran contends that his right hip strain is due to service. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his right hip strain is secondary to his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. See February 2021 VA 21-526EZ.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Alternatively, secondary service connection may be granted for a current disability that is due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Further, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the evidence is not in approximate balance and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right hip strain. See also March 2021 and March 2022 VA Hip and Thigh Conditions Examinations. 

Notably, service treatment records are silent for complains of or treatment for right hip pain in service. See January 1988 Report of Medical History; March 1988 Report of Medical Examination; May 1993 Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination; May 1996 Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination; September 1997 Report of Medical History, Report of Medical Assessment, and Report of Medical Examination. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service, is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or alternatively, is due to or aggravated by his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. 

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right hip strain, and the Veteran is service connected for left ankle tendinitis, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of right hip strain began during service, is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or is due to, or aggravated by, his service-connected left ankle tendinitis.  

However, the record contains conflicting medical opinions regarding whether the Veteran's right hip strain is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or alternatively, is due to, or aggravated by the Veteran's left ankle tendinitis. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a September 2021 private opinion from G.U., an advanced practice registered nurse, who opined that the Veteran's current right hip strain is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. The examiner cited a number of medical studies and reasoned that alterations in joint kinematics affect other major joints including the feet, ankles, knees, hips, and the lumbar spine and overtime, can accelerate wear on these joints; joint degeneration on the healthy contralateral limb can be attributed to increased limb loading; and repetitive stressors with average weight-bearing activity can exacerbate frictional stress within the hip joint, causing premature cartilage break down and osteoarthritis. Accordingly based on the cited studies and the Veteran's lay statement, G.U., opined the Veteran "developed an altered center of gravity and antalgic gait pattern with limping that the medical literature associates with secondary biomechanical changes that cause abnormal kinematics to occur within both of the lower extremity joints, and per the below medical literature, hastened the development and progression of his Right Hip Strain."

However, the Board finds the September 2021 private opinion conclusory, and therefore, without probative value. "An opinion is adequate where it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability, if any, in sufficient detail so that the Board's 'evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.'" Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) (citing Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994)). Moreover, "[a]n unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context." Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240 (U.S. 2012) (citing Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008)). "It is the fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes probative value to a medical opinion." Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

The September 2021 private opinion generally cites to medical evidence without any application to the Veteran's specific medical history. Further, the opinion does not provide an adequate rationale as to why the Veteran's service-connected left ankle tendinitis caused his current diagnosis of right hip strain. The opinion merely attempts to generally link lower extremity musculoskeletal injuries of one leg to an increased likelihood of additional lower extremity musculoskeletal injuries without any application to the Veteran's specific left ankle tendinitis or right hip strain symptoms, circumstances, medical history, and additional medical conditions. The examiner solely notes the Veteran's lay statement describing his current symptoms as the basis of the opinion. Thus, the Board finds the September 2021 private opinion is inadequate and without probative value. See Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 240; Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 123 (citing Ardison, 6 Vet. App. at 407).

Further, the Veteran underwent VA hips and thigh examination in March 2021 and March 2022. 

The March 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right hip strain is less likely than not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The rationale was "[t]here are no records about any injury or treatment for the right hip during service. He was first treated for the right hip in 2021, and left service in 1997. The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Further, in a March 2021 VA opinion, an examiner also opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee strain is due to his left ankle tendonitis. The rational was that "[a] right hip strain is a musculoskeletal condition of the right hip muscles. It has no pathophysiological relationship with ankle tendonitis on the contralateral leg." 

Moreover, in June 2022, a VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right hip strain is due to or the result of his left ankle tendinitis. The examiner reasoned that 

There is no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature (Wheeless' Textbook of Orthopedics) to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5cm so that the individuals gait pattern has been altered to the extent that clinically there is an obvious Trendelenburg gait. This level of severity is not supported based on record review, history or exam.

Furthermore, in a June 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that the Veteran's right hip strain was not by aggravated by the Veteran's left ankle tendinitis. The examiner reasoned that 

There is no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5cm so that the individual's gait pattern has been altered to the extent that clinically there is an obvious Trendelenburg gait. 

Taken together, as the examiners thoroughly reviewed the claims file, reviewed all of the Veteran's medical records, acknowledged the Veteran's lay statements, and provided an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data, the Board finds that combined the March 2021, March 2022, June 2022, and June 2023 VA hip opinions are both probative and persuasive. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304-05 (2008). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the combined VA medical opinions of record. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran believes his right hip strain is related to service and alternatively, secondary to his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. However, the Veteran in this case is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple anatomical relationships and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the probative and persuasive combined VA medical opinions of record. 

Accordingly, the Board is persuaded that the medical evidence is against the Veteran's claim of service connection right hip strain. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82. Thus, the appeal in this matter must be denied.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is denied.

In the October 2022 rating decision, the AOJ favorable found that the Veteran submitted new and relevant evidence. The Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran contends that his right knee strain is due to service. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his right knee strain is secondary to his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. See February 2021 VA 21-526EZ.  

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right knee strain. See also March 2021 and March 2022 VA Knee and Lower Leg Examinations. 

Notably, although the Veteran noted left knee issues in service, service treatment records are silent for complains of, or treatment for, right knee issues in service. See January 1988 Report of Medical History; March 1988 Report of Medical Examination; May 1993 Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination; May 1996 Report of Medical History and Report of Medical Examination; September 1997 Report of Medical History, Report of Medical Assessment, and Report of Medical Examination. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service, is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or alternatively, is due to or aggravated by his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. 

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right knee strain, and the Veteran is service connected for left ankle tendinitis, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of right knee strain began during service, is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or is due to, or aggravated by, his service-connected left ankle tendinitis.  

However, the record contains conflicting medical opinions regarding whether the Veteran's right knee strain is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, or alternatively, is due to, or aggravated by the Veteran's left ankle tendinitis. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a September 2021 private opinion from G.U., an advanced practice registered nurse, who opined that the Veteran's current right knee strain is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. The examiner cited a number of medical studies and reasoned that alterations in joint kinematics affect other major joints including the feet, ankles, knees, hips, and the lumbar spine and overtime, can accelerate wear on these joints; chronic changes in plantar load distribution predispose the knee to pain, inflammation, and chronic knee joint disabilities; studies support an inter-dependence between the function of the foot and ankle joints and their effects on the plantar load distribution. Accordingly based on the cited studies and the Veteran's lay statement, G.U., opined the Veteran "developed an altered posture and gait that the medical literature associates with secondary biomechanical changes that cause abnormal kinetics to occur within both of the lower extremity joints, and per the below medical literature, hastened the development and progression of his Right Knee condition to include Strain."

However, the Board finds the September 2021 private opinion conclusory, and therefore, without probative value. See Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 123 (citing Ardison, 6 Vet. App. at 407); see also Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. at 240 (citing Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304). The September 2021 private opinion generally cites to medical evidence without any application to the Veteran's specific medical history. Further, the opinion does not provide an adequate rationale as to why the Veteran's service-connected left ankle tendinitis caused his current diagnosis of right knee strain. The opinion merely attempts to generally link ankle disabilities to an increased likelihood of knee disabilities without any application to the Veteran's specific left ankle tendinitis or right knee strain symptoms, circumstances, medical history, and additional medical conditions. The examiner solely notes the Veteran's lay statement describing his current symptoms as the basis of the opinion. Further, the opinion fails to provide a rational as to why the examiner has concluded the cited medical evidence is applicable to the development of knee disabilities of the opposite leg. Thus, the Board finds the September 2021 private opinion is inadequate and without probative value. See Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 240; Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304; Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 123 (citing Ardison, 6 Vet. App. at 407).

Further, the Veteran underwent VA knee and lower leg examinations in March 2021 and March 2022. 

The March 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee strain is less likely than not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The rationale was "[t]here are no records about any injury or treatment for the right knee during service. He was first treated for the right knee in 2020, and left service in 1997. Therefore, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee strain was incurred by the pain, injury, exposure during service."

Further, in a March 2021 VA opinion, an examiner also opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee strain is due to his left ankle tendonitis. The rational was that "[a] right knee strain is a musculoskeletal condition of the right knee muscles due to wear and tear. It has no pathophysiological relationship with ankle tendonitis on the contralateral leg." 

Moreover, in June 2022, a VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee strain is due to or the result of his left ankle tendinitis. The examiner reasoned that 

There is no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature (Wheeless' Textbook of Orthopedics) to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5cm so that the individuals gait pattern has been altered to the extent that clinically there is an obvious Trendelenburg gait. This level of severity is not supported based on record review, history or exam. Therefore it is less likely than not that the Veteran's Limitation of flexion, knee (right knee strain) is proximately due to or the result of: tendinitis, left ankle.

Furthermore, in the June 2023 VA opinions, an examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee strain was not caused or aggravated by the Veteran's left ankle tendinitis. The examiner reasoned that 

There is no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5cm so that the individual's gait pattern has been altered to the extent that clinically there is an obvious Trendelenburg gait. 

Moreover, the examiner noted "[t]his level of severity is not supported based on record review, history or exam, and while "[i]t is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, [] one joint's disease does not 'spread' to another or cause damage to it." 

Taken together, as the examiners thoroughly reviewed the claims file, reviewed all of the Veteran's medical records, acknowledged the Veteran's lay statements, and provided an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data, the Board finds that combined the March 2021, March 2022, June 2022, and June 2023 VA knee opinions are both probative and persuasive. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304-05. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran believes his right knee strain is related to service and alternatively, secondary to his service-connected left ankle tendinitis. However, the Veteran in this case is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple anatomical relationships and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 n.4; see also Kahana, 24. Vet. App. 428. Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the combined effect of the VA medical opinions of record. 

Accordingly, the Board is persuaded that the medical evidence is against the Veteran's claim of service connection right knee strain. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82. Thus, the appeal in this matter must be denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

During the May 2023 VA back conditions examination, the Veteran reported current symptoms of soreness, sharp pain, rated his pain every day as normally a 3, and if he is over exerted, his pain can increase to 10 occasionally. 

However, in the May 2023 VA back conditions examination report, the examiner noted no flareups were reported by the Veteran and procured evidence does not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flareups. Likewise, no estimates were provided for functional loss during flareups. See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017). Moreover, the Board notes that the Veteran reported back flareups in the March 2022 VA back conditions examination. Accordingly, the Board finds the flareup opinion portion of the May 2023 VA back conditions examination inadequate. See id. 

As the AOJ relied on an inadequate examination in issuing the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ committed a duty-to-assist error prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Accordingly, remand is required for an adequate addendum opinion to determine whether the Veteran does in fact experience back symptom flareups and, if so, offer an adequate opinion as to functional loss due to flareups, pursuant to Sharp. 

2. Prior to August 3, 2022, entitlement to a TDIU rating is remanded.

The Board notes that the Veteran raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating in August 2022, during the appeal period for his claim of entitlement to a rating excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Accordingly, the Board finds that it must remand the issue of entitlement to a TDIU prior to August 3, 2022, is inextricably intertwined with the previously remanded increased rating claim. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). 

Where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with other claims currently on appeal, the appropriate remedy is to remand the claim pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claims. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991). Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is warranted on that basis alone.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected lumbar strain. The examiner should review this remand and the May 2023 VA back conditions examination and answer the following: 

2. After a review of the May 2023 examination, and medical evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to whether the Veteran suffers from described flareups, and if so, as to the severity, frequency, and duration of any flareups, and the degree of functional loss during flareups.

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on review, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.

Additionally, the examiner should provide estimates of what the Veteran's range of motion measurements, symptoms, and related impairment would have been throughout the appeal period, including during flare-ups.

The examiner is directed to provide a rationale for all estimates of range of motion and/or functional loss and cite the evidence relied upon in determining all estimated values.

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the inextricably intertwined issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating prior to August 3, 2022. 

?

4. A detailed explanation (rationale) is required for all opinions provided.  (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation.  Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested). 

 

J. Abrams

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sprague, Gloria J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.