Citation Nr: A25030184
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250110-506967
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to reimbursement of beneficiary travel expenses related to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) performed at a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center (VAMC) on September 30, 2024, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an administrative decision of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) dated January 3, 2025. 

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) received on January 10, 2025, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the appellant was notified in a March 2025 letter of his right to switch dockets to either an Evidence Submission docket or Hearing Docket within 60 days of the date which the Board received his VA Form 10182.   See March 2025 Board Docketing Letter.  The Veteran has not requested a docket switch and has not submitted additional evidence.   Therefore, the Board proceeds to the merits of the case.

Favorable findings of the AOJ which the Board will not disturb is that the claim was timely filed.  See January 2025 VHA Decision.

1. Beneficiary Travel benefits for September 30, 2024.

The Veteran contends that his beneficiary travel expenses related to an MRI he received at a VAMC on September 30, 2024, should be reimbursed.  See January 2025 VA Form 10182.

A January 2025 VHA decision indicated that the claim would not be approved because it had already been processed through Beneficiary Travel Self Service System (BTSSS), and the second claim does not qualify for payment as there is no evidence of additional cost incurred to authorize additional payment.  See VHA File, received March 6, 2025, pg. 2. 

The Board notes that the VHA files contains two copies of the same decision for travel to care provided on September 30, 2024, at 08:00 am.  See id. at pgs. 1, 4. Thus, it is unclear from the record how this is evidence of a duplicate claim.

The Board also notes that the claim file for this date of service contains only 5 pages of record, with no BTSSS records, medical records, or evidence of payment. Without these VHA records, application, or BTSSS submission or evidence of payment, the Board does not have adequate information to adjudicate the claim. 

In this case, the Board finds that due process requires that the AOJ ensure that a complete copy of the record before it is made available for the Board's review in connection with the appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (requiring the Secretary to consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case).  While the claim file contains an initial VA denial letter or beneficiary travel disposition for this date of service, the BTSSS files are not included. dates in question.  Due to a record which is apparently incomplete, it is unclear under what authority the appellant seeks or may otherwise be entitled to payment.  Thus, a duty to assist error has occurred in development of the record before the Board.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that remand is warranted for the AOJ to associate with the claim file the claim for reimbursement, adjudicatory documents, and evidence considered in connection with the claims on appeal.  If such records are unable to be located, the AOJ should make a formal finding of unavailability and provide the appellant with notice of the unavailability of records.

The appellant is notified that under the modernized appeal system, remands do not automatically return to the Board for additional adjudication.  Should the AOJ deny the claim in whole or in part and the appellant wish to continue its appeal before the Board, the appellant should file a Notice of Disagreement within the applicable appeal period after the AOJ's readjudication of the claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Associate with the electronic claim file all relevant filings, notices, adjudicatory documents, and evidence considered in connection with the claim on appeal.

2. The record should include (but not limited to): all notices sent to the appellant informing it of the evidence necessary to constitute a complete claim and the evidence necessary to substantiate the claim; all decisions regarding the claim; any evidence submitted by the appellant related to the claim; any relevant VA medical records obtained or received related to the claim; and any relevant documents received or generated in connection with the claim.

3. If any records are unable to be located, the AOJ should make a formal finding of unavailability and provide the appellant with notice of the unavailability of records.

4. The AOJ is reminded that any subsequent decision as to the claim should comply with 38 U.S.C. 5104.

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McKenzie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.