Citation Nr: A25030568
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240118-410294
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal condition, claimed as gastric ulcer, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dental condition for compensation purposes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dental condition for treatment purposes is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 1973 to September 1993.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

Within the framework of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), in January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) in response to the May 2023 rating decision and elected Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  In this regard, the Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the May 2023 decision.  It may consider argument, but not evidence, that was received at any time after May 2023 rating decision.

Under the AMA, favorable findings by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) are binding on the Board.  The May 2023 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the service connection claims for the back condition, gastrointestinal condition, left shoulder condition, and dental condition.  These are binding favorable findings by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to the address the claims on the merits.  See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claims on appeal herein for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.

Entitlement to service connection for back condition is remanded.

As indicated above, favorable findings by the AOJ are binding on the Board.  38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Here, the May 2023 rating decision found that the evidence showed that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as the service treatment records (STRs) show the Veteran was assessed for back pain in October 1992.  The May 2023 rating decision also found the Veteran was diagnosed with a disability.  Thus, the remaining inquiry is whether the diagnosis was due to service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  A VA opinion was obtained for the back condition in October 2013 in which the VA examiner provided a negative conclusory opinion without supporting rationale.  A conclusory opinion is an inadequate opinion.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (Vet. App. 2007).  The October 2013 VA examination was also based on an incomplete record as additional relevant treatment records ranging from 2007 to 2011 have since been associated with the claims file in May 2023.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460 (1993) (medical opinions based on an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise are not probative).  Thus, a remand is required in order to correct this pre-decisional error of failing to obtain an adequate VA opinion. 

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his current left shoulder condition that he reports had its onset during active service.  A review of the STRs show the Veteran's complaints of left clavicular shooting pain in February 1987.  Post-service treatment records show the Veteran's reports of ongoing chronic left shoulder pain and left shoulder impingement from 2007 to 2009.  A 2007 x-ray report revealed mild degenerative changes involving the left glenohumeral joint.  

The Board finds that while the evidence listed above is not sufficient to decide the Veteran's claim, when taking the available evidence as a whole, it is sufficient to reach the low threshold set forth in McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  See also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Specifically, the Veteran has claimed a current left shoulder condition which may be associated with his active service.  However, prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was not provided a VA examination or medical opinion specific to the claimed left shoulder condition.  Thus, the Board finds that there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Board to make a decision on the claim.

Prior to the May 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ failed to obtain a VA examination or medical opinion for the issue of service connection for the claimed left shoulder disability.  This deficiency constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion. 

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal condition, claimed as gastric ulcer, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a current condition that he has characterizes as a gastric ulcer condition.  However, the Board has expanded this claim to include any gastrointestinal disorder.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  The Veteran contends that his condition had its onset during service.  

A review of the STRs show the Veteran experienced GI upset in March 1991.  Post-service treatment records show that the Veteran had experienced a history of gastropathy.  

The Board finds that while the evidence listed above is not sufficient to decide the Veteran's claim, when taking the available evidence as a whole, it is sufficient to reach the low threshold set forth in McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  See also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Specifically, the Veteran has claimed a current gastrointestinal disability which may be associated with his active service.  However, prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was not provided a VA examination or medical opinion specific to the claimed gastrointestinal condition.  Thus, the Board finds that there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Board to make a decision on the claim.  Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion to correct this pre-decisional error.

Additionally, under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022, or PACT Act, see Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022) (applicable here), a disability examination and medical opinion is required for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168 § 303, 136 Stat. 1779 (2022).  Here, a May 2023  TERA memorandum confirms the Veteran's participation in a TERA.  Thus, the AOJ must also obtain a VA medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's claimed gastrointestinal condition is related to his participation in a TERA to satisfy this statutory/regulatory duty.

Entitlement to service connection for dental condition for compensation purposes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dental condition for treatment purposes is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a current condition that he has characterizes as a tooth condition.  However, the Board has expanded this claim to include any dental condition.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  The Veteran contends that his current dental condition is related to his military service, to include his military occupational specialty (MOS) as a diver.  A March 1991 STR noted the Veteran's reports of tooth pain and a June 1991 STR noted the Veteran was a master diver with tooth squeeze.  

A review of the military personnel records also shows that there are outstanding treatment records not yet associated with the claims file.  Specifically, an undated letter from the Department of the Air Force PCS/Separation Departure Notification noted the Veteran was currently under dental care and that records would be available after dental treatment was completed.  However, a review of the available STRs do not include any dental treatment records.  The AOJ did not attempt to obtain these records.  Moreover, the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination that addresses diagnosis or etiology of the claimed dental disability despite the in-service dental complaints and indication of a current dental condition.  When taking the available evidence as a whole, the Board finds that the low threshold requirement has been met for a VA examination.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The RO's failure to provide an examination and failure to ensure that all service treatment records have been obtained constitute pre-decisional duty to assist errors, and a remand is necessary to correct such errors.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

Regarding dental disorder for treatment purposes, unless explicitly stated otherwise, a claim for service connection for a dental disability for compensation purposes must also be considered a claim for service connection for outpatient dental treatment under 38 C.F.R. § 3.381.  Mays v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 302 (1993).  VA regulations require adjudication for a claim of service connection of a dental condition for dental treatment purposes after the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) has determined basic eligibility status under criteria set by 38 C.F.R. § 3.381(a).  The claims file demonstrates that the AOJ has not attempted to verify basic eligibility status under criteria set by 38 C.F.R. § 3.381(a) for the Veteran's dental claim.

Therefore, pre-decisional error has been committed and remand is also warranted so that VHA may adjudicate the issue of entitlement to service connection for a dental disorder for purposes of treatment in the first instance.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain and associate with the claims file any outstanding service treatment records, to include all dental records.

2. After completing development #1, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current back condition.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's STRs, post-service medical records, and lay statements in support of the claim in addressing the following:

(a) Confirm and identify any diagnosed back condition that presently exists or that has existed at any point near or during the appeal period (since 2023).

i. In the event that the criteria for a diagnosis of a back disability are not met, the examiner should specifically state whether there is any functional impairment associated with the Veteran's complaints of back pain.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (holding that pain alone may constitute a disability, even without an identifiable underlying pathology, provided that such pain is productive of functional impairment).

(b) For any diagnosed back condition or functional impairment, the examiner must elicit a complete history from the Veteran regarding relevant symptoms during examination, to include the onset and any related ongoing symptomatology during active service and following separation from service.

(c) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's back condition(s) or functional impairment was incurred during or caused by active service.

(d) In providing the above opinion for (c), the examiner must also consider and address the Veteran's reported ongoing back complaints since active service.  The examiner is reminded that it is not sufficient to base an opinion solely on lack of documentation of complaints in the service or post-service treatment records. 

A complete and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions.  In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider and address all relevant lay statements of record.  If the examiner is unable to offer the opinions requested, he or she must explain in detail why that is the case.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The Board does not, at this time or by this remand, make any determination, express or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.  The examiner must indicate whether there was any further need for information or testing necessary to make a determination.  The examiner must indicate whether an opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular examiner.

3. After completing development #1, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current left shoulder condition.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's STRs, post-service medical records, and lay statements in support of the claim in addressing the following:

(a) Confirm and identify any diagnosed left shoulder condition that presently exists or that has existed at any point near or during the appeal period (since 2023).

i. In the event that the criteria for a diagnosis of a back disability are not met, the examiner should specifically state whether there is any functional impairment associated with the Veteran's complaints of left shoulder pain.  

(b) For any diagnosed left shoulder condition or functional impairment, the examiner must elicit a complete history from the Veteran regarding relevant symptoms during examination, to include the onset and any related ongoing symptomatology during active service and following separation from service.

(c) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left shoulder condition(s) or functional impairment was incurred during or caused by active service.

The examiner is reminded that it is not sufficient to base an opinion solely on lack of documentation of complaints in the service or post-service treatment records. 

A complete and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions.  In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider and address all relevant lay statements of record.  If the examiner is unable to offer the opinions requested, he or she must explain in detail why that is the case.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The Board does not, at this time or by this remand, make any determination, express or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.  The examiner must indicate whether there was any further need for information or testing necessary to make a determination.  The examiner must indicate whether an opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular examiner.

4. After completing development #1, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current gastrointestinal condition, to include gastric ulcers.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's STRs, post-service medical records, and lay statements in support of the claim in addressing the following:

(a) Confirm and identify any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition that presently exists or that has existed at any point near or during the appeal period (since 2023).

(b) For any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition, the examiner must elicit a complete history from the Veteran regarding relevant symptoms during examination, to include the onset and any related ongoing symptomatology during active service and following separation from service.

(c) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's gastrointestinal condition(s) was incurred during or caused by active service, to include the Veteran's conceded TERAs.  The examiner must address the total potential exposure through all applicable military exposure, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

The examiner is reminded that it is not sufficient to base an opinion solely on lack of documentation of complaints in the service or post-service treatment records. 

A complete and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions.  In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider and address all relevant lay statements of record.  If the examiner is unable to offer the opinions requested, he or she must explain in detail why that is the case.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The Board does not, at this time or by this remand, make any determination, express or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.  The examiner must indicate whether there was any further need for information or testing necessary to make a determination.  The examiner must indicate whether an opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular examiner.

5. After completing development #1, schedule the Veteran for a VA dental examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed dental disability.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for review by the examiner, and such review should be noted in the examination report.  All appropriate tests and studies should be accomplished, including x-rays, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

The dentist should provide a detailed overview of the Veteran's mouth, to include documenting missing teeth, existing dental restorations, and outstanding issues.

The examiner must obtain from the Veteran and record in the examination report a complete history regarding the onset and continuity of symptoms.

Following an examination and review of the record, the examiner is requested to provide the following information:

After a full examination and review of the claims file, the dentist should offer an opinion as to the following:

(a) The examiner is asked to identify all dental disability diagnosis present during the pendency of or proximate to the appeal (i.e. from 2023).

(b) For each diagnosis identified, the examiner must elicit a complete history from the Veteran regarding relevant symptoms during examination, to include the onset and any related ongoing symptomatology during active service and following separation from service.

(c) For each diagnosis identified, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any dental disability was caused by in-service dental trauma or if it was due improper dental care or treatment.

The examiner must fully explain the rationale for all opinions, with citation to supporting data/lay statements.  If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

6. Refer the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental disorder for treatment purposes to VHA for adjudication of Class eligibility in the first instance under 38 C.F.R. § 3.381.

 

 

T. Raymond

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.C., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.