Citation Nr: A25030034
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-454104
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected disabilities is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately by his service connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected disabilities are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1995 to November 1998.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). This July 2023 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the July 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Service Connection Criteria

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease shall be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). A claimant is also entitled to service connection on a secondary basis when it is shown that a service-connected disability has aggravated a nonservice-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Pertinent to this claim, although obesity itself is not considered a disability for VA purposes, when obesity has been caused by a service-connected condition, and subsequently causes another disability, obesity may be considered an "intermediate step" for establishing service connection on a secondary basis. See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017). This inquiry extends both to causation and to aggravation. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306 (2020). The veteran's level of physical activity is a factor that should be considered when addressing whether obesity served as an "intermediate step" in the causation or aggravation of disabilities on a secondary basis. Id. at 303.

VA's Office of General Counsel has issued VAOPGPREC 1-2017 which discusses service connection based, in part, on obesity. (Jan. 6, 2017). Particularly relevant to this claim is that "obesity may be an 'intermediate step' between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis" under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

The determination as to whether the requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected disabilities is granted. 

The Veteran contends that his obstructive sleep apnea is related to his service. See May 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). In the alternative, the Veteran asserts that his musculoskeletal disabilities make it difficult for him to exercise, make it difficult for him to fall and stay asleep and that he cannot sleep solely on his back. See May 2023 submission. The July 2023 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran has currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea; the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  

The Board also notes that the Veteran is service connected for a variety of musculoskeletal disabilities, to include right knee retropatellar pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and limitation of flexion; right knee retropatellar pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and instability; left knee retropatellar pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and instability; left hip strain with flexion; right hip strain; right ankle strain; left knee retropatellar pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and limitation of extension; left hip strain with extension; limited extension of the right thigh; flexion of the right thigh; and left hip strain limitation of motion.

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's service and/or service connected disabilities and his diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea, the Board notes that the record contains two etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed. See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993). When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other. See Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998). The Board will consider each of these opinions below.

A May 2023 opinion from Dr. Z.M., a private physician specializing in sleep medicine, indicated that they had reviewed all pertinent medical records to include documentation of lay statements inclusive of obstructive sleep apnea symptomology and the obstructive sleep apnea screening tool (STOP-BANG). The provider opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain is due to his service connected musculoskeletal disabilities and that his overweight condition led to, caused and aggravated the current obstructive sleep apnea. The provider opined that the Veteran has a known service connected disability that can lead to and cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or comfort overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, which leads to and/or promotes weight gain. The provider further noted that the medical literature has documented that weight gain was known to predispose patients to and directly cause obstructive sleep apnea. The provider noted that the medical literature has described from a pathophysiological perspective how obstructive sleep apnea is associated with weight gain, exacerbates hyperglycemia and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the obstructive sleep apnea condition. The provider further noted that sleep loss results in metabolic and endocrine alterations, including decrease glucose tolerance, and decreased insulin sensitivity which can lead to an increased body mass index and becoming overweight. The Board finds that the provider considered all evidence of record after thorough review of the claims file, including statements properly weighed. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2009); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion...must support its conclusion with an analysis the Board can consider and weight against contrary opinion"). Furthermore, the medical examination report contained clear conclusions with supporting data and a thorough rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301. Therefore, the etiology opinion is of great probative value.

A June 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner stated that many conditions can cause sleep apnea and that some factors, such as unhealthy lifestyle habits, can be changed. The examiner noted that other factors, such as age, family history, race and ethnicity, and sex, cannot be changed. The examiner noted that obesity is a condition that is a common cause of sleep apnea and that people with this condition can have increased fat deposits in their necks that can block the upper airway. The examiner noted that maintaining a healthy weight can help prevent or treat sleep apnea caused by obesity. The examiner also noted that sleep apnea is more common in men than in women and that men are more likely to have serious sleep apnea and to get sleep apnea at a younger age than women. The examiner noted that genetics, age, hormone levels and heart and kidney condition can also cause sleep apnea. However, the examiner concluded that there is no causal relationship between any of the Veteran's service connected disabilities and sleep apnea. The Board finds that this medical opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes. The opinion failed to analyze both proximate cause and aggravation of the Veteran's service connected disabilities. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (holding that medical opinion that only addresses whether a service-connected disability caused a nonservice-connected disability does not address whether the service-connected disability aggravated a nonservice-connected disability). In addition, the examiner did not address the Veteran's contentions that his service connected musculoskeletal disabilities make it difficult for him to fall and stay asleep and that he cannot sleep solely on his back. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

In sum, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The only probative opinion of record is in support of the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis. Moreover, there is no sufficient basis for the Board to reject this supportive opinion and to further develop the claim. Cf. Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (holding that, because it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against a Veteran's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases for its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Therefore, the Board finds that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected disabilities is warranted. The appeal is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Adeyemi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.