Citation Nr: A25030549
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240525-442709
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

?

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran is a Persian Gulf Veteran and has been diagnosed with IBS, a qualifying chronic disability involving a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness for veterans with service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for IBS have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2007 to May 2012.

The case is on appeal from December 2023 and February 2024 rating decisions.

The Veteran was previously denied service connection for the right knee in October 2016.  Then, all issues were denied in March 2019.  In the December 2023 decision on appeal, the RO did not adjudicate whether new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the issues.  It cited this standard, but then stated it was basing a decision on the evidence of record.  It proceeded to adjudicate the merits of each issue.  The RO's treatment of these issues is consistent with a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was received.  As there is not clear and unmistakable error in this finding, the Board will not reconsider this question.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  

In a May 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on that claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, for the claims being remanded, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran's NOD also expressed disagreement with rating decisions issued in June 2015 and October 2016 regarding issues involving high cholesterol, the low back, and hearing loss.  The Board observes that the Veteran's May 2024 NOD was received greater than one year after those rating decisions.  Hence, the NOD is not timely and cannot initial an appeal of these issues.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202, 20.203.  The Board will not further address the issues.  

The Veteran's representative filed an appellate brief in July 2024, which contained a hyperlink to content that is not otherwise part of the record on appeal; however, that content was not accessed nor considered as part of the record before the Board.  See Bowey v. West, 11 Vet. App. 106, 108-09 (1998) (holding that the mere reference to non VA documents is insufficient to incorporate them into the record).

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Service connection for IBS

The Veteran is seeking service connection for IBS.  He wrote in a November 2022 claim form that there was a burn pit at the corner of the compound where deployed in Afghanistan.  He began to experience what he thought was dysentery toward the end of the deployment, but he had continued to experience bowel problems since then.  

A.  Applicable Law

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  A veteran seeking compensation under these provisions must establish three elements: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service."  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

Service connection may be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest to any degree at any time. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).  A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i).  

A Persian Gulf veteran is defined as a veteran who served on active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(1). The Southwest Asia theater of operations refers to Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations. Id. § 3.317(e)(2). The period of the Persian Gulf War is from August 2, 1990, through the present. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2(i). Additionally, for veterans diagnosed with an infectious disease as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(2), the qualifying period of service also includes active military, naval, air, or space service in Afghanistan on or after September 19, 2001. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(3)(ii).  

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022.  Section 405 of the PACT Act reduces the threshold for establishing eligibility when considering presumptive service connection for Persian Gulf War veterans. Presumptive conditions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a) and (b) may now manifest to any degree at any time.  There is no longer a requirement for a chronic disability to manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more prior to December 31, 2026. The end date is no longer applicable and will be removed in a forthcoming regulation.  

Additionally, the PACT expanded the definition of a Persian Gulf veteran to include those who served in the countries of Afghanistan, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Syria, and Jordan, along with those who served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).  

B.  Discussion

In this case, the Board finds that service connection is warranted.  

The February 2024 rating decision on appeal favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability.  Consistent with this finding, a VA examination in January 2024 diagnosed IBS.  Hence, a current diagnosis is established.  

There is also no material dispute that the Veteran is a "Persian Gulf Veteran" under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  His DD 214 shows service in Afghanistan from August 2010 to May 2011.  The rating decision on appeal favorably found that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is established based on his service in Afghanistan.  The Board points out that this favorable finding is consistent with 38 U.S. Code § 1119, which establishes a presumption of exposure to toxic substances, chemicals, and airborne hazards for service members who served in Afghanistan during this timeframe.  Accordingly, an in-service event is established.  

The Board finally finds that a nexus is established.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, the Veteran's IBS is classified as a functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases).  This is a type of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms for purposes of compensation for disability due to undiagnosed illness and medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B)(3).  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, a qualifying chronic disability listed in this section shall be considered service connected for purposes of VA law and regulation.  38 CFR 3.317(a)(6).  Accordingly, the Board finds that a nexus to service is established.  

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively in favor of the claim.  As there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is applicable and service connection for IBS is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for a left knee condition.

2. Service connection for a right knee condition.

As issues 1-2 are related, the Board will address them together.  

Specifically, the Board finds that a VA examination is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran wrote in a November 2022 claim form that two things contributed to the development of a knee condition.  First, in Afghanistan and in preparation, he conducted hundreds of foot patrols in excess of 20 miles with more than 80 pounds of gear.  The boots they were given did not help, in his opinion. Second, he had been "stuffed" in a small space in vehicles during service, which left him on the verge of tears when he could not stretch his legs.  The Veteran wrote that the pain had persisted on and off to the present day.

The VA medical records, such as in October 2018, show a diagnosis of knee arthralgia.  

The rating decision on appeal stated that the evidence did not show a current diagnosed disability, but then favorably found that he has been diagnosed with a disability based on VA medical records showing treatment for knee pain.  

The Board cannot make a fully-informed decision on either issue because no VA examiner has opined whether the Veteran's current knee pain may be related to the events during service.

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332, 338-39 (2020).  However, at this stage, the Veteran's account of knee pain associated with the duties during service, which appear consistent with the types, places, and circumstances of such service, appears plausible.  

The Board must remand these claims to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination (or telehealth interview, review of the record, etc., if an in-person examination is not feasible) by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed right and left knees.

(a.) Does the Veteran have a current diagnosis?  The examiner must provide a diagnosis for any conditions found extant.  In doing so, the examiner must conduct all necessary diagnostic testing, unless it can be explained why such testing is not medically necessary.  

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(b.) Is a current condition at least as likely as not related to service, including contention foot patrols with up to 80 pounds of gear, plus sitting in confined spaces in vehicles during such service?  

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that the condition (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the diagnosis and the toxic exposure risk activity(ies) during service in Southwest Asia?  The examiner must consider: 

i.	The total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; and

ii.	The synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(e.) Please provide a medical statement explaining whether the Veteran's disability pattern is: 

(1) an undiagnosed illness

(2) a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology

(3) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or 

(4) a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis 

(f.) If, after examining the Veteran and reviewing the claims file, you determine that the Veteran's disability pattern consistent with options (3) or (4) above, (i.e., either  a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology or a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis), then please provide a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability pattern or diagnosed disease is related to a specific exposure event experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia.

In answering these questions, the examiner is asked to consider the statements from the Veteran regarding his history of symptoms during and since service.  The examiner is asked to explain why his statements make it more or less likely that the current condition is related to service.  

If indicated, it should be explained whether there is a **medical** reason to believe that the Veteran's recollection of his symptoms during and after service may be inaccurate or not medically supported as the onset or cause of his current diagnosis.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed condition is known to develop, or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner should not rely on silence in the medical records unless it can be explained: (a) why the silence in the available records can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why the fact would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Bosely, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.