Citation Nr: A25030689
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-450629
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease, stage III is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease with atrial fibrillation and heart failure preserved ejection fraction (claimed as coronary artery disease) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for rheumatoid arthritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1984 to June 1987, with additional service in the Reserves/National Guard.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of rating decisions in December 2023 and March 2024 issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The Veteran, through her attorney, filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), in June 2024.  He chose the direct review docket.  This means that the evidentiary review period closed at the time of the rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202.  The Board received and docketed the appeal in July 2024.  The appeal is now before the Board for review.

Remand Analysis - All Claims

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record.  Such findings will be made when (or if) these matters return to the Board.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

The AOJ erred by not attempting to acquire the Veteran's complete outstanding, relevant private medical records prior to the initial rating decisions on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A(b). Here, the Veteran reported being treated by Methodist Hospital for a heart disorder in 2023.  In November 2023, she said that she had just been discharged from the hospital.  She said that her private treatment team included a gastrointestinal physician (Dr. S.) and two cardiologists (Dr. J.A. and Dr. D.P.).  The Veteran also claimed during a VA exam in September 2023 that she was told by a private primary care provider that she had rheumatoid arthritis but was never prescribed any specific medication for it. 

The Board does not see these records in the claims file.  The only private medical records submitted in conjunction with the present claims include 15 pages of records from Methodist Hospital covering the treatment dates of March 22, 2023, and July 5 through July 6, 2023.  The AOJ did not request the Veteran's remaining relevant records from her cardiovascular/gastrointestinal and non-VA primary care teams. The Board cannot conclude that this error was harmless.  Remand to give the Veteran an opportunity to submit her complete private medical records or authorize VA to obtain them on her behalf is necessary before a final decision.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the Veteran and her attorney and ask them to submit an authorization for release of medical records from any private treatment providers relevant to the disabilities at issue on appeal, including from Dr. S.; Methodist Hospital (including Dr. J.A. and Dr. D.P.).; and her non-VA primary care provider who reportedly diagnosed rheumatoid arthritis.  Allow a reasonable time for response.  If a response is received, request the authorized records.  Make two requests unless it is clear that further requests would be futile.

 

 

T. Berry

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Reed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.