Citation Nr: A25030417
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240602-444769
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD has been characterized by depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, suicidal ideation, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances and establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; there is orientation to person, place, time, and situation; normal thought process and speech; and no hallucinations, delusions, unusual thought content, perceptual- or behavioral disturbances, homicidal ideations, violence, self-harm, assaulting others, or verbally- or physically abusive behavior. 

2. The Veteran's PTSD has been productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking and mood; total occupational and social impairment has not been demonstrated.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2009 to November 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to an increased rating for his PTSD.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.

Under the relevant laws and regulations, all psychiatric disabilities, to include PTSD, are evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders ("General Rating Formula"). Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, or mood due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like settings), and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) (including maintaining minimum personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but they are not meant to be exhaustive; and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Turning to the evidence, at the May 2024 informal conference, the Veteran reported he continued to have decreased social interaction and self-care; he is further disconnected from his family and socially withdrawn; he has been taking Seroquel for his mood but it causes weight gain; he has panic, anxiety, and intrusive images; and he has been harming himself with daily suicidal ideation and reported this to his psychiatrist. The Veteran reported he has severe sleep impairment, hopelessness, and self-blame. He has been attending counseling; and a further increase of medication or another use is pending. The Veteran feels he has done all the modalities to improve but feels like he is getting worse. 

VA medical treatment records, throughout the entire period on appeal reveal, that the Veteran was consistently alert, cooperative, and oriented to person, place, time, and situation; calm and relaxed; his affect was appropriate; and there was no psychosis. Treatment records further show the Veteran's speech was fluent, clear, and coherent; his thought processes were logical and linear. Furthermore, the Veteran was able to provide relevant information and did not have difficulty making himself understood; his thought process was normal, logical, and coherent. The Veteran denied any overt impulsivity. In June 2023, the Veteran reported worsening depression and, within the past three months, on one occasion, had significant suicidal ideation when he brought a gun to a gym. He shared the event with his wife who then removed the firearms. There were no recurrent, suicidal thoughts since the event; and he had no intent or plans to commit suicide.

The Veteran was fully engaged in safety planning, able to name important protective factors, and was strongly motivated to continue treatment. He stated that his marriage and children were his main protective factors; he had a good support network of friends and was a full-time, stay-at-home dad. The psychiatrist opined the Veteran did not pose any imminent risk to himself or others; thus, there was no indication for involuntary treatment. There is no history of actual self-harm, violence, or assaulting others or any evidence of verbally- or physically abusive behavior; or behavioral- or perceptual disturbances.

At the November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran denied any significant changes in social, marital, or family matters since his last evaluation in November 2022. He has not worked since getting out of the Army in November 2021; he enrolled in college and completed approximately 40 units, but it was very hard; and he had to stop. The Veteran indicated he could not complete his school commitments and have a family at the same time. The Veteran reported that once he put a gun under his chin and attempted to pull the trigger; he saw a picture of his daughter and called his wife and reported the incident to his prescriber. He denied current suicidal ideation but noted periods he thinks about it without intent.

The examiner indicated the Veteran suffered from depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short- and long-term memory, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation. The examiner determined the Veteran has an occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner noted the Veteran was dressed appropriately; alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation; thought process was logical and goal directed; did not articulate or endorse hallucinations, delusions, or homicidal ideation; speech was within normal limits for rate, tone, and rhythm; was able to make and maintain eye contact; and complained of memory problems but recent and remote memory appeared to be intact. The Veteran was able to track the conversation, provide a coherent history, and did not experience any word finding difficulties or parapraxis. Mood was dysphoric with constricted affect. The Veteran was awaiting assignment to the IOP program and is hopeful that treatment may reduce symptoms enough so he could work in the future. The Board finds the medical opinion is adequate and significantly probative.

The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements regarding his PTSD symptoms and the severity and frequency of his symptoms are competent and credible. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the symptoms do not manifest to the degree considered by a 100 percent rating.

The Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD most closely approximates a disability picture with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas as contemplated by the criteria for a 70 percent rating. Here, the VA examination and clinical records document that, as a result of his PTSD, the Veteran experienced depression, anxiety, panic attacks, sleep disturbances, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances such as managing college and family responsibilities. The Board acknowledges that, in 2023, the Veteran intentionally brought his gun with him to the gym and considered using the gun to die by suicide. These symptoms are considered by the 70 percent rating.

The analysis progresses to whether a 100 percent schedular rating is warranted. A psychiatric disability picture of less than total impairment is suggested by the level of functioning related to occupational and social relations. Throughout, the Veteran had a stable relationship with his family, and at times, participated in certain social activities, including pursuing a college education. It was noted on examinations and in VA treatment records that he maintained good hygiene and was able to perform activities of daily living, including the responsibilities of being a stay-at-home parent (evidence of actual functioning). Significantly, symptoms noted during the evaluation period also do not suggest total impairment. Gross impairment in thought process, hallucinations, delusions, unusual thought content, or perceptual- or behavioral disturbances were not clinically noted. The Veteran was oriented to all spheres; had a normal, logical, and coherent thought process; normal speech; intact language; and was able to provide relevant information to make himself understood. While the Veteran reported suicidal ideation, such ideation does not appear to have resulted in him being considered a persistent danger to himself or others. Therefore, a PTSD disability picture of total occupational and social impairment is not shown during the period on appeal.

Based on the overall disability picture, the Board finds the evidence weighs persuasively against a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD; and the claim is denied.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record for the Board's consideration. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Treadwell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.