Citation Nr: A25030944
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-441320
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right hip disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 2005 to January 2006.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the issues of entitlement to service connection for headaches and entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right hip disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Additionally, the Board acknowledges that the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not yet elapsed.  However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) is not necessary because the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence to be considered on remand and this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the remand.  Id.

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as secondary to PTSD, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she has a headache disability that is related to her service, to include as secondary to her service-connected PTSD.  Additionally, the Veteran contends that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for her right hip disability. 

In February 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-0966 Intent to File a Claim.  Within a year, the Veteran filed a formal claim for entitlement to service connection for headaches and a right hip disability. 

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination for headaches and her right hip on January 14, 2024.  In January 2024, the examination scheduling requests were cancelled because the Veteran was a "[n]o show."  The Veteran subsequently called to reschedule the examinations and reported that she was unable to make the appointments because "of car troubles /no transportation." 

On February 4, 2024, the AOJ deferred entitlement to service connection for headaches and a right hip disability for additional development.  

New VA examinations for the Veteran's headaches and right hip disability were requested on February 6, 2024.  Both examinations were cancelled on February 19, 2024 because the "Veteran [was] unavailable."  No further attempts to contact the Veteran regarding scheduling an examination are available in the file.  

In February 2024, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for headaches and granted entitlement to a 10 percent rating, but no higher, for a right hip disability, in part because "evidence expected from the examination, which might have been material to the outcome of this claim, could not be considered as [the Veteran] failed to report" and the evidence "showed no good cause for the failure to report." 

Upon review, the Board finds that proper documentation of attempts to contact the Veteran to schedule an examination are not in the file.  As a result, the claim should be remanded in order to schedule a new examination. 

First, the AOJ's characterization of the situation as a failure to report is incorrect, as the examination was cancelled at the request of the AOJ, not because of the Veteran's failure to report for a scheduled examination.  Indeed, though a request was initiated, an examination was never formally scheduled according to the evidence of record.  Further, unlike when the Veteran did fail to report and was listed as a "no show," the later examination requests were cancelled because the "Veteran [was] unavailable."  

The Board concludes that the attempts to schedule the Veteran for an examination and the documentation of these attempts are each inadequate.  Here, VA did not submit contemporaneous documentation of the attempts to contact the Veteran, nor did VA attempt to contact the Veteran following the contractor's inability to schedule her for an examination.  As such, the Board finds good cause to reschedule the examinations.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to schedule an examination constitutes a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.  Any future attempts to contact the Veteran by VA and the contractor must be contemporaneously documented in the claims file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of her headaches.  A copy of the claims file, to include this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  

Any attempts to contact the Veteran to attempt to schedule or obtain an examination must be documented in the claims file.  

All necessary testing should be conducted.  Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to provide the following:

A)	Identify all headache disorders diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal.

B)	Identify the date of onset of any diagnosed headache disorders.

C)	Offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any current headache disorder had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service. 

D)	Offer an opinion as to whether any current headache disorder is causally related to or aggravated (has undergone a measurable increase in its severity as shown by comparing the current disability to medical evidence created prior to any aggravation) by her service-connected PTSD.

If the Veteran's headache disorder has been aggravated by her service-connected PTSD, the examiner must also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability. This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time.

The examiner is advised that the absence of evidence of continuous treatment of a headache disorder in the Veteran's treatment records cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion.  In this regard, if the examiner rejects the lay statements of record as to onset and/or a continuity of symptoms, he or she should provide a reason for doing so beyond the mere lack of corroborating records.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination to determine the severity of her right hip disability.

Any attempts to schedule the Veteran for a VA examination must be documented in the claims file.  

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for a medical opinion addressing the severity of the Veteran's right hip disability.

The examiner must test the following: 

A)	Range of motion during active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. The examiner should also estimate range of motion loss with repeated use over time.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training.

3. A rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the clinician must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webster, Rebecca

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.