Citation Nr: A25030300
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220518-243502
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1973 to May 1977 and from May 1979 to July 1994.

Regarding service connection for a left knee condition, this matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2020 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed and continued in a June 2021 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.  The Veteran appealed the decision in a May 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2020 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Regarding service connection for a low back condition, although the Veteran initially requested HLR when submitting the April 2021 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error within the April 2020 AOJ decision and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  Following additional development, the AOJ then issued the September 2021 decision on appeal herein considering all evidence of record through the September 2021 AOJ decision.  In the May 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2021 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has a left knee condition that is related to service.  Upon review, the Board finds remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA opinion to resolve this claim.

Prior to the rating decision on appeal herein, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2020.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee disability was less likely than not related to service.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reflect complaint of knee pain in 1980 with a provisional diagnosis of chondromalacia, but imaging 13 years later in December 1993 was negative, and STRs are otherwise silent for complaints, diagnosis, or chronicity of care for the left knee.  The examiner, however, failed to consider or reconcile all of the STRs reflecting complaints related to the left knee.  Specifically, STRs reflect complaint of pain in the left leg from the knee down in 1997; complaint of recurrent bilateral knee pain "off and on for several years" in 1980; and complaint of tender spot over left knee area without specific injury assessed as tendonitis and DJD with possible loose body in 1993.  Thus, the AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion considering all of the STRs of record, a duty to assist error.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Additionally, the examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion based, at least in-part, on a diagnosis of left meniscal tear and degenerative arthritis in 2004.  Upon review, however, STRs in December 1993 reference tendonitis and degenerative joint disease with possible loose body although imaging confirming this diagnosis is not contained in STRs.  That is, imaging at the time of the December 1993 appointment was noted to reflect "possible loose body vs osteophyte in knee; otherwise[,] negative."  Nonetheless, the AOJ should have also obtained clarification, to the extent possible, as to when the Veteran was diagnosed with left knee arthritis, a duty to assist error.  See Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 12 (2001).

Accordingly, this claim is remanded for corrective action.

While the Board is remanding this issue for further development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

2. Service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has a low back condition that is related to service.  Upon review, the Board finds remand is necessary to correct multiple pre-decisional duty to assist errors to include obtaining an adequate VA opinion to resolve this claim and outstanding Social Security Administration (SSA) records.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding this claim in February 2020 and August 2021.  During the February 2020 VA examination, the Veteran contended that his current back disability is related to carrying gear and physical training during service.  He stated that he started having episodes of back pain in 1980 to1981.  Neither examiner, however, addressed this theory of entitlement.  That is, neither examiner addressed whether the Veteran's current back disability is related to carrying gear and physical training during service.  The AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion addressing this reasonably raised theory of entitlement, a duty to assist error.  See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-56 (2008).  Moreover, STRs reflect diagnosis of a low back strain in 1976 with subsequent complaints of low back pain in November 1981 and December 1981.  The February 2020 VA examiner only addressed the complaints in 1981 while the August 2021 VA examiner only addressed the noted low back strain in 1976.  The AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion addressing all of the in-service complaints related to the back, a duty to assist error.

Additionally, prior to the AOJ decision on appeal, the record reflects the Veteran is in receipt of SSA benefits.  While it is otherwise unclear from the record why the Veteran is in receipt of SSA benefits, the records were identified at the time of the AOJ decision, and they may be relevant to this claim.  As such, the AOJ should have obtained the Veteran's outstanding SSA records and the failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Accordingly, this claim is remanded for corrective action.

While the Board is remanding this issue for further development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's SSA records associated with his disability award, to include clinical and medical records supporting that award, and associate them with the claims file.  All efforts to obtain said records should be documented in the claims file along with all responses received from attempts to obtain the records.

2. Only after the above development, return the entire claims file and this remand to an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee disability and low back disability.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the examiner's discretion.  The examiner should render an opinion, including rationale, addressing:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's left knee disability (i) began during active service, (ii) manifested within one year after discharge from service, or (iii) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.  

NOTE: The examiner is directed to clarify, to the extent possible, when the Veteran's left knee arthritis was diagnosed in light of 1993 STR referencing DJD and 2004 imaging reflecting DJD.

NOTE: The examiner is directed to address and consider the Veteran's report of onset and persistence.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's left knee disability is related to service, to include reports of knee pain in 1977, 1980, and 1993.

NOTE: In so opining, the examiner is directed to address and consider all STRs referencing complaints related to the left knee including in 1977, 1980, and 1993.

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's low back disability is related to service, to include carrying gear and physical training during service, notation of low back strain in 1976, and/or complaints of back pain in 1981.

NOTE: The examiner is directed to address and consider the Veteran's contention that his current back disability is related to carrying gear and physical training during service as well as service treatment records reflecting a low back strain in 1976 and multiple complaints of back pain in 1981.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Allen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.