Citation Nr: A25030578
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230705-359372
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer with perineural invasion is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for skin condition, to include dermatitis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 1978 to October 1982.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 decision, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO), which is also the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran filed a timely appeal to the Board under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) with the submission of a July 2023 Decision Review Request (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) (VA Form 10182), disagreeing with the June 2023 decision on appeal. The Veteran specified the claims of prostate cancer with perineural invasion and skin condition. The Veteran requested the Direct Review docket, whereby the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. No evidence accompanied this submission.

Therefore, if evidence was associated with the claims file after the closing of the record with the June 2023 decision, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer with perineural invasion.

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer was incurred during active service.

The June 2023 decision on appeal identified the following favorable findings of fact: The Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability. The Male Reproductive Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) dated May 31, 2023 shows a diagnosis of prostate cancer, status post prostatectomy; perineural present. Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is presumed. The Internal Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum dated March 3, 2023 confirming the Veteran participated in a TERA at Camp Lejeune from March 7, 1980 and October 9, 1982 and United States Marine Corps (USMC) Ammunition Tech showing exposure to potential hazardous substance.

After VA's receipt in September 2022 of the Veteran's claim application, VA issued the March 2023 TERA memorandum. It states the Veteran qualifies for presumptive exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water (CLCW). The memorandum concluded that the Veteran participated in a TERA during active military service. In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a TERA examination for male reproductive organ conditions.

The TERA examiner issued May 2023 negative opinions for service connection. For the Veteran's prostate condition, the examiner summarized the conclusions of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. The ATSDR had reviewed clinical studies addressing the possibility of CLCW ingestion of water causing prostate cancer. The ATSDR noted that there is some evidence for a positive association. However, the ATSDR also noted that the studies on which an association might be based were inconsistent and inconclusive in their outcomes. The ATSDR found overall the evidence of an association to be insufficient and concluded there was "below equipoise evidence for causation." The TERA examiner therefore concluded there is no medical or scientific evidence available at this time which provides an indication of a relationship causing the development of prostate cancer. The examiner added that there is a greater risk of prostate cancer from other causes, noting that the "etiology of prostate cancer is multifactorial and remains quite baffling, with numerous modifiable and unmodifiable risk factors associated with its development."

Moreover, the May 2023 TERA examiner did not provide a direct service-connection opinion for prostate cancer. The failure to meet the requirements of service connection on a presumptive basis does not preclude consideration of service connection on a direct basis. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Additionally, per the February 2025 Informal Hearing Presentation, no opinion squarely addresses the exposures from being an ammunition specialist. 

Where VA provides a veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination and etiology opinion must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinions, as well as arrange for an opinion on direct service connection for prostate cancer, is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for skin condition, to include dermatitis. 

The Veteran contends that the onset of his skin condition was in 1980. He began to exhibit red, flaky, itchy bumps on both arms that later developed on both legs, chest and back, but he did not seek treatment during service. 

The June 2023 decision identified the following favorable findings of fact: Service treatment records from the period of service from October 10, 1978 to October 9, 1982 show treatment for cellulitis to right forearm during service in June or July 1981. The Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability. The Skin Diseases Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) dated May 31, 2023 shows a diagnosis of dermatitis. Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is presumed. The Internal Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum dated March 3, 2023 confirming the Veteran participated in a TERA at Camp Lejeune from March 7, 1980 and October 9, 1982 and USMC Ammunition Tech showing exposure to potential hazardous substance.

As noted, a March 2023 TERA memo stated the Veteran had presumptive exposure to CLCW. In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a TERA examination for skin conditions.

The May 2023 examiner provided a TERA opinion on the Veteran's skin condition. She stated there is no medical or scientific evidence available at this time which provides an indication of a relationship between development of dermatitis and the Veteran's TERA. The examiner added that the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis is unknown, but the disease seems to be the result of genetic susceptibility, immune dysfunction and epidermal barrier dysfunction. She cited to current medical literature. 

The Board finds this opinion is not adequate. The examiner relied on a speculative conclusion. As such, she did not address any medical evidence of record in giving the opinion. For example, in July 1981, the Veteran was treated for "possible" right-forearm cellulitis, which exhibited edema. This appears to have been in conjunction with an infected insect bite. However, there were purulent discharges and "elevated redness." Other skin-related conditions treated in service include the Veteran presenting in February and October 1979 with persistent warts on his right thumb. He requested their removal. Moreover, the examiner did not discuss the Veteran's report to her in the May 2023 TERA examination for skin conditions, in which he reported a 1980 onset of a skin condition, As already stated, he further reported that upon onset he exhibited red, flaky, itchy bumps on both arms that later developed on both legs, chest and his back. The Veteran added that he did not seek treatment for this during service.

The examiner also provided an opinion on direct service connection for skin condition. She stated diagnosis of dermatitis was not caused by the in-service right-arm cellulitis. The examiner observed that the Veteran's cellulitis was an acute episode and it does not appear elsewhere in the STRs. She added that there is no scientific medical evidence to support that cellulitis causes dermatitis. For the same reasons stated above, the Board find this opinion is not adequate. The examiner relies solely on an absence-of-evidence rationale, regarding in-service treatment and also medical scientific evidence. The examiner did not discuss the Veteran's reports to her of his 1980 onset and symptoms. The ammunition exposure was not addressed.

Based on the foregoing reasons, remand is necessary for adequate opinions addressing service connection based on TERA and also based on direct service connection, regardless of any consideration of the application of presumptive service connection based on CLCW exposure.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for the review of the file by an examiner for the purpose of providing opinions on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's prostate cancer with perineural invasion and skin conditions, to include dermatitis. If the examiner deems examinations to be necessary, arrange for those examinations.

2. The examiner is requested to provide opinions addressing the following:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's prostate cancer with perineural invasion is caused by toxic-exposure risk activity (TERA) pertaining to exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water (CLCW).

(b)	Whether prostate cancer with perineural invasion was incurred during active service or directly caused by exposures as an ammunition specialist. 

(c)	Whether prostate cancer with perineural invasion was incurred during active service or directly caused by an event, injury or disease occurring in active service. 

(d)	Whether the Veteran's skin condition, to include dermatitis, is caused by TERA pertaining to exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water (CLCW).

(e)	Whether prostate cancer with perineural invasion was incurred during active service or directly caused by exposures as an ammunition specialist. 

(f)	Whether skin condition, to include dermatitis, was incurred during active service or directly caused by an event, injury or disease occurring in active service. 

The examiner is to note that the direct service-connection opinions are requested regardless of any applicable presumption of service connection due to CLCW or exposures as an ammunition specialist. The Board needs to know whether the Veteran's prostate condition and skin condition were directly caused by any event, injury or disease during active service, to include, but not exclusively, CLCW.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Each opinion rendered by the examiner must be accompanied by a rationale, by which conclusions are supported by references to and discussion of findings on examination, to clinical findings in the medical evidence of record and/or to accepted medical literature. 

3. Readjudicate the claims.

 

 

EMILY TAMLYN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Franke, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.