Citation Nr: A25030186
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-461408
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1994 to January 1998.  This case comes to the Board from a March 2024 decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Because the AOJ issued the decision after February 19, 2019, the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies to this case.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 20.4.

In May 2023, the Veteran filed his initial claim seeking service-connected compensation for claimed disabilities of the lumbar spine and both ankles.  The AOJ denied that claim in August 2023.  In November 2023, the Veteran requested a higher-level-review (HLR) of the August 2023 decision pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.  The AOJ issued its March 2024 decision - the decision the Veteran has appealed to the Board - in response to the January 2023 HLR request.

In his VA Form 10182 ("Notice of Disagreement" or "NOD"), the Veteran selected the option of direct review by the Board without the submission of additional evidence and without a hearing.  When an appellant selects this option, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal. Because the March 2024 decision was the result of an HLR of the August 2023 decision, the evidentiary record is limited to the information in the claims file at the time of the August 2023 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f).

Although the need for further delay is regrettable, the Board must remand this case for two reasons.  The first reason concerns the need to obtain potentially relevant medical records.  In May 2023, together with his initial claim, the Veteran gave the AOJ a written authorization to obtain copies of medical records from a physician in private practice, a cardiologist in private practice, and a hospital.  The AOJ successfully obtained copies of treatment records from the cardiologist.

VA must notify the Veteran when its efforts to obtain relevant non-Federal records are unsuccessful.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e)(1).  According to a report of contact form, the AOJ made several attempts to request treatment records from the private physician.  Eventually they received a message from the physician's office verifying the existence of medical records concerning the Veteran.  But the message explained that a fee of $39 ($1 per page) was required before the records custodian would send the requested records to the AOJ.  According to the report of contact form, an AOJ employee left a telephone message with the records custodian asking for a waiver of this fee.  After leaving the message, the AOJ ceased its efforts to obtain copies of the private physician's records.  

There is no information in the claims file indicating that the AOJ wrote to the Veteran or otherwise notified him that the physician required a $39 fee before releasing the records or that, as a result of the physician's request for a fee, the AOJ would discontinue further efforts to obtain the records.  Under these circumstances, the failure to make such an explanation could potentially have frustrated the Veteran's own opportunity to obtain the records himself by paying the fee.  The missing records, moreover, could be highly significant, because, according to the May 2023 records release authorization, the private physician provided treatment for his "joint pains" and "back pains..."  

Because the AOJ learned of the fee request for the records and did not advise the Veteran of this before issuing its August 2023 decision, there was a pre-decisional failure to comply with its duty to assist the Veteran.  Under the AMA appeal procedures, the Board must remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

It appears the AOJ made a similar error with respect to the hospital records.  On June 8, 2023, the AOJ wrote to the Veteran explaining that it had made a request to the hospital to provide the record but had not yet received them.  The file includes a report of contact form, dated June 23, 2023, indicating that an AOJ employee made three attempts to request records from the hospital via e-mail and ceased its attempts to obtain them after there was no response for 30 days.  

The claims file includes records from the identified hospital from the year 2021.  According to the May 2023 records release authorization, the hospital had performed physical examinations for the Veteran work since July 2000.  It appears that the 2021 records, which include at least one document certifying his being medically fit to continue his work as a firefighter, were added to the claims file on June 3, 2023.  So it is strange that the report of contact form, prepared on June 23, did not mention them.  Because the available records seem incomplete, on remand, the AOJ should make reasonable efforts to obtain copies of the hospital records.  

It is also necessary to remand the case to obtain new medical opinions.  The AOJ arranged for a nurse practitioner to examine the Veteran's back and ankles in June 2023.  According to the ankles report, the diagnoses were bilateral collateral ligament sprain and bilateral degenerative arthritis.  The medical history section of this report indicates that the Veteran told the examiner that his ankle condition began in 1995, during his Army service.  The thoracolumbar spine examination report reflects a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain.  Like the ankles questionnaire, the medical history summary in the back report indicates that the Veteran told the examiner that his back pain began in 1994 during his service with the Army in Korea.  Service treatment records indicate complaints of lower back pain and treatment for multiple ankle sprains.  

For both the back and the ankles, the June 2023 examiner prepared similar opinions concluding that a relationship between the current disabilities and military service was less likely than not.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's post-service work as a firefighter was the more likely cause of the current disabilities.  This rationale is inadequate, however, because the examiner failed to address the statements the Veteran made during the respective examination interviews.  As noted, the Veteran told the examiner that his pain in both his back and his ankles had its initial onset during service.  These statements seem consistent with the service treatment records.  The examiner is not necessarily required to accept the Veteran's statements.  Perhaps there are reliable diagnostic test results or other items of medical evidence which undermine the theory that both disabilities relate to in-service injuries.  But under these circumstances, an adequate opinion would include a rationale clearly explaining why the examiner rejected the Veteran's statements.  Because both June 2023 opinions were associated with the claims file before issuance of the relevant decision in August 2023, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by denying the back and ankles claims instead of seeking a new opinion.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Write to the Veteran and explain to him the results of the AOJ's request for medical records to Dr. Robert Tomchik, a physician in Miramar, Florida.  Inform the Veteran that employees of Dr. Tomchik's office indicated that they possessed records related to the Veteran's treatment but would not release copies of the records until they received a fee of $39.  The Veteran should be invited to obtain and submit these records himself.  

2. Make reasonable efforts to obtain any outstanding potentially relevant records of the Veteran's medical treatment held by medical professionals in private practice, including records from Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, Florida.  According to an authorization to release records, submitted by the Veteran in May 2023, this facility administered physical examinations associated with the Veteran's work at regular intervals since July 2000.  The claims file includes a set of records from "Jackson Health" all from the year 2021.  At least one of those documents seems to concern the Veteran's physical fitness to work as a firefighter.  But given the lengthy interval of time (July 2000 to the present) identified in the May 2023 authorization, these records may be incomplete.  Because the May 2023 authorization has likely expired, the AOJ should request these records from their custodian after obtaining an updated and appropriate authorization from the Veteran.

The AOJ should document in writing all efforts to obtain the records identified in this part of the remand and any other records identified by the Veteran.  Any responses to the AOJ's requests for records should be associated with the electronic claims file.

3. Schedule an examination of the Veteran's ankles with a qualified person for the purpose of preparing an opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current disabilities of both the left and right ankles, including the arthritis and collateral ligament sprains identified in the June 2023 examination report.  After the in-person examination and a review of the claims file are complete, the examiner should prepare a report responding to this question:

Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current disabilities of the left and/or right ankles had their initial onset in service or are otherwise related to any in-service disease, injury, or event, including the multiple ankle sprains documented in the service treatment records?

The examiner should prepare a clear rationale fully explaining the medical reasons for his or her opinion. The examiner should address the statement in the medical history section of the June 2023 examination report in which the Veteran indicated to the examiner that his current ankle pain began in 1995, during his active-duty service.  If the examiner disagrees with this statement he or she must explain why.   

4. Schedule an examination of the Veteran's thoracolumbar spine with a qualified person for the purpose of preparing an opinion on the nature and etiology of any current disability of spine, including the lumbosacral strain identified in the June 2023 examination report.  After the in-person examination and a review of the claims file are complete, the examiner should prepare a report responding to this question:

Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current disability of the spine had its initial onset in service or is otherwise related to any in-service disease, injury, or event, including the episodes of back pain documented in the service treatment records?

The examiner should prepare a clear rationale fully explaining the medical reasons for his or her opinion. The examiner should address the statement in the medical history section of the June 2023 examination report in which the Veteran indicated that his current back pain began in 1994, during his active-duty service.  If the examiner disagrees with this statement, he or she must explain why.   

5. The AOJ must ensure that the requested examination reports and opinions comply with these instructions.  If any report is insufficient, the AOJ should return the examiner's report for any necessary corrective action.  

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Nye, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.