Citation Nr: A25030331
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220630-256198
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors (claimed as right hand/arm tremors) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity intentional tremors is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's right upper extremity essential tremors are proximately due to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the U.S. Army from May 1967 to February 1970 and in the U.S. Navy from June 1974 to March 1976.

A rating decision was issued in July 2021, which denied service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors. This decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In September 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim adjudicated in the July 2021 rating decision.  

In December 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received to readjudicate the claim.

In January 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review. A Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development in a February 2022 rating decision, to include affording the Veteran additional VA examinations and to obtain a medical opinion as to the etiology of his disability.

In May 2022, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the June 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ supplemental claim rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board has trifurcated the claim for right upper extremity tremors to be service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors, service connection for right upper extremity intentional tremors, and service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, as the present record supports a grant of the benefit sought on appeal for right upper extremity essential tremors. See Locklear v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 311 (2011) (bifurcation of a claim generally is within VA's discretion).

1. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors (claimed as right hand/arm tremors) is granted.

The Veteran asserts that he acquired right hand/arm tremors due to his military service, to include as due to agent orange exposure. See March 2021 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

In the May 2022 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ conceded: 1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability as a VA examination showed an essential tremors diagnosis on a July 2021 peripheral neuropathy examination, 2) he has sufficient service to meet the minimum [service] requirements for presumptive service connection, from May 8, 1967 to February 7, 1970 and the Navy from June 14, 1974 to March 26, 1976; 3) the diagnosed disability is a condition that has been presumptively linked to exposure because the disability has been rated/denied as peripheral neuropathy, which if acute could be presumptively manifested; 4) he performed service in Vietnam; 5) the claimed disability, as a form of neuropathy, a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service; 6) he was exposed to herbicide agents during military service; and 7) the claimed issue became manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more following service, according to VA examination July 26, 2021. However, the AOJ denied the claim on the basis that the Veteran's right upper extremity essential tremors were not a manifestation of Parkinson's disease, nor were they otherwise etiologically related to military service per a March 2022 VA medical opinion.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In addition, service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

The Board concludes that, upon affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Veteran has a current disability, namely right upper extremity essential tremors, that is proximately due to or the result of service-connected PTSD. 38 U.S.C.§ 1110; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

In this case, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in July 2021 and March 2022, in which the Veteran was diagnosed with essential tremors. 

A VA examiner, in May 2021, rendered a positive nexus opinion, and opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right upper extremity essential tremor is proximately due to or the result of/aggravated by the service-connected PTSD. The rationale was that PTSD and anxiety are strongly associated with right upper extremity essential tremor, and she cited to a study in support of her conclusion entitled "Conditions Associated with Essential Tremor in Veterans: A Potential Role for Chronic Stress." See May 2021 C&P Exam; https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29971194/ (last accessed April 2, 2025). 

In July 2021, a VA examiner provided a clarifying opinion opining that it was impossible to know the etiology of the Veteran's tremors, that it was all speculative as to whether it was due to diabetes, or the medication the Veteran takes. The examiner noted the medication the Veteran was prescribed for PTSD does not cause tremors. The examiner reviewed and referenced the May 2021 VA examiner's positive opinion, finding that it was "poor and not well-supported" other than an opinion. Ultimately, the examiner concluded that no one knows [the etiology of the condition], and it is all speculative. The examiner noted that the Veteran attested that his tremors started a decade ago, way after his time in service and there is no known cause, but it is found to be common among older people than younger or middle aged individuals.  The examiner included a hyperlink to a Mayo Clinic website and noted about half of essential tremor cases "appear" to result from a genetic mutation, (this form is referred to as familial tremor); however, the examiner noted it is not clear what causes essential tremor in people without a known genetic mutation, and that known risk factors include genetic mutation and age in that essential tremor is more common in people aged 40 and older.

In September 2021, the Veteran submitted a copy of the medical treatise that the supported the May 2021 VA examiner's favorable opinion.  The treatise included a study, assessing whether conditions associated with tremor are linked to stress as increased depression, hearing loss, dementia, alcoholism, and mortality in essential tremor patients remain unexplained. The result was that PTSD was among the most common psychiatric diagnoses in tremor patients.

Upon review of the record, and after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.310.

In weighing the medical opinions of record, the Board finds the May 2021 VA medical opinion highly probative. This opinion tends to substantiate the relationship between the Veteran's right upper extremity essential tremors and his service-connected PTSD. The examiner provided an adequate rationale for her conclusion, which was buttressed by supportive medical literature. The medical treatise highlighted that that PTSD was among the most common psychiatric diagnoses in tremor patients, which is consistent with the facts of the Veteran's case, as the Veteran has been service-connected for PTSD since May 2021. Notably, she provided an understandable rationale for the opinion, which relied on an accurate history and a review of the Veteran's claims file, noting the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Further, the Board finds nothing in the record to doubt the qualifications of the examiner, and thus finds this medical opinion to be competent. For these reasons, the Board affords this opinion great weight.

On the contrary, the Board affords no weight to the July 2021 clarifying opinion. The examiner opined it was "impossible" to know the etiology without citing to any specific evidence of record or medical principles.  If an examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). And while the examiner asserted no one could respond to such an inquiry, the May 2021 examiner was able to provide an etiological opinion and cited to the evidence of record, noting that the Veteran's right upper extremity tremors were due to PTSD, for which the Veteran was service-connected. As such, this July 2021 VA medical opinion as no probative value and greater weight must be assigned to the May 2021 VA medical opinion and the medical treatise submitted in September 2021.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes his right upper extremity essential tremors are due to exposure to herbicide agents during service, and therefore, is entitled to service connection on a presumptive basis. However, the Veteran's essential tremors did not have its onset in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within the 1 year presumptive period for early-onset peripheral neuropathy following separation from service; and was not noted in service with evidence of continuity of symptomatology to allow for an award of service connection on this basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309.

Finally, the Board finds that while the Veteran engaged in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), further development for a TERA opinion is not warranted and the Veteran is not prejudiced as the present decision is a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal. See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156, 1158-59 (Fed. Cir. 1997); see also Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022)(The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022).

As such, the Board finds the evidence supports entitlement to service connection for essential tremors, as secondary to service-connected PTSD; and, therefore, the claim is granted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310(a).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Remand is necessary in this case to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Under the AMA, the Board may remand "for correction of [an] error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim." 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 138 (2024) (holding that an agency decision which post-dates the decision on appeal may result in an error requiring remand because a decision does not constitute "evidence" and as such, the decision need not have been of record at the time of the decision on appeal).

2. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity intentional tremors is remanded.

In this case, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2022 where the examiner concluded the Veteran had a diagnosis of intentional tremors, for the first time during the appellate period and concluded that they were not directly due to service, due to any [other] tremors, or due to Parkinson's disease and that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. 

Specifically, a March 2022 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was not diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, and opined that the Veteran's right upper extremity intention tremors are less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The rationale for the negative opinion was that the Veteran stated he never had a diagnosis of any tremor or movement disorder during service, but instead indicated that he noticed a mild right hand intention tremor in or around 2005. The examiner noted that the Veteran's evaluation was consistent with intention tremor, not likely due to tremors or Parkinson's disease in service, as intention tremor is not known to be a result of Parkinson's disease, and the Veteran stated that he did not have any tremors of any kind during military service. The examiner therefore concluded that as the Veteran did not have any tremor during service, and there is no diagnosis of Parkinson's disease in the medical records available, the Veteran's medical records do not support that his diagnosed right upper extremity intention tremors are at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by any tremors or Parkinson's during service.

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was not service-connected for essential tremors. 

In light of the Board's award of service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors, the Board finds that the pre-decisional record now raises the theory that service-connected right upper extremity essential tremors may have aggravated the Veteran's right upper extremity intentional tremors. Moreover, because the provision of a VA medical opinion could produce positive nexus evidence leading to a grant of service connection for intentional tremors on a secondary basis, correction of this error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. Green, supra. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion in support of this claim to determine whether the right upper extremity intentional tremors are secondary to service-connected right upper extremity essential tremors on an aggravation basis.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (holding that medical opinion that only addresses whether a service-connected disability caused a nonservice-connected disability does not address whether the service-connected disability aggravated a nonservice-connected disability).  

3. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

In light of the Board's award of service connection for right upper extremity essential tremors, the Board finds that the pre-decisional record now raises the theory that service-connected right upper extremity essential tremors may have aggravated the Veteran's right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy. Moreover, because the provision of a VA medical opinion could produce positive nexus evidence leading to a grant of service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy on a secondary basis (as secondary to right upper extremity service-connected essential tremors), correction of this error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. Green, supra. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion in support of this claim to determine whether the Veteran's right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is secondary to service-connected right upper extremity essential tremors.

In addition, the pre-decisional evidentiary record reasonably raises the theory of entitlement of service connection for peripheral neuropathy as secondary to service-connected PTSD, to include as due to prescribed medication for PTSD.

Specifically, in an April 2021 VA examination report, the Veteran was diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy. As noted above, the medical treatise evidence relied upon by the VA examiner and submitted by the Veteran included a study finding that PTSD was among the most common psychiatric diagnoses in tremor patients. Notably, the AOJ issued a binding favorable finding in a May 2022 rating decision on appeal, that tremors was a form of neuropathy. 

However, no examiner has rendered an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy is secondary to service-connected PTSD, to include as due to his prescribed medication for PTSD. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 553 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009)(holding that the Board must consider theories of entitlement raised expressly by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record. As a non-adversarial adjudicator, the Board has an obligation to analyze claims [that go] beyond the arguments explicitly made). As such, remand is necessary for an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's right upper extremity intentional tremors. No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the examiner determines otherwise.

Following review of the claims file, the examiner should address whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's right upper extremity intentional tremors:

(a) are caused by his essential tremors; or

(b) have been aggravated (worsened) by his essential tremors.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional with the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy. No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the examiner determines otherwise.

Following a review of the claims file, the examiner should opine as to whether it is as least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy:

(a)  is caused by to his service-connected right upper extremity essential tremors;

(b) has been aggravated (worsened) by his right upper extremity essential tremors, or

(c) is caused by his PTSD, to include medications to treat his PTSD; or

(d)  has been aggravated (worsened) by PTSD, to include medications to treat his PTSD.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional with the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pendleton, N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.