Citation Nr: A25030740
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240312-423791
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected left knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1980 to October 2000.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 higher-level review (HLR) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of history, in a September 2023 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied an increased evaluation for both the right and left knee disorders. The Veteran filed a September 2023 request for higher-level review, and the AOJ subsequently issued the January 2024 HLR rating decision.

In a March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to increased rating for both the right and left knee, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected right knee condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected left knee condition is remanded.

The Board finds that remand for a new VA medical examination regarding both the service-connected right and left knee disorders is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Adjudication under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) limits the circumstances in which the Board may remand appeals to the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board has the duty to remand to correct any error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, the Veteran seeks an increased evaluation for both his right and left knee disorders. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his current 10 percent evaluation for each knee does not reflect the increased severity of his bilateral knee symptoms, including pain on motion, locking, buckling, weakness, and stiffness, among other symptoms, which cause functional impairment. See June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.

After filing his claim for increased evaluation for both knees, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the current level of bilateral knee impairment. See August 2023 VA Examination Report. The VA examiner performed an examination and indicated a bilateral degenerative arthritis diagnosis. See id. The examiner also noted the Veteran's report of flare-ups in both knees. See id. Specifically, the examiner indicated the Veteran asserted his right knee flare-ups were moderate to severe, precipitated by weight-bearing activities, and last "hours to days." See id. Regarding left knee flare-ups, the examiner recorded that the Veteran reported severe, daily flare-ups that last for days and are precipitated by walking, standing, or sitting. See id. 

The examiner also administered range of motion (ROM) testing, and indicated that active ROM measurements were abnormal bilaterally, with flexion endpoint to 130 degrees and extension endpoint to 10 degrees for both knees. See id. The examiner noted that passive ROM measurements were the same as the active ROM measurements. See id. Although the examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences flare-ups, she did not provide any estimated ROM for flexion or extension endpoints for either knee and she did not discuss the Veteran's lay statement of record describing functional loss experienced during his knee flare-ups. See id.; see also June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. 

Based on the August 2023 VA examination, the AOJ found that the Veteran's right and left knee disorders are properly rated at 10 percent disabling. In other words, the AOJ determined that the bilateral knee disorders do not warrant a rating in excess of 10 percent. See September 2023 Rating Decision; January 2024 HLR Rating Decision.

But pursuant to Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), VA examiners must estimate the functional loss that would occur during flare-ups; specifically, examiners must name the precipitating and alleviating factors for the flare-ups and estimate, per a veteran's reports, the extent to which flare-ups affect functional impairment. 

Here, the VA examiner did not estimate the functional loss or ROM that would occur during the reported flare-ups of each knee. Additionally, the examiner did not discuss the June 2023 lay statement in which the Veteran described the functional loss he experiences during knee flare-ups, including pain, locking, buckling, weakness, and stiffness, among other symptoms, that cause an inability to move. See August 2023 VA Examination Report; see also June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the August 2023 VA examination was inadequate as to the current severity of the Veteran's right and left knee disorders, as the examiner did not comply with the guidance in Sharp and did not include the Veteran's June 2023 lay statement in her flare-up analysis. 

If a medical examination or opinion provided by VA is inadequate, the relevant claim must be remanded to obtain an adequate medical examination or opinion. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The Board cannot render its own independent medical judgment, and therefore, given the inadequacy of the August 2023 VA examination, an adequate medical examination is needed. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 172 (1991). 

Remand to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error is therefore required for the right and left knee disorder claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a VA physician of appropriate expertise to fully assess the current severity of the service-connected right and left knee disabilities. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. All indicated studies, tests, and evaluations must be conducted, and all findings reported in detail. A complete history of symptoms must be elicited from the Veteran and recorded in the examination report.

The examiner should then provide responses with respect to the following: 

(a) Report the extent of the symptoms of both the right and left knee disorders in accordance with VA rating criteria; 

(b) Conduct range of motion testing of the bilateral shoulders, specifically noting the motion in degrees on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight-bearing.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, a clear explanation must be provided.  

(c) Render specific findings as to whether there is objective evidence of pain on motion, weakness, excess fatigability, and/or incoordination associated with the bilateral knees.  If pain on motion is observed, the examiner should indicate the point at which pain begins.

(d) State whether the examination is taking place during a period of flare-up.  If not, the examiner must ask the Veteran to describe the flare-ups he experiences, to include frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, severity, and/or extent of functional impairment during a flare-up of his symptoms and/or after repeated use over time. Based on the Veteran's lay statements and other evidence of record, to include the June 2023 Veteran lay statement, the examiner must provide an opinion estimating any additional degrees of limitation of range of motion caused by functional loss during a flare-up.  If the examiner is unable to do so, s/he must indicate why. It should be noted that VA's Clinicians Guide specifically advises examiners to try to procure information necessary to render an opinion regarding flare-ups from veterans.

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptoms. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

A complete rationale should be provided for all medical opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion as requested above, including if the examiner is unable to provide an opinion on the impact of flare-ups on the Veteran's range of motion, the clinician must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the clinician (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.Z. Noh

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.