Citation Nr: A25030675
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 201229-135101
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a separate noncompensable disability rating for bulimia nervosa is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder, anxious distress and trichotillomania, (hereafter "PTSD") is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's bulimia nervosa, evaluated under the Rating Formula for Eating Disorders, is not manifested by incapacitating episodes having a total duration of two weeks or longer.

2. The Veteran's PTSD symptoms and their effects do not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment during the period on appeal. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a separate noncompensable disability rating for bulimia nervosa have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9521.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1993 to January 1999, and from September 2001 to August 2002. 

This matter initially came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

The Veteran timely initiated this appeal to the Board by submitting a December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2020 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or her representative with the VA Form 10182, or within 90 days of the Board's receipt thereof. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

In April 2024, the Board denied a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder, anxious distress, bulimia nervosa and trichotillomania. The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court or CAVC). The interested parties agreed to a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) in December 2024, finding the Board erred in not considering whether the Veteran was entitled to a separate disability rating for her bulimia nervosa under the General Rating Formula for Eating Disorders under DC 9521. 

Upon return from the Court, in December 2024, the Board sent the appellant and her representative a notice letter informing them that the case had been received by the Board from the Court. The appellant was advised she had 90 days to submit additional argument. The Veteran's representative submitted an Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) in March 2025. Thus, the Board will first address the directive in the December 2024 JMR, then will proceed to readjudicate the claim. Prior to doing so, it is noted that the Veteran has already been found to be 100 percent disabled by VA. The Veteran currently has a 100 percent combined evaluation for compensation, effective September 21, 2024. See January 2025.

Increased Rating-Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of the two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In both initial rating claims and increased rating claims, the Board must discuss whether "staged ratings" are warranted. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

After the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record.  38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  This standard does not require the evidence to be exactly equal; rather, it includes "scenarios where the evidence is not in equipoise but nevertheless is in approximate balance.  Put differently, if the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt."  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Rating Formula for Eating Disorders

Under the Rating Formula for Eating Disorders, Diagnostic Code 9521 governs bulimia nervosa. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9521, Note (2).

A noncompensable disability rating is warranted for binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting or other measures to prevent weight gain or resistance to weight gain even when below the expected minimum weight, with a diagnosis of an eating disorder but without incapacitating episodes.

A 10 percent rating is warranted for binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting or other measures to prevent weight gain or resistance to weight gain even when below the expected minimum weight, with a diagnosis of an eating disorder and incapacitating episodes of up to two weeks total duration per year.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for self-induced weight loss to less than 85 percent of expected minimum weight with incapacitating episodes of more than two but less than six weeks total duration per year.

A 60 percent rating is warranted for self-induced weight loss to less than 85 percent of expected minimum weight with incapacitating episodes of six or more weeks total duration per year.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for self-induced weight loss to less than 80 percent of expected minimum weight, with incapacitating episodes of at least six weeks total duration per year and requiring hospitalization more than twice a year for parenteral nutrition or tube feeding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9521.

An incapacitating episode is a period during which bed rest and treatment by a physician are required. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9521, Note (1). 

1. Entitlement to a separate disability rating for bulimia nervosa. 

The Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder, anxious distress, bulimia nervosa and trichotillomania, is presently evaluated at 70 percent under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders pursuant to?38?C.F.R. §?4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411. See October 2020 Codesheet. Per the directive in the December 2024 JMR, the Board shall now address whether a separate rating for the Veteran's bulimia nervosa is warranted. 

By way of procedural background, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 50 percent rating effective August 17, 2015. Thereafter, a September 2018 rating decision granted an increased rating of 70 percent effective March 7, 2018. A December 2019 rating decision continued the 70 percent rating but added "bulimia nervosa" to the description of the rated mental disorder. See December 2019 Codesheet. 

The October 2020 rating decision on appeal stems from an increased rating claim submitted by the Veteran on September 22, 2020. See VA 21-526EZ. As in this case, where an increase in the level of a previously service-connected disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability. Francisco,7 Vet. App. at 58.

Turning to the evidence, during a December 2019 Eating Disorders VA examination, the Veteran reported she had been binging and purging since 2019, which had increased up to five times a week. She denied receiving any treatment for her eating disorder thus far, although she reported she notified her psychiatrist of her behavior several weeks prior. The VA examiner diagnosed bulimia characterized as binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting "without incapacitating episodes." No functional impact was identified. 

In December 2019, the Veteran reported she binged and purged about one to two times a week. See Behavioral Health Note. In February 2020, she reported binging and purging three to four times a week. See Behavioral Health Note. In May 2020, the Veteran denied any binging or purging in the last month, which she attributed to a change in psychotropic medication. See VA Mental Health Note. In June 2020, the Veteran reported a reduction of bulimia symptoms since early 2020, again attributing this to a change in mediation. See VA Psychiatric/Mental Health Closing Note. 

During an October 2020 Eating Disorders VA examination, the Veteran reported that she continued to binge and purge leading to secondary acid reflux, with the most recent incident happening the week before. She reported that her binging and purging was sporadic without known patterns. Treatment entailed psychotherapy. The Veteran indicated that the condition had stayed the same since onset. The VA examiner characterized the Veteran's eating disorder as binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting. No incapacitating episodes of up to two weeks total duration per year were identified. A symptom of body dysmorphia was also reported with the Veteran unwilling to look at herself in camera during the video VA examination. No functional impact was found. The VA examiner specified that the Veteran's binging and purging was sporadic and did not interfere with work functionality. 

The Board has reviewed the evidence of record in conjunction with the applicable laws and regulations and finds that a separate noncompensable rating for bulimia nervosa is warranted. 

Here, the Veteran has reported binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting consistent with a zero, or noncompensable rating under Diagnostic Code 9521. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a higher evaluation. The December 2019 VA examiner characterized the Veteran's bulimia nervosa as binge eating followed by self-induced vomiting "without incapacitating episodes." No functional impact was identified. Similarly, the October 2020 VA examiner determined the Veteran's bulimia nervosa did not interfere with work functionality. Incapacitating episodes of up to two weeks duration per year were not identified. In fact, there is no report of any incapacitating episodes requiring bed rest and treatment by a physician, even by the Veteran's own account. Thus, the evidence of record supports a noncompensable rating under Diagnostic Code 9521, but no higher rating. 

The Board notes that the assignment of a separate disability rating for bulimia nervosa under the Rating Formula for Eating Disorders does not violate the rule against pyramiding. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. The Veteran's other psychiatric disorders to include PTSD are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders which provides compensation based on a wide variety of psychiatric symptoms, exclusive of eating and purging behavior. As such, the Veteran's other psychiatric symptoms, which are addressed below, are sufficiently separate and distinct from the eating and purging behavior under Diagnostic Code 9521 for bulimia nervosa. Further, as noted by the interested parties in the December 2024 JMR, Note (2) under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, species that Diagnostic Code 9521 (for bulimia nervosa) should be rated under the General Rating Formula for eating Disorders. 

Based on the foregoing, a separate noncompensable disability rating under Diagnostic Code 9521 for bulimia nervosa is granted. 

Having now addressed the directive in the December 2024 JMR, the Board proceeds with the remainder of its analysis. 

General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders

Pursuant to?38?C.F.R. §?4.130, the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411, provides a 70 percent rating is prescribed when there is evidence of occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is prescribed when there is evidence of total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation as to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-3 (2002). However, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under §4.130 by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that such symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD. See December 2020 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. She also contends "trichotillomania" was never added to her PTSD diagnosis list; however, as outlined in the April 2024 Board decision, this disability was found service-connected in the October 2020 rating decision on appeal. See October 2020 rating decision and Codesheet.

As explained previously, a November 2015 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 50 percent rating effective August 17, 2015.The Veteran did not appeal that decision or submit new and relevant evidence within the one-year appeal period. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(b), 19.21, 19.52. Consequently, the November 2015rating decision became final. 38 C.F.R. §20.1103. Thereafter, a September 2018 rating decision granted an increased rating of 70 percent effective March 7, 2018.The Veteran did not seek review of that rating decision by the AOJ nor appeal to the Board within the one-year appeal period. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500. Rating decisions issue December 2019 and April 2020 continued the 70 percent rating, albeit adding additional diagnoses. These rating decisions were also not appealed. 

This claim stems from an increased rating claim submitted in September 2020. See VA Form 21-526EZ. Thus, the primary concern is the present level of disability. Francisco,7 Vet. App. at 58. 

Finally, the Board notes that the discussion of the evidence of record below excludes the Veteran's symptoms of bulimia nervosa as these symptoms are addressed above and now subject to a separate disability rating. 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was afforded three VA examinations during the period on review. During the first VA examination, in December 2019, the Veteran reported she lived with her 13-year-old son and brother. She had friends in town and worked with her best friend, although she was reportedly less active or more detached with them. She continued to talk with her uncle, aunt and cousin who resided out of state. Symptoms endorsed by the Veteran included nightmares, intrusive thoughts, triggers, avoidance, lack of trust, hypervigilance, being easily startled, anxiety, daily sadness, fatigue, and low motivation. The Veteran denied auditory and visual hallucinations but referenced ongoing delusions. The VA examiner reported the Veteran presented as appropriately dressed, alert, cooperative, oriented and maintained appropriate eye contact. Her thought process was coherent, logical and goal directed. Her insight and judgement were both deemed fair. She was tearful on occasion. Suicidal and homicidal ideation, intent, and/or plan was denied during the examination.  

During a February 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported a lack of energy, heart palpitations, low blood pressure, irritability, depression, picking and rubbing her eyebrows, chewing the inside of her mouth, difficulty focusing and a self-described "terrible" memory. The Veteran also reported suicidal ideations, including a suicidal ideation the day prior to the VA examination; however, she denied she would ever act on it. In terms of behavioral observations, the VA examiner reported the Veteran was appropriately dressed, and presented as alert, coherent, and cooperative, with full and appropriate affect. Her thought processes were spontaneous, relevant and goal directed. The examiner noted the Veteran was unable to repeat "the" telephone number, did not know the names of the Vice President or the Governor of the state of Nevada, and knew few current events. Nonetheless, her insight and judgement were deemed adequate. No evidence of hallucinations or delusions were present. She did not present as suicidal or homicidal during the examination. 

During an October 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported disturbing memories, anxiety, physical reactions to reminders of trauma, avoidance, sleep interruptions, irritable/angry outbursts, difficulty concentrating, loss of interest in activities and socializing, depressed mood, flattened affect, low motivation, weight gain, social withdrawal, and suicidal ideation. Further, memory deficits were reported, as were neglect of personal appearance and hygiene and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. The Veteran was observed to be disheveled (albeit appropriately dressed), frenetic, anxious, agitated, impulsive and highly distracted. She picked at her eyebrows during the exam, which the examiner characterized as trichotillomania, a maladaptive strategy for anxiety from PTSD. The VA examiner noted the Veteran could not sit still and could not tolerate looking at herself on the computer video with eye contact avoidance as a result. 

Despite the foregoing, the October 2020 VA examiner determined the Veteran presented as oriented, alert, and coherent. Language and speech were within normal limits, with immediate recall and recent and remote memory intact. Thought processes were logical and associations made sense. Judgement and reasoning were fair, but insight was poor. There was no evidence of circumstantial or tangential responses. The VA examiner indicated the Veteran was able to comprehend and respond to questions indicating a clear understanding of what was asked. Mood was anxious and depressed with restricted range of affect. There was no evidence of hallucinations or delusions. The Veteran credibly denied current suicidal ideation. She cited to being the caregiver for her 14-year-old son and having a deep connection with her dog.

All three VA examiners determined the Veteran's level of impairment was best characterized as occupational and social impairment reduced reliability and productivity. 

VA treatment records reveal regular treatment for mental health symptoms during the period on review. 

In support of her claim, the Veteran submitted three lay statements in December 2020, one she authored, one from a coworker A.R. and one from her supervisor N.M. 

In her lay statement, the Veteran reported that she had "never been able to have a healthy relationship." She indicated she worked as a hospice social worker but claimed she could not continue to do so long term because of her anxiety and desire to stay at home with her dog. Specifically, she indicated that she wished she "could have a service dog" but was not sure what job she could find as a social worker that would permit her to have her dog with her all day. Conversely, the Veteran reported that if she did not work, she would have too much time to contemplate suicide as she hated herself and felt worthless. She indicated she had terrible anxiety issues that culminated in her having a nuclear stress test earlier in the year because she thought she was having heart issues. The heart pain was reportedly from anxiety symptoms without any heart issues found.

The Veteran's coworker, A.R., reported they had known the Veteran for over 10 years in a personal and professional capacity. A.R. indicated the Veteran struggled with the chaotic energy in the office that could be distracting, and became withdrawn at times, sad and more reserved. A.R. reported that the Veteran was no longer her bubbly personality and no longer provided the same level of interaction and personal involvement she used to with patients or team members. A.R. suggested there was a direct correlation between the Veteran's PTSD symptoms and level of stress in the workplace, which could vary day to day.

The Veteran's supervisor, N.M., reported they had noticed changes in the Veteran's behavior over the last year to include being not as engaged with her patients, seeming more reserved, being easily "triggered," and preferring to stay in the office due to anxiety. N.M. indicated she had known the Veteran for one year and six months. As a registered nurse, N.M. indicated she had extensive knowledge regarding PTSD and anxiety and felt the Veteran's symptoms had worsened with it more of a challenge to manage symptoms in the workplace. 

The Veteran's representative submitted an Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) in March 2022 citing to the October 2020 VA examination and aforementioned lay statements in support of the Veteran's claim. The lay statements from the Veteran's coworker and supervisor were characterized as clinical professionals with "first-hand knowledge of the Veteran's symptoms associated with PTSD." A second IHP was submitted in March 2025, following the December 2024 JMR. 

The Board has reviewed the evidence of record in conjunction with the applicable laws and regulations and finds a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted. 

Here, the Board finds that although there appear to be fluctuations in the severity, overall, the symptoms observed are commensurate with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

The Veteran's reported symptoms of panic, depression, irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances are all symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent evaluation under Diagnostic Code 9411. 

Another symptom noted by the October 2020 VA examiner was neglect of personal appearance and hygiene and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. Further, the October 2020 VA examiner noted the Veteran appeared disheveled, although appropriately addressed. The other VA examiners, however, observed the Veteran was appropriately dressed without any hygiene issues noted. Her treatment providers have observed the same. See e.g., September 2020 BH Scheduled Patient Note (fair grooming and hygiene); July 2020 Primary Care Video Connect (appears well groomed). Regardless, even if present, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene is contemplated by the 70 percent disability rating under DC 9411. The evidence as a whole does not demonstrate an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene) as contemplated by a 100 percent rating; rather, it appears there was just an isolated occurrence of such symptoms around the time of the October 2020 VA examination.

The Veteran has also reported suicidal ideation, which is another symptom specified for a 70 percent evaluation under Diagnostic Code 9411. See e.g., February 2020 VA examination (reporting suicidal ideation the day before the examination); August 2020 VA Psych/Telephone Note (reporting chronic passive suicidal ideation without intent or plan); December 2020 lay statement that if she did not work, she would have too much time to contemplate suicide. Critically, the Veteran has consistently denied she would act on such thoughts and not been determined to be a suicide risk by medical professionals. See e.g., December 2019 VA Examination; February 2020 VA Examination; February 2020 Updated Suicide Prevention Safety Plan; August 2020 Psych/Telephone Consult; October 2020 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's suicidal ideation symptoms are not manifested by a persistent danger of hurting self or others, and as a result, do not more nearly approximate the 100 percent rating criteria. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki,713 F.3d 112, 117(Fed. Cir. 2013) (noting that the "frequency, severity, and duration" of a Veteran's symptoms "play an important role" in determining the disability level).

Nor are the Veteran's symptoms consistent with gross impairment in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations or grossly inappropriate behavior. To the contrary, the Veteran has consistently presented as alert and engaged, with logical and goal directed thought processes. See December 2019 VA examination; February 2020 VA examination; and October 2020 VA examination. While the Veteran reported "delusions to be ongoing" to the December 2019 VA examiner, the examiner did not endorse the presence of such symptoms. Nor did the February 2020 or October 2020 examiners. Moreover, paranoia, delusions, obsessions, and compulsions have not been identified by the Veteran's treatment providers. See e.g., August 2020 Psych Telephone Contact; May 2020 BH Scheduled Patient Note.

The evidence of record also does not demonstrate the Veteran has had symptoms consistent with disorientation to time or place. The February 2020 VA examiner reported the Veteran did not know the names of the Vice President or the Governor of the state of Nevada and knew few current events. In terms of behavioral observations, however, no disorientation was noted. The Veteran presented as alert and coherent with spontaneous, relevant and goal directed thought processes. Similarly, the Veteran has consistently been observed as alert and oriented to person, place, time and situation by her treatment providers. See e.g., February 2020 Patient Note; May 2020 Mental Health Telephone Encounter; August 2020 Psychiatric/Telephone Contact; September 2020 Mental Health Note. 

While the Veteran reported she had a "terrible" memory during the February 2020 VA examination, the October 2020 VA examiner noted the Veteran had immediate recall and recent and remote memory intact. The Veteran's treatment providers have also reported the Veteran's memory function is "intact based on ability to recall autobiographical details."  See e.g., February 2020, March 2020 and September 2020 Behavioral Health Patient Notes. Thus, to the extent there is memory impairment, the Board does not find these symptoms to the level of memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, as is contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating under DC 9411.

Reviewing the record as a whole, there is no evidence of total occupational and social impairment. While the symptoms observed during psychiatric evaluations are significant, it appears she maintain full-time employment as a hospice social worker and has been responsible for managing three interns. See e.g., September 2020 Scheduled Patient Note. The Veteran has reported enjoying her job, which has a flexible schedule to accommodate medical appointments. See May 2020 Psych Treatment Plan. She is a single parent of a 14-year-old who attends private school, and she is a homeowner. See e.g., June 2020 Psych Closing Note. Her brother resides with them, as do two dogs and a cat. See December 2019 Mental Health Outpatient Notes. The Veteran has described herself as a good mom and a really good social worker. Id. The Veteran reportedly keeps in contact with friends and family. See e.g., April 2020 BH Scheduled Patient Note. She has reported having a stable social circle of female friends but indicated most of them are "in a relationship" and her closest friend does not live in the state. See June 2020 BH Scheduled Patient Note. In sum, neither the work history, nor the personal history provided by the Veteran is consistent with total occupational and social impairment contemplated by a 100 percent disability rating under DC 9411.

The Board has considered the lay statements of the Veteran's coworker and supervisor. To the extent these individuals are competent to make medical conclusions based on their background as nurses, the Board does not find these statements support a 100 percent disability rating. The colleagues reporting of the Veteran presenting as more withdrawn, anxious, and reserved are all symptoms contemplated by a70 percent rating. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's supervisor states her symptoms have "worsened"; however, the nature and severity of symptoms described do not warrant a rating in excess of 70 percent. 

Further, the Board finds the collective opinions of the VA medical examiners more probative than the lay statements of record as the examiners provided a holistic review of the Veteran's symptoms and addressed the relevant rating criteria. In doing so, the VA examiners determined the Veteran had "occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity" which is the criteria for a 50 percent rating under DC 9411 and does not support a 100 percent rating. 

Considering the above, the Board finds the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a 100 percent evaluation. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82. Accordingly, a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD is denied.

Finally, the Board also considers whether an inferred claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) under Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) has been raised by the record, as suggested by the Veteran's contention that she could not continue to work due to anxiety. See Veteran's December 2020 lay statement. However, as explained in the April 2024 Board decision, the record reflects that the Veteran was working fulltime during the period on review. Thus, TDIU consideration under Rice is not applicable. 

The Board observes that, in the Veteran's representative's March 2025 IHP, entitlement to TDIU is raised, citing to argument in a December 2024 Post Remand Brief, which was submitted following the December 2024 JMR. However, the December 2024 JMR did not specify any error with adjudication of the increased rating claim for PTSD other than the need to consider whether a separate rating was warranted for the Veteran's bulimia nervosa. The Board has fully addressed the JMR directive, which was product of the interested parties' agreement.

						[SIGNATURE ON NEXT PAGE]

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Long, Kindra F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.