Citation Nr: A25030745
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453917
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1989 to July 1994.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board finds the representative's August 2024 appellate brief constitutes a waiver of the remainder of the one-year period in which to switch docket lanes under the Appeals Modernization Act.

In addition, because the Board is remanding the service connection claim for hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed hypertension is secondary to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and asthma.  Alternatively, he claims that his hypertension is due to his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). 

The Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the April 2024 rating decision on appeal.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that in his January 2024 supplemental claim and statement in support of his claim, the Veteran is claiming his hypertension is secondary to his PTSD and asthma under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

In August 2022, the PACT Act expanded the benefits available in relation to certain disorders.  Relevant here, service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for diseases associated with herbicide exposure for Veterans who served in Vietnam from January 1962 to May 1975.  Among other things, the PACT Act added hypertension to the list of diseases presumed to be associated with exposure to herbicide agents.  See PACT Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  The Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension since September 2014.  See May 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Veteran served in Southwest Asia; however, he did not serve during the Vietnam war era, and therefore, he is not presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents based on his service.  See December 2022 and January 2023 VA Memo; December 2024 other (TERA Memo). 

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran submitted a January 2024 disability benefits questionnaire from his private doctor.  However, no etiology for his hypertension was provided therein.  

In April 2024 a VA TERA opinion was obtained.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Specifically, the examiner noted that there was no medical nexus between TERA exposures and hypertension.  The Veteran had a family history of hypertension and was a smoker, which put him at increased risk for hypertension.  Per the examiner, people might be more at risk if they: are overweight, eat too much salt and do not eat enough fruit and vegetables; do not do enough exercise; drink too much alcohol or coffee (or other caffeine-based drinks); smoke; have a lot of stress; are over 65; have a relative with high blood pressure; are of black African or black Caribbean descent; or live in a deprived area.  

Upon review, the Board finds that there is no opinion addressing direct or secondary service connection associated with the file.  With respect to the latter, the Veteran raised the theory that his hypertension was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities in January 2024, prior to the issuance of the April 2024 rating decision on appeal.  Accordingly, a remand is warranted in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an etiological opinion addressing such matters.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an addendum opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertension.  Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to provide the follow:

(a.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service.

(b.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by a service-connected disability. 

(c.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by a service-connected disability.  

A rationale should be offered for any opinion provided.

 

 

M. M. CELLI

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Garey

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.