Citation Nr: A25030614
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230309-329631
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a head injury is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from April 2013 to December 2013, and November 2015 to August 2016.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) Higher-Level Review rating decision. The RO is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for purposes of this appeal. 

By way of history, the claim was previously adjudicated in an October 2022 rating decision. The Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review in November 2022, to which the RO issued the February 2023 rating decision.

After receiving notice of the February 2023 rating decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 notice of disagreement (NOD) which was received in March 2023, and selected the Direct Review docket. In the direct review docket, the Board reviews the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision for each issue. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. In the Higher-Level Review lane, the RO considers only the evidence that was of record at the time of the rating decision to which the Veteran sought Higher-Level Review. In this case, that means that the Board is limited to review of the evidence received by the time of the October 2022 rating decision. Any evidence submitted after that rating decision was not considered by the Board when preparing this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ when adjudicating the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a head injury is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a head injury. He reports that he incurred a head injury, to include reverse lordosis (suggesting a neck-related injury), during service when carrying heavy equipment such as machine guns and heavy ruck sacks; alternatively, he reports that he hit his head multiple times while working as a security forces officer. See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. 

However, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination regarding service connection for a head injury. In accordance with the duty-to-assist provisions codified at 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d) and by regulation found at 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4), a medical opinion or examination is required if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient evidence to decide the claim, but there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). As such, an opinion is necessary to determine the etiology of any current residuals of head injury.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

Failure to obtain an opinion in this case constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring corrective remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any current head injury, to include as related to the Veteran's reported in-service injuries to the head.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is as likely as not that any identified disability is related to service.

In so opining, the examiner should consider the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter, including the nature of his reported injury and the onset, progression, and severity of his reported symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and/or thereafter represented the onset of his current disabilities, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. A thorough rationale must accompany all opinions formed and conclusions drawn.

If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion. In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

Paulette Vance Burton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hukill, Benjamin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.