Citation Nr: A25030534
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240215-417734
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include rhinitis, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for low back disability is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for inguinal hernia is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and sleep issues, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right foot/ankle disability is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2003 to July 2003 and September 2007 to May 2011, with additional periods of active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IDT) in the United States Marine Corps Reserves. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in January 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In February 2024, the Veteran timely appealed by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and requested Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the AOJ issued the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal has not been considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, if evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed, as the Board is remanding the claims herein for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include rhinitis.

As reflected in his August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, the Veteran contends that he has rhinitis is due to his service in Iraq. 

As an initial matter, the Board has broadened and recharacterized the Veteran's claim for service connection for rhinitis to one for a respiratory disability, to include rhinitis, based on the evidence of record as discussed below. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

The Veteran reports being diagnosed with non-allergic rhinitis by Dr. W.N. in 2013 or 2014, which was treated with Nasacort. September 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. Although he has attempted to obtain the treatment records from Dr. W.N., he has not been able to do so because Dr. W.N. is no longer with the same medical office. Id. Dr. W.N. referred him Dr. V.L.'s office, as they might have those records. The Veteran submitted a request in September 2023 to Dr. V.L.'s office; however, it appears that he has not received those records to date. There is no indication of record that the AOJ has attempted to assist the Veteran with obtaining these records. Thus, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not attempting to obtain these outstanding, relevant records, and a remand is necessary for an attempt to obtain them. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had service in Kuwait. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As a result of that service, the AOJ also favorably found that he had participated in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA). Id. Further, the Board notes that rhinitis is a disability eligible for presumptive service connection due to exposure to fine particulate matter provided there is competent evidence of a current diagnosis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this claim. Taking into consideration the above, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to provide him with a VA examination. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disability.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for low back disability.

The Veteran that he has lower back and neck disabilities due to wear and tear in service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that he joined the Marines in June 2002, and between heavy pack hikes/humps, carrying combat gear, wearing flak jackets, jumping off of 7-ton trucks, jumping in and out of Humvees, he has experienced plenty back and neck pain due to service. As reflected in his military personnel records, the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was a Basic Field Artillery Officer.

In the same August 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he started seeing a chiropractor, M.D., in 2005 so he could get his muscles and bones put back into their proper place after engaging in these activities. However, the records from M.D. are no longer available. He started seeing Dr. R.B. in 2011 following a period of active duty service and saw him until 2015 when he moved. After moving, he has continued to seek treatment due to the pain he experiences. Presently, he sees Dr. A. The Veteran indicated that he would obtain statements from Dr. R.B. and Dr. A. for the record. However, there is no indication of record that the AOJ has attempted to assist the Veteran with obtaining these records. Thus, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not attempting to obtain these outstanding, relevant records, and a remand is necessary for an attempt to obtain them. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Further, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to these claims. Taking into consideration the above, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to provide him with VA examinations. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an inguinal hernia.

The Veteran contends that he has an inguinal hernia due to a training accident in July 2004. The Veteran's service personnel records show that he served various periods of IDT and ADT in 2004, to include in July 2004. See September 2023 DPRIS Response - Annual Retirement Credit Record. 

In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that during a training in July 2004, he felt pain in his lower abdomen, close to his right hip bone on the front of his body where his right leg connects. He went to see a corpsman about the pain and was told that there was really nothing they could do for him in the field and was simply told to keep an eye on it. Ever since this time, he has had daily irritation. The Veteran never said anything further about it in service as he did not want it to impact his service and subsequent release and entry into the civilian world. In December 2011, upon leaving service, he was diagnosed with an inguinal hernia following a right lower quadrant ultrasound.  

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this claim. Taking into consideration the above, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to provide him with a VA examination. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81. 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, depression, and sleep issues.

The Veteran contends that he has PTSD and/or depression is due to a traumatic event which occurred while he was stationed in Africa. See August 2023 VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD. He reported that in March 2010, while stationed in Djibouti another Marine, R.H., killed himself with a service rifle. The notes that the AOJ has made no attempt to verify the Veteran's claimed in-service stressor. 

An August 2023 statement, J.W. relayed serving in the same unit as the Veteran in Djibouti in March 2010 and stated that they had personal knowledge that the Veteran heard the shot that killed R.H. and observed him being moved by Navy Corpsmen. However, it is unclear how he obtained this knowledge. Notwithstanding, J.W. reported that the Veteran was frequently tired and was not sleeping properly and could not sleep through the night. Additionally, J.W. reported that the Veteran recently told him that he still rarely slept through the night. 

In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during his service. Specifically, the AOJ indicated this was based on the Veteran's service treatment records documenting complaints of trouble sleeping. Also, the AOJ favorably found that there was sufficient evidence of an in-service stressor based on his service in Kuwait. However, none of these favorably findings corroborate the March 2010 stressor reported by the Veteran. Consequently, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not attempting to verify R.H.'s death in March 2010 and a remand is necessary for an opportunity to do so. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this claim. Taking into consideration the above, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to provide him with a VA examination. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81. 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right foot/ankle disability.

The Veteran that he has a right foot disability due to wear and tear in service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

As an initial matter, the Board has broadened and recharacterized the Veteran's claim for service connection for a right foot disability to one for a right foot/ankle disability based on the evidence of record as discussed below. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

In support of this claim, the Veteran submitted an August 2023 private treatment record from Dr. W.B.S. with T.H.P.G. documenting his report of right foot pain. However, the private treatment record proceeds to indicate that he was actually evaluated for ankle pain. In the end, he was assessed with right foot pain and radiologic examinations of the foot and ankle were ordered. The radiologic examinations are not of record. Thus, it appears there are relevant, outstanding treatment records. Consequently, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not attempting to obtain these outstanding, relevant records, and a remand is necessary for an attempt to obtain them. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Further, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this claim. Taking into consideration the above, the Board finds a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to provide him with VA examinations. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran to determine if there are any relevant, outstanding private treatment records, to include records from Dr. W.N. (which may be in the possession of Dr. V.L.'s office) regarding his claimed rhinitis, Dr. R.B. and Dr. A. regarding his claimed cervical spine and low back disabilities, and Dr. W.B.S. with T.H.P.G. regarding his claimed right foot/ankle disability. 

If there are any relevant, outstanding private treatment records, undertake any development deemed appropriate to obtain a copy of those records from each private treatment provider and/or facility identified by the Veteran.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed respiratory disability.

Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a respiratory disability, to include rhinitis and which also includes any diagnosis that he has had during the pendency of this appeal even it has since resolved. 

(b.) As to each current diagnosis of a respiratory disability for which service connection on a presumptive basis is not available, opine as to whether it was incurred in or otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service, to include his participation in a TERA, and explain why or why not. 

In doing so, the examiner should also address the Veteran's presumed participation in a TERA based on his period of service in Kuwait, as a result of which he is presumed to have been exposed to substances, chemicals, and airborne hazards, to include burn pits and other toxins, as well as fine particulate matter, and the combined, synergistic effect of all his TERA.

In doing so, the examiner should also consider the relevant medical and lay evidence of record. 

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed cervical spine disability.

Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a cervical spine disability, which includes any diagnosis that he has had during the pendency of this appeal even it has since resolved. 

The examiner is reminded that for VA compensation purposes, a current disability may exist when there is evidence of current symptomatology resulting in functional impairment. 

(b.) As to each current diagnosis of a cervical spine disability or symptomatology resulting in functional impairment, opine as to whether it was incurred in or otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service, to include the wear and tear from his duties in service, and explain why or why not. 

In doing so, the examiner should consider the relevant medical and lay evidence of record. In this regard, the examiner's attention is directed to an  August 2023 statement from the Veteran that between heavy pack hikes/humps, carrying combat gear, wearing flak jackets, jumping off of 7-ton trucks, jumping in and out of Humvees, he has experienced plenty back and neck pain due to service.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed low back disability.

Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a low back disability, which includes any diagnosis that he has had during the pendency of this appeal even it has since resolved. 

The examiner is reminded that for VA compensation purposes, a current disability may exist when there is evidence of current symptomatology resulting in functional impairment. 

(b.) As to each current diagnosis of a low back disability or symptomatology resulting in functional impairment, opine as to whether it was incurred in or otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service, to include the wear and tear from his duties in service, and explain why or why not.

In doing so, the examiner should consider the relevant medical and lay evidence of record. In this regard, the examiner's attention is directed to an  August 2023 statement from the Veteran that between heavy pack hikes/humps, carrying combat gear, wearing flak jackets, jumping off of 7-ton trucks, jumping in and out of Humvees, he has experienced plenty back and neck pain due to service. 

5. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claim inguinal hernia. 

Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an inguinal hernia or the residuals of an inguinal hernia. 

(b.) If the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an inguinal hernia or the residuals of an inguinal hernia, opine as to whether it was incurred in or otherwise caused by the Veteran's period of service in July 2004 and explain why or why not.

In doing so, the examiner should consider the relevant medical and lay evidence of record. In this regard, the examiner's attention is directed to an August 2023 statement from the Veteran that during a training in July 2004, he felt pain in his lower abdomen, close to his right hip bone on the front of his body where his right leg connects. He went to see a corpsman about the pain and was told that there was really nothing they could do for him in the field and was simply told to keep an eye on it. Ever since this time, he has had daily irritation.

6. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed acquired psychiatric disability.

Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disability, which includes any diagnosis that he has had during the pendency of this appeal even it has since resolved.

(b.) As to each current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disability, opine as to whether it was incurred in or is otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service and explain why or why not. 

As to a diagnosis of PTSD, the examiner must explain how the diagnostic criteria are met and opine as to whether it the Veteran's claimed in-service stressor supports such a diagnosis. 

In doing so, the examiner should consider the relevant medical and lay evidence of record.

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed right foot/ankle disability.

(a.) Upon conducting an examination, the examiner should:

(b.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a right foot and/or ankle disability, which includes any diagnosis that he has had during the pendency of this appeal even it has since resolved. 

The examiner is reminded that for VA compensation purposes, a current disability may exist when there is evidence of current symptomatology resulting in functional impairment. 

(c.) As to each current diagnosis of a right foot and/or ankle disability or symptomatology resulting in functional impairment, opine as to whether it was incurred in or otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service, to include the wear and tear from his duties in service, and explain why or why not. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In doing so, the examiner should consider the medical and lay evidence of record.

 

 

G.J. Suh

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Spielmann, Jill F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.