Citation Nr: A25030313
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240326-427269
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for low back is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1. The Veteran has been diagnosed with a cervical spine strain.

2. The Veteran has been diagnosed with lumbar spine degenerative arthritis and lumbosacral strain.

3. The Veteran has been diagnosed with right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis and strain.  

4. The Veteran's cervical spine arthritis was not chronic in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and symptoms were not continuous since service separation.

5. The Veteran's lumbar spine degenerative arthritis and lumbosacral strain was not chronic in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and symptoms were not continuous since service separation.

6. The Veteran's right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis and strain was not chronic in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and symptoms were not continuous since service separation.

7. The Veteran's cervical spine strain is not etiologically related to service.

8. The Veteran's lumbar spine degenerative arthritis and lumbosacral strain is not etiologically related to service. 

9. The Veteran's right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis and strain is not etiologically related to service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for cervical spine have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for low back have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right shoulder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1990 to March 1993.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which confirmed and continued the prior denial of service connection for the claims on appeal. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ/RO) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ/RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

VA regulations require that the Board contact an appellant and request clarification if the Board cannot identify which review option an appellant intends to select. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f). A Notice of Disagreement (NOD) may be unclear if an appellant attaches evidence to a NOD indicating that the appellant is seeking Direct Review, as evidence submitted along with an NOD may not be considered by the Board under that review option. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).

In the instant appeal, the Veteran's attorney submitted statement along with the March 2024 VA Form 10182, to include arguments and reference to evidence already in the record. These contentions are a recitation of prior arguments and citations and do not represent new evidence. The present appeal is therefore factually distinguishable from Edwards, and the Board can proceed with a decision without clarifying the Veteran's intent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).  Id.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

By way of procedural background, the Veteran initially submitted a claim for service connection in December 2022, which included claims for right shoulder, cervical spine and low back. A rating decision was issued in March 2023, which denied the claims as they neither incurred in nor were caused by service.  

In May 2023, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim for service connection for right shoulder, low back and cervical spine. A rating decision was issued in August 2023, which noted new and relevant evidence and reconsidered the claims but confirmed and continued the prior denials. Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ/RO are binding on the Board as there is no evidence to the contrary. 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The Veteran timely submitted a notice of disagreement (10182/NOD) in March 2024, seeking review of the claim. As such, the claims for service connection for cervical spine, low back and right shoulder are properly before the Board for adjudication.

Service Connection Laws and Regulations

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). Only chronic diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) are entitled to the presumptive service connection provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990). Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while credibility is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) ("although interest may affect the credibility of testimony, it does not affect competency to testify").

Generally, the degree of probative value which may be attributed to a medical opinion issued by a VA or private treatment provider considers such factors as its thoroughness and degree of detail, and whether there was review of the claims file. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000). Also significant is whether the examining medical provider had a sufficiently clear and well-reasoned rationale, as well as a basis in objective supporting clinical data. See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382(1998); see also Claiborne v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 181, 186 (2005) (rejecting medical opinions that did not indicate whether the physicians actually examined the veteran, did not provide the extent of any examination, and did not provide any supporting clinical data). The Court has held that a bare conclusion, even one reached by a health care professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record. Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998).

A significant factor to be considered for any opinion is the accuracy of the factual predicate, regardless of whether the information supporting the opinion is obtained by review of medical records or lay reports of injury, symptoms and/or treatment, including by a veteran. See Harris v. West, 203 F.3d 1347, 1350-51 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (examiner's opinion based on accurate lay history deemed competent medical evidence in support of the claim); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 177 (2005) (holding that a medical opinion cannot be disregarded solely on the rationale that the medical opinion was based on history given by the veteran); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that the Board may reject a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual basis).

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine.

The Veteran asserts that his cervical spine disorder is the result of his military service. 

Initially, the Board notes the Veteran has been diagnosed with a cervical strain. See February 2023 and June 2023 VA examination reports. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment for his neck or cervical spine. The STRs are also silent for any motor vehicle accidents or incidents involving a tank. On a February 1993 report of medical history, the Veteran reported he was in "pretty good health except some ankle problems and left knee on occasion." The Veteran reported no head injury or bone, joint or other deformity. At a February 1993 report of medical examination, the Veteran was found to have a normal head, face and neck and spine, other musculoskeletal. On a December 1993 report of medical history, at enlistment in the National Guard, the Veteran reported no head injury or bone, joint or other deformity. At a December 1993 enlistment examination for the National Guard, the Veteran was noted to have a normal head, face and neck and spine, other musculoskeletal.

The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was that of infantryman. See DD Form 214. In October 1992, the Veteran was among several service members to receive an award for driver and mechanic badge as he "performed assigned duties as a driver or assistant driver of Army vehicles for a minimum of 12 consecutive months or has driven at least 8,000 miles and has no Army motor vehicle accident or traffic violation recorded on his/her Equipment Operator's Qualification record." The Veteran completed infantryman training, Fast Fighting Vehicle Infantryman and Basic Airborne training. See Veteran's Military Personnel Record. 

During post-service primary care treatment in December 2021, the Veteran had "no signs of trauma, neck supple, no midline cervical tenderness, no jugular venous distention, no lymphadenopathy, no thyromegaly, or masses/lesions appreciated." During a new patient sleep medicine treatment in September 2023, the Veteran reported pain in his shoulders, back, knees and ankles. The Veteran did not report pain in his neck. See Valley Coastal Bend VAMC.

Although the Veteran reported complaints of neck pain since service, the record shows he has not reported pain or any complaints of neck or cervical pain since separation. 

As part of the Veteran's December 2022 claim for service connection, the Veteran provided a statement regarding his cervical spine condition. The Veteran reported that "During my active-duty service, I injured my neck in a car accident. Since separating from active duty, I continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with my neck, used over-the-counter medication to treat my neck pain, and continued to use the stretches shown to me by medical in service." The Veteran also reported that "When I have a flare-up, I am unable to do anything but lie in my bed for the day; in the last 12 months I have been confined to my bed or couch for 6 weeks."

The Veteran was afforded a February 2023 VA neck examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of cervical strain. The Veteran reported onset in 1992 when he was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. The Veteran reported he was medically seen during service. The Veteran reported he had stiffness and chronic pain, was currently taking Motrin and CBD cream and reported difficulty with prolonged activity involving the cervical region. The Veteran reported weekly flare-ups lasting three to four days. 

In a separate February 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed neck condition was less likely than not incurred in nor caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned: "Reviewed the veteran's E-File. He has a parachutist badge. However, his service treatment records are silent for any formal diagnosis, evaluation, treatment for claimed conditions. Report of medical history in 1993 silent for any complaints for claimed conditions. Post military records are silent as well. I cannot attribute the veteran's conditions solely secondary to parachuting. Veteran states he injured his neck and back in a Motor Vehicle Accident during military service, Right shoulder injury during service. These injuries are not documented. Per review of all potentially relevant evidence, I am unable to establish service connection or chronicity of care for the veteran's claimed condition. As such, a nexus cannot be established."

In May 2023, the Veteran provided a private nexus opinion. The private examiner noted the Veteran reported an injury to his neck/cervical spine while on active duty in a car accident with continued symptoms to the present. The private examiner noted five general studies addressing cervical pain. The private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay evidence, current diagnosis and general medical studies to conclude that "it is my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current cervical spine strain condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his neck/cervical spine area injury that occurred during active military service."

Although the May 2023 private opinion represents competent medical evidence, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate. The Board notes the May 2023 private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay statement but did not review the Veteran's service treatment records or post-service treatment records. The private provider relied on overly broad articles that were not specific to this Veteran or a similarly situated individual. Additionally, the private provider did not provide any rationale to support the opinion that the Veteran's cervical spine disorder was related to service. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008); see also Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998) (a bare conclusion, even one reached by a health care professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record). As such, the Board does not find this opinion to be probative. 

In a May 2023 telephone call, the Veteran "indicated that he never served during the Gulf War and that no line of duty investigation was done regarding the vehicle accident that had happened during his active duty." See May 22, 2023 report of general information. 

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA neck examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of cervical strain. The Veteran reported onset in 1992 when, at Fort Chaffee, he was in a tank which collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. The Veteran reported he hit at chest level in the vehicle which injured his right shoulder, neck and back. The Veteran reported seeing medics after this incident. The Veteran also reported he jumped with parachute during service which caused injuries to his back during service. The Veteran reported weekly flare-ups lasting three to four days.

In a separate June 2023 toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran claims he hurt his neck at Ft. Chaffy which is stateside and not during deployment. A nexus is not made."

In a separate June 2023 direct service connection opinion regarding the Veteran's cervical condition, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran reports that he injured his neck, back and right shoulder during training when he was in a tank of sorts and it hit a tree going 35mph which it came to a dead stop; veteran flew forward and hit the tank wall injuring his right shoulder, neck and back. Veteran's lay statement states he injured his neck in a car accident during active duty.  ALL PROCURED LAY STATEMENTS OF AND FROM THE VETERAN IS PRESUMED TO BE TRUE AND IS EVIDENCED BY the Veteran procured lay statements on day of this examination endorsing THE VETERAN IS AT LEAST OF SOUND MIND AND KNOWLEDGEABLE FOR RECALL OF HISTORY OF EVENT/injury/illness incurred in or caused by the claimed condition/event during military service. Therefore, the Veteran have a diagnosis of Service connection for cervical spine is denied. that is at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by (the) cervical spine during service. A nexus is made."

The Board notes that the June 2023 VA examiner relied only on the Veteran's statements. The examiner specifically states, in capitalized letters, that because the Veteran is of "sound mind and knowledgeable for recall" it is presumed to be true and the only evidence the examiner reviewed was the Veteran's statements. A medical opinion is adequate when the medical expert discusses the relevant facts of a claimant's case, including any relevant lay statements about the disability picture, such that the opinion and rationale sufficiently inform the Board of the expert's judgment on the medical question. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 254 (2020). Here, the June 2023 opinion relied only on the Veteran's lay statements and did not review the entire record to provide an opinion based upon the Veteran's prior medical history, does sufficiently informs the Board of the medical expert's opinion, and did not contain a thorough explanation. Accordingly, the Board finds the June 2023 VA direct opinion to be inadequate and, therefore, provides no probative value. 

In a March 2024 summary submitted with the Veteran's 10182/NOD, the Veteran's representative argues that based on the Veteran's lay statements, a parachute badge and a cervical spine diagnosis, that the benefit of the doubt should be applied to grant service connection for the Veteran's claimed neck/cervical spine disorder. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms without any specialized knowledge or training. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465; Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011), Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007). Furthermore, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and pain the Veteran experienced, as they would be readily apparent. See Horowitz v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 217, 221-22 (1993) (lay statements are competent on in-service and post-service symptoms).

The Board notes that the Veteran reported that he injured his neck in a car accident during his active duty service and had neck pain since his service. In his December 2022 statement, the Veteran reported he use the stretches he was shown while on active duty. However, the Veteran's STRs are silent for any neck or cervical spine injury, event or illness or any motor vehicle accident. Likewise, the Veteran reported flare-ups that rendered the Veteran bedridden, however, following service, the Veteran did not report neck pain during his VA medical treatment. 

Additionally, at his February 2023 VA neck examination, the Veteran reported neck pain following an incident in which the Veteran "was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank." The Veteran also reported he was "medically seen during service." Again, the Veteran's STRs are silent for medical treatment and silent for any event involving a tank. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report the nature of his symptoms but not credible to report their onset or its continuity.

The Board finds that the weight of the competent evidence of record demonstrates that the currently diagnosed cervical spine disorder is not related to or caused by service. Despite the Veteran's assertions of debilitating neck pain, his post-service treatment records are silent.

To the extent the Veteran is contending continuity of symptoms since service, his contentions made in conjunction with his claim for service connection are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Namely, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment. In short, the Veteran's contentions of continuity of symptoms of neck problems since service lack credibility and are outweighed by the evidence of record showing no link between service and the current complaints.  

For these reasons, and based on the evidence of record, the weight of the competent, credible, and probative evidence is against a finding of a relationship between the Veteran's cervical spine disorder and service. Because the weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a neck and/or spine condition, to include cervical strain, is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for low back.

The Veteran asserts that his lumbar spine disorder is the result of his military service. 

Initially, the Board notes the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine and lumbosacral strain. See February 2023 and June 2023 VA examination reports. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment for his back or lumbar spine. The STRs are also silent for any motor vehicle accidents or incidents involving a tank. On a February 1993 report of medical history, the Veteran reported he was in "pretty good health except some ankle problems and left knee on occasion." The Veteran reported no recurrent back pain or bone, joint or other deformity. At a February 1993 report of medical examination, the Veteran was found to have a normal spine, other musculoskeletal. On a December 1993 report of medical history, at enlistment in the National Guard, the Veteran reported no recurrent back pain or bone, joint or other deformity. At a December 1993 enlistment examination for the National Guard, the Veteran was noted to have a normal spine, other musculoskeletal.

The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was that of infantryman. See DD Form 214. In October 1992, the Veteran was among several service members to receive an award for a driver and mechanic badge as he "performed assigned duties as a driver or assistant driver of Army vehicles for a minimum of 12 consecutive months or has driven at least 8,000 miles and has no Army motor vehicle accident or traffic violation recorded on his/her Equipment Operator's Qualification record." The Veteran completed infantryman training, Fast Fighting Vehicle Infantryman and Basic Airborne training. See Veteran's Military Personnel Record. 

During post-service primary care treatment in December 2021, the Veteran had "no costovertebral angle tenderness, no midline or paraspinal tenderness, no clubbing, cyanosis, or edema appreciated." During a new patient sleep medicine treatment in September 2023, the Veteran reported pain in his shoulders, back, knees and ankles. See Valley Coastal Bend VAMC.

Although the Veteran reported complaints of back pain since service, the record shows he has not reported pain or any complaints of back or lumbar pain since separation until September 2023. 

As part of the Veteran's December 2022 claim for service connection, the Veteran provided a statement regarding his lumbar spine condition. The Veteran reported that "During my active-duty service, I injured my back in a vehicle accident and on parachute landing. Since separating from active duty, I continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with my low back, continued to receive treatment for my low back issues by civilian doctors, used over-the-counter medication to treat my low back pain, and continued to use the stretches shown to me by medical in service." The Veteran also reported that "When my lower back pain is at its worst, I can still move my back, but only slightly, can't bend over, and must use ice or heat for my back."

The Board notes that the Veteran stated that he was treated by "civilian doctors," however, the Veteran did not report similar treatment for his neck or right shoulder. Additionally, the Veteran's representative did not mention such treatment nor was the name or information of such "civilian doctors" provided by the Veteran or his representatives. While the Board acknowledges a duty to assist, this is the only mention of a "civilian doctor." VA's duty to assist is not a one-way street. If the appellant wants help, the Veteran cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where his own actions are essential in obtaining the putative evidence. Wood v. Derwinski,1 Vet. App. 191 (1991); Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 68 (1993).

The Veteran was afforded a February 2023 VA neck examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis with lumbar radiculopathy bilateral lower extremities. The Veteran reported onset in 1992 when he was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. The Veteran reported chronic pain, stiffness and radiculopathy symptoms bilateral lower extremities; used an over the counterbrace, Motrin, CBD cream; and reported difficulty with sitting, standing, walking, climbing stairs and driving. The Veteran reported monthly flare-ups lasting one week.

In a separate February 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed back condition was less likely than not incurred in nor caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned: "Reviewed the veteran's E-File. He has a parachutist badge. However, his service treatment records are silent for any formal diagnosis, evaluation, treatment for claimed conditions. Report of medical history in 1993 silent for any complaints for claimed conditions. Post military records are silent as well. I cannot attribute the veteran's conditions solely secondary to parachuting. Veteran states he injured his neck and back in a Motor Vehicle Accident during military service, Right shoulder injury during service. These injuries are not documented. Per review of all potentially relevant evidence, I am unable to establish service connection or chronicity of care for the veteran's claimed condition. As such, a nexus cannot be established."

In May 2023, the Veteran provided a private nexus opinion. The private examiner noted the Veteran reported an injury to his lower back while on active duty in a vehicle accident and a parachute landing. The private examiner noted two studies addressing degenerative joint disease and post-traumatic arthritis. The private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay evidence, current diagnosis and general medical studies to conclude that "it is my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current lumbar spine degenerative arthritis condition is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his back injury that occurred during active military service."

Although the May 2023 private opinion represents competent medical evidence, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate. The Board notes the May 2023 private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay statement but did not review the Veteran's service treatment records or post-service treatment records. The private provider relied on overly broad articles that were not specific to this Veteran or a similarly situated individual. Additionally, the private provider did not provide any rationale to support the opinion that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder was related to service. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008); see also Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998) (a bare conclusion, even one reached by a health care professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record). As such, the Board does not find this opinion to be probative. 

In a May 2023 telephone call, the Veteran "indicated that he never served during the Gulf War and that no line of duty investigation was done regarding the vehicle accident that had happened during his active duty." See May 22, 2023 report of general information. 

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA neck examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis, lumbosacral strain and lumbar radiculopathy bilateral lower extremities. The Veteran reported onset in 1992 when at Fort Chaffee, he was in a tank which collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. The Veteran hit at chest level in the vehicle which injured his right shoulder, neck and back. The Veteran reported seeing medics after this incident. The Veteran also jumped with parachute during service which caused injuries to his back during service. The Veteran denied flare-ups. 

In a separate June 2023 toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran claims he hurt his back at Ft. Chaffy which is stateside and not during deployment. A nexus is not made."

In a separate June 2023 direct service connection opinion regarding the Veteran's lumbar condition, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran reports that he injured his neck, back and right shoulder during training when he was in a tank of sorts and it hit a tree going 35mph which it came to a dead stop; veteran flew forward and hit the tank wall injuring his right shoulder, neck and back. Veteran's lay statement states he injured his neck in a car accident during active duty.  ALL PROCURED LAY STATEMENTS OF AND FROM THE VETERAN IS PRESUMED TO BE TRUE AND IS EVIDENCED BY the Veteran procured lay statements on day of this examination endorsing THE VETERAN IS AT LEAST OF SOUND MIND AND KNOWLEDGEABLE FOR RECALL OF HISTORY OF EVENT/injury/illness incurred in or caused by the claimed condition/event during military service. Therefore, the Veteran have a diagnosis of Service connection for low back is denied. That is at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by (the) low back during service. A nexus is made."

The Board notes that the June 2023 VA examiner relied only on the Veteran's statements. The examiner specifically states, in capitalized letters, that because the Veteran is of "sound mind and knowledgeable for recall" it is presumed to be true and the only evidence the examiner reviewed was the Veteran's statements. A medical opinion is adequate when the medical expert discusses the relevant facts of a claimant's case, including any relevant lay statements about the disability picture, such that the opinion and rationale sufficiently inform the Board of the expert's judgment on the medical question. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 254 (2020). Here, the June 2023 relied only on the Veteran's lay statements and did not review the entire record to provide an opinion based upon the Veteran's prior medical history, did not sufficiently inform the Board of the medical expert's opinion, and did not contain a thorough explanation. Accordingly, the Board finds the June 2023 VA direct opinion to be inadequate and, therefore, provides no probative value. 

In a March 2024 summary submitted with the Veteran's 10182/NOD, the Veteran's representative argues that based on the Veteran's lay statements, parachute badge and his lumbar spine diagnosis, that the benefit of the doubt should be applied to grant service connection for the Veteran's claimed neck/lumbar spine disorder. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms without any specialized knowledge or training. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465; Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011), Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007). Furthermore, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and pain the Veteran experienced, as they would be readily apparent. See Horowitz v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 217, 221-22 (1993) (lay statements are competent on in-service and post-service symptoms).

The Board notes that the Veteran reported that he injured his back in a car accident during his active duty service and had back pain since his service. In his December 2022 statement, the Veteran reported he use the stretches he was shown while on active duty. However, the Veteran's STRs are silent for any back or lumbar spine injury, event or illness or any motor vehicle accident, including involving a tank or instructions on stretching. Likewise, following service, the Veteran did not report back pain during his VA medical treatment until September 2023, 30 years after his release from active duty.

Additionally, at his February 2023 VA back examination, the Veteran reported neck pain following an incident in which the Veteran "was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank." The Veteran also reported he was "medically seen during service." Again, the Veteran's STRs are silent for medical treatment and silent for any event involving a tank. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report the nature of his symptoms but not credible to report their onset or its continuity.

The Board finds that the weight of the competent evidence of record demonstrates that the currently diagnosed lumbar spine disorder is not related to or was caused by service. Despite the Veteran's assertions of debilitating back pain, his post-service treatment records are silent.

To the extent the Veteran is contending continuity of symptoms since service, his contentions made in conjunction with his claim for service connection are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Namely, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment. In short, the Veteran's contentions of continuity of symptoms of back problems since service lack credibility and are outweighed by the evidence of record showing no link between service and the current complaints.  

For these reasons, and based on the evidence of record, the weight of the competent, credible, and probative evidence is against a finding of a relationship between the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder and service. Because the weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a back and/or spine condition, to include lumbosacral strain and degenerative arthritis, is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder.

The Veteran asserts that his right shoulder disorder is the result of his military service. 

Initially, the Board notes the Veteran has been diagnosed with a right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis and strain. See February 2023 and June 2023 VA examination reports. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment for his right shoulder. The STRs are also silent for any motor vehicle accidents or incidents involving a tank. On a February 1993 report of medical history, the Veteran reported he was in "pretty good health except some ankle problems and left knee on occasion." The Veteran reported no painful or "trick" shoulder. At a February 1993 report of medical examination, the Veteran was found to have normal upper extremities. On a December 1993 report of medical history, at enlistment in the National Guard, the Veteran reported no painful or "trick" shoulder. At a December 1993 enlistment examination for the National Guard, the Veteran was noted to have normal upper extremities.

The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was that of infantryman. See DD Form 214. In October 1992, the Veteran was among several service members to receive an award for a driver and mechanic badge as he "performed assigned duties as driver or assistant driver of Army vehicles for a minimum of 12 consecutive months or has driven at least 8,000 miles and has no Army motor vehicle accident or traffic violation recorded on his/her Equipment Operator's Qualification record." The Veteran completed infantryman training, Fast Fighting Vehicle Infantryman and Basic Airborne training. See Veteran's Military Personnel Record. 

During post-service primary care treatment in December 2021, the Veteran had normal shoulders. During a new patient sleep medicine treatment in September 2023, the Veteran reported pain in his shoulders, back, knees and ankles. See Valley Coastal Bend VAMC.

Although the Veteran reported complaints of right shoulder since service, the record shows he has not reported pain or any complaints of right shoulder pain since separation until September 2023. 

As part of the Veteran's December 2022 claim for service connection, the Veteran provided a statement regarding his lumbar spine condition. The Veteran reported that "During my active-duty service, I injured my right shoulder in a training accident. I have had issues with my right shoulder ever since active duty." 

The Veteran was afforded a February 2023 VA shoulder examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of rotator cuff tendonitis. The Veteran reported onset in 1995 when he was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. The Veteran was a paratrooper. The Veteran reported chronic pain, stiffness, popping/ clicking, stabbing pain occasional, numbness/ tingling radiating down right arm and poor sleep quality. The Veteran reported currently taking Motrin, Tylenol and CBD cream and had difficulty with yard work and day to day activities. The Veteran reported weekly flare-ups lasting three days. 

In a separate February 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed right shoulder condition was less likely than not incurred in nor caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned: "Reviewed the veteran's E-File. He has a parachutist badge. However, his service treatment records are silent for any formal diagnosis, evaluation, treatment for claimed conditions. Report of medical history in 1993 silent for any complaints for claimed conditions. Post military records are silent as well. I cannot attribute the veteran's conditions solely secondary to parachuting. Veteran states he injured his neck and back in a Motor Vehicle Accident during military service, Right shoulder injury during service. These injuries are not documented. Per review of all potentially relevant evidence, I am unable to establish service connection or chronicity of care for the veteran's claimed condition. As such, a nexus cannot be established."

In May 2023, the Veteran provided a private nexus opinion. The private provider noted that the Veteran reported he developed progressive pain in the right shoulder while on active duty related to military MOS duties and over-usage. The private examiner noted four general studies addressing shoulder and musculoskeletal disorders, only one of which generally addresses members of the military. The private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay evidence, current diagnosis and general medical studies to conclude that "it is my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current chronic right shoulder rotator cuff tendinitis is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his right shoulder overuse injury that occurred during active military service."

Although the May 2023 private opinion represents competent medical evidence, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate. The Board notes the May 2023 private examiner relied on the Veteran's lay statement but did not review the Veteran's service treatment records or post-service treatment records. The private provider relied on overly broad articles that were not specific to this Veteran or a similarly situated individual. Additionally, the private provider did not provide any rationale to support the opinion that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder was related to service. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008); see also Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998) (a bare conclusion, even one reached by a health care professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record). As such, the Board does not find this opinion to be probative. 

In a May 2023 telephone call, the Veteran "indicated that he never served during the Gulf War and that no line of duty investigation was done regarding the vehicle accident that had happened during his active duty." See May 22, 2023 report of general information. 

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA shoulder examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of right shoulder strain and right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis. The Veteran reported onset in 1992, while at Fort Chaffee, he was in a tank which collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank. Veteran hit at chest level in the vehicle which injured his right shoulder, neck and back. The Veteran reported seeing medics after this incident. Veteran also jumped with parachute during service which caused injuries to his back during service. The Veteran denied flare-ups. 

In a separate June 2023 toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran claims he hurt his right shoulder at Ft. Chaffy which is stateside and not during deployment. A nexus is not made."

In a separate June 2023 direct service connection opinion regarding the Veteran's right shoulder condition, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran reports that he injured his neck, back and right shoulder during training when he was in a tank of sorts and it hit a tree going 35mph which it came to a dead stop; veteran flew forward and hit the tank wall injuring his right shoulder, neck and back. STR's are silent on neck, right shoulder, or back injury.  ALL PROCURED LAY STATEMENTS OF AND FROM THE VETERAN IS PRESUMED TO BE TRUE AND IS EVIDENCED BY the Veteran procured lay statements on day of this examination endorsing THE VETERAN IS AT LEAST OF SOUND MIND AND KNOWLEDGEABLE FOR RECALL OF HISTORY OF EVENT/injury/illness incurred in or caused by the claimed condition/event during military service. Therefore, the Veteran have a diagnosis of Service connection for right shoulder condition is denied. that is at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by (the) right shoulder during service. A nexus is made."

The Board notes that the June 2023 VA examiner relied only on the Veteran's statements. The examiner specifically states, in capitalized letters, that because the Veteran is of "sound mind and knowledgeable for recall" it is presumed to be true and the only evidence the examiner reviewed was the Veteran's statements. A medical opinion is adequate when the medical expert discusses the relevant facts of a claimant's case, including any relevant lay statements about the disability picture, such that the opinion and rationale sufficiently inform the Board of the expert's judgment on the medical question. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 254 (2020). Here, the June 2023 relied only on the Veteran's lay statements and did not review the entire record to provide an opinion based upon the Veteran's prior medical history, did not sufficiently inform the Board of the medical expert's opinion, and did not contain a thorough explanation. Accordingly, the Board finds the June 2023 VA direct opinion to be inadequate and, therefore, provides no probative value. 

In a March 2024 summary submitted with the Veteran's 10182/NOD, the Veteran's representative argues that based on the Veteran's lay statements, parachute badge and his right shoulder diagnosis, that the benefit of the doubt should be applied to grant service connection for the Veteran's claimed right shoulder disorder. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms without any specialized knowledge or training. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465; Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011), Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007). Furthermore, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and pain the Veteran experienced, as they would be readily apparent. See Horowitz v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 217, 221-22 (1993) (lay statements are competent on in-service and post-service symptoms).

The Board notes that the Veteran reported that he injured his right shoulder in a car accident during his active duty service and had back pain since his service. However, the Veteran's STRs are silent for any right shoulder injury, event or illness or any motor vehicle accident, including involving a tank. Likewise, following service, the Veteran did not report back pain during his VA medical treatment until September 2023, 30 years after his release from active duty.

Additionally, at his February 2023 VA shoulder examination, the Veteran reported shoulder pain following an incident in which the Veteran "was in a tank which almost collided with a tree which caused him and his mates to fly forward in the tank." The Veteran also reported he was "medically seen during service." Again, the Veteran's STRs are silent for medical treatment and silent for any event involving a tank. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report the nature of his symptoms but not credible to report their onset or its continuity.

The Board finds that the weight of the competent evidence of record demonstrates that the currently diagnosed right shoulder disorder is not related to or was caused by service. Despite the Veteran's assertions of debilitating right shoulder pain, his post-service treatment records are silent.

To the extent the Veteran is contending continuity of symptoms since service, his contentions made in conjunction with his claim for service connection are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Namely, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment. In short, the Veteran's contentions of continuity of symptoms of right shoulder problems since service lack credibility and are outweighed by the evidence of record showing no link between service and the current complaints.  

For these reasons, and based on the evidence of record, the weight of the competent, credible, and probative evidence is against a finding of a relationship between the Veteran's right shoulder disorder and service. Because the weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a right shoulder condition, to include rotator cuff tendonitis and shoulder strain, is denied. 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	MELNYK, H.        

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.