Citation Nr: A25030738
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250130-512632
DATE: April 2, 2025

ISSUES

1. Whether the request for a waiver of recovery of the overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00 was timely received.

2. Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt.

ORDER

The request for a waiver of recovery of the overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00, was timely received; to this extent only, the claim is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In August 2022, the Debt Management Center (DMC) sent the Veteran a letter informing him of an overpayment of VA pension benefits in the amount of $38,142.00.

2. The Veteran died on November [REDACTED] 2022.

3. On April 16, 2024, DMC sent a letter to the Veteran's estate - and therefore to the Appellant - informing them of the overpayment of VA pension benefits in the amount of $38,142.00, as well as their right to request a waiver of recovery of the debt.

4. On April 22, 2024, VA received the Appellant's waiver request, which is within 180 days of the April 16, 2024, DMC letter sent to the Veteran's estate.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The Appellant's request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA pension benefits in the amount of $38,142.00 was timely filed. 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b)(2).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from July 1953 to July 1957. The Veteran died in November 2022, and the Appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c). 38 U.S.C. § 7107(b).

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2025 administrative decision, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC).

Following the January 2025 COWC decision, the Appellant filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Appellant selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the January 2025 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board has considered the recent holding by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (generally, the Board may not Decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later). In the Appellant's immediate case, a year has not yet passed from the time of the January 2025 COWC decision on appeal. Having said that, neither the Appellant, nor her Representative, have given any indication that they desire a docket switch. Instead, as the claim has been Advanced on the Docket, the Appellant has expressed a desire to address the claim without undue delay, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 20.902 (c).

Furthermore, to the extent that the timeliness claim on appeal is being granted, that Decision is not against the interests of the Appellant. And to the extent that the waiver issue is being remanded, a formal Decision is not being reached on the claim, and therefore the Appellant is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. To the contrary, by virtue of this remand, the Board is correcting a procedural error to assist in substantiating the claim. Thus, the Board will proceed accordingly.

As discussed below, in addition to claiming entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA pension benefits in the amount of $38,142.00, the Appellant, through her Representative has also challenged the validity of the debt. Thus, the claim has been expanded to include that challenge, as reflected on the title page.

Whether the request for a waiver of recovery of the overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00 was timely received.

The Appellant, through her Representative, has argued that the request for a waiver of recovery of the VA pension debt be deemed timely.

By way of background, in July 2022, an internal Award print screen noted that a debt had been generated in the amount of $38,142.00. The internal note does not indicate why, nor how, the debt was created.

No notification letter is associated with the claims file during this time informing the Veteran why or how the debt was created.

In August 2022, the Veteran was sent a letter from the Debt Management Center (DMC), informing him that an overpayment had been created in the amount of $38,142.00. The Veteran was informed of his rights to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt. The letter was addressed to the Veteran specifically.

On November 4, 2022, the Veteran passed away. His VA pension benefits were suspended effective December 1, 2022.

In December 2022, VA sent a letter to the Veteran's spouse, the Appellant, informing her that non-service-connected burial allowances were granted, based on her application.

On April 16, 2024, the DMC sent a letter to the Veteran's estate. The amount of debt listed was the same, at $38,142.00. This letter is the first notification letter informing someone who is not the Veteran - either the Appellant, or the estate Representative - of the overpayment, as well as her rights associated with the overpayment.

In January 2025, the COWC denied the Appellant's waiver request, stating that they had received it on April 22, 2024, which the Board observes would have been within a week of the DMC letter to the estate. Of note, the Board is basing this waiver request date on the findings from the COWC, as that waiver request has not been associated with the claims file. The COWC denied the Appellant's waiver claim, finding that she did not submit the request within 180 days from the initial August 2022 DMC letter.

The Appellant then submitted her VA Form 10182, NOD. She wrote that the waiver request should be deemed timely, because she was first informed of the debt in April 2024 in the DMC letter to the estate, and she quickly submitted the waiver request within that same week. This, she argues, is clearly within 180 days.

The Veteran's Representative then submitted an Appellate Brief in March 2025. In the Brief, they argued that the Appellant's waiver request should be considered timely, because she was first informed of the debt in a letter to the estate, as the prior letter went to the Veteran right before he passed. Thus, when the estate (and therefore the Appellant) was notified of the debt, she quickly submitted the waiver request, which was received within 180 days. They also argued that they are unclear how the debt was created, because no notification letter has been associated with the claims file informing the Veteran - and subsequently the Appellant - how the debt had been created. Therefore, they were challenging the validity of the debt. Finally, the Representative argued that the Appellant faced significant financial hardship, including numerous debts resulting from the Veteran's passing, limited funds, and that recovery of the debt would defeat the purpose of the pension benefits, insofar as she would be pushed further into poverty.

The Appellant's claim is now before the Board.

Turning to the threshold question, the law states a request for waiver of indebtedness shall only be considered if it is made within 180 days following the date of a notice of indebtedness issued on or after April 1, 1983, by VA to the debtor. The 180-day period may be extended if the individual requesting waiver demonstrates to the Chairperson of the Committee that, as a result of an error by either VA or the postal authorities, or due to other circumstances beyond the debtor's control, there was a delay in such individual's receipt of the notification of indebtedness beyond the time customarily required for mailing (including forwarding). If the requester does substantiate that there was such a delay in the receipt of the notice of indebtedness, the Chairperson shall direct that the 180-day period be computed from the date of the requester's actual receipt of the notice of indebtedness. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b).

In consideration of the above, the Board finds that the Appellant's waiver request was timely received.

To begin, and simply put, the Appellant herself - through the estate - was not notified of the overpayment until April 16, 2024. The prior letter was sent to the Veteran and is specifically marked with his name on it. It was sent in August 2022, and the Veteran passed away a short time later in November 2022. VA then took over a year to transfer the debt to the Veteran's estate. The DMC letter informing the administrator of the estate - or in this case the Appellant, who may have been authorized to receive estate mail - about the right to request a waiver within 180 days of the DMC letter, was therefore reset in a sense, because the debt was being transferred to a different legal entity (the Veteran, versus the estate of the Veteran). Thus, affording her the benefit of the doubt, the first time that the Appellant was notified of her right to request a waiver, was through the April 16, 2024, DMC letter to the estate. She then sent a waiver request (according to the COWC), within a week of that.

Of note, the Board cannot assume that because the initial debt letter was sent to the Veteran, who resides at the same address as the Appellant, that the rights listed within the debt letter were also explained to the Appellant. Said another way, it is reasonable to think that the Appellant did not necessarily open mail that was not addressed to her, and therefore she would not have been informed of the debt, nor her right to request a waiver of recovery of the debt.

Thus, the first DMC letter notifying the debtor, in this case the estate/Appellant (and not the Veteran himself) of her right to request a waiver of recovery of the debt was from April 16, 2024. She submitted a waiver request which was received on April 22, 2024. That waiver request is clearly within the 180 days by which she could submit a waiver request.

The Board therefore finds that the Appellant's waiver request was timely submitted, and to this extent only, the appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board finds that additional evidentiary development is required before the claims on appeal are adjudicated.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $38,142.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

The Appellant has requested a waiver of recovery of the overpayment. She has also disputed the validity of the debt.

Having said that, the Board is reminded that the Appellant's claim was denied as the waiver request was found to be untimely. Thus, the waiver issue has not been decided on the merits.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately remanding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Here, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred, as the Appellant's waiver request was not actually decided on the merits. Only the matter of timeliness was addressed by the COWC, so the Appellant's arguments regarding financial hardship, and that recovery of the debt would defeat the purpose of pension benefits, have not been considered. On remand, the COWC is directed to consider the Appellant's arguments in favor of a waiver when deciding the claim on the merits.

In addition, the Appellant, through her Representative has also disputed the validity of the debt. Of note, the first indication in the claims file of a debt sent to the Veteran is actually from the Award print screen, and the August 2022 DMC letter. Neither of these documents indicate a reason that the debt was created. There is no explanatory notification letter, much less a formal finding, regarding the validity of the debt. Simply put, neither the Appellant, nor the Representative, are clear on how/why the debt was created. It is for this reason that they have challenged the validity of the debt. See March 2025 Appellate Brief.

The Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has directed that appellate review by the Board on the Veteran's waiver claim must be deferred pending formal adjudication of the Appellant's challenge to the validity of the debt by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991) ("when a Veteran raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application... it is arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion to adjudicate the waiver application without first deciding a veteran's challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against him or her"); VAOPGCPREC 6-98 (July 24, 1998) (holding that when a veteran challenges the validity of the debt and seeks waiver of the debt, the [Regional Office] must first fully review the debt's validity and, if the office believes the debt to be valid, prepare a written decision fully justifying the validity of the debt before referring the waiver request to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC)). A debtor may dispute the amount or existence of a debt, which is a right that may be exercised separately from a request for waiver or at the same time. 38 C.F.R. § 1.911 (c)(1). Resolution of the creation issue must precede consideration of the waiver issue.

And because there is no explanation for the debt within a Notification letter, nor is there a formal finding of the validity of the debt, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has also occurred on this ground. On remand, prior to the waiver claim being considered by the COWC, a determination must be made regarding the validity of the debt.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO must make a formal finding as to the validity of the overpayment of VA pension debt. The Appellant should be given an opportunity to provide clarifications to amounts of income, medical expenses, nursing home care of the Veteran, etc., that would possibly impact any overpayment, during the relevant period on appeal. If any amount of the purported overpayment is determined to be valid, the Appellant should again be informed of any rights/obligations associated with the overpayment.

The RO is reminded that when an Appellant raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application, the issue regarding the challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against the Appellant must first be decided. See Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991).

2. Following Step 1, the RO is to refer the issue related to a waiver of recovery of the debt to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) for any additional development required, followed by a decision on the merits of her waiver claim. If deemed necessary, the COWC should request that the Appellant and/or her Representative submit an updated VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR).

The COWC is reminded that the Board has found the Appellant's waiver claim timely. They are further reminded that the Appellant, through her Representative, have argued in favor of a waiver on grounds of severe financial hardship, and that recovery of the debt would defeat the purpose of pension benefits.  

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.