Citation Nr: A25030474
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439813
DATE:  April 2, 2025

    

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served in the Montana Army National Guard from November 2004 to November 2013, which included a period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from November 2004 to April 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision.

In August 2022, the appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0996, requesting higher level review (HLR) of an October 2021 rating decision.  In a November 2022 HLR decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) identified a duty to assist error.  Therefore, the claim was transferred to the supplemental claim lane, which was then later denied in the January 2024 rating decision

The appellant submitted a VA Form 10182 in May 2024, and he elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that January 2024 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, the AOJ will be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider because the case is being remanded. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In October 2023, the AOJ requested a medical opinion for the claim and noted that an examination was not needed.  The record also shows that an examination was cancelled later month, but there is no documentation indicating whether cancellation was made by the appellant or the AOJ.  Nevertheless, the AOJ relied on a finding in the January 2024 rating decision that the appellant had cancelled the examination.  Moreover, the requested medical opinion was never provided in response to the October 2023 request. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine etiology of the appellant's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the appellant is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner is also advised that the absence of in-service evidence of a hearing disability during service is not always fatal to a service connection claim.  Evidence of a current hearing loss disability and a medically sound basis for attributing that disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for hearing loss where there is credible evidence of acoustic trauma due to significant noise exposure in service, post-service audiometric findings meeting the regulatory requirements for a hearing loss disability for VA purposes, and a medically sound basis upon which to attribute the post-service findings to the injury in service.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the appellant has bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus that are causally or etiologically related to his period of ACDUTRA from November 2004 to April 2005 or any other verified period of qualifying active service, to include any noise exposure therein.

In rendering the opinion, the examiner should explain the significance, if any, of any threshold shifts or lack thereof in service.  He or she should also discuss medically known or theoretical causes of hearing loss and tinnitus and describe how hearing loss and tinnitus which result from noise exposure generally present or develop in most cases, as distinguished from how hearing loss and tinnitus develop from other causes, in determining the likelihood that the current hearing loss and tinnitus were caused by noise exposure in service as opposed to some other cause.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.W. Neiman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.