Citation Nr: A25030033
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458358
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1981 to June 1981.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In this case, the Veteran seeks service connection for PTSD. He contends that he experienced events on active duty that caused him psychological trauma. See April 2022 VA Form 21-0781: Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD); April 2022 Veteran Lay Statement.

Upon review, the Board finds that additional development is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Board notes that the Veteran's claim was initially adjudicated as entitlement to service connection for PTSD. However, in light of the evidence of record, the Board has recharacterized the issue more broadly to include any acquired psychiatric disorder. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6, 8 (2009).

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection because although the Veteran had been diagnosed with PTSD, there was insufficient evidence to confirm a link between his current symptoms and an in-service stressor. 

VA must order an examination when there is competent evidence of a current disability; evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; an indication that the disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or another service-connected disability; and there is insufficient evidence for VA to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Despite the foregoing, the record reflects that no VA examination has been obtained to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed PTSD. While his lay assertions may not be dispositive of the claim in establishing a relationship between his diagnosed mental health condition and active service, the Board finds that the Veteran's contentions are sufficient to trigger VA's duty to obtain a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his PTSD. Id. As such, remand is required to determine whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is related to his service.

The Board further notes that there is no indication the AOJ undertook any development in an effort to verify the Veteran's reported stressors, to include making a formal finding on the lack of evidence to verify stressors. Thus, the Board also remands this matter for the AOJ to adequately develop and corroborate the Veteran's assertions of his in-service stressors while serving; any and all appropriate development should be completed to correct such a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should ensure the Veteran has provided sufficient information to verify his alleged stressors reported in the April 2022 VA Form 21-0781 and Lay Statement.

After gathering sufficient information, the AOJ should contact the appropriate records custodian to verify the Veteran's alleged stressors.

A summary should be forwarded to the appropriate custodian with a request for any information that could verify his alleged stressors. If no relevant records are available, a negative reply to that effect is required.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA mental disorders examination to determine the nature of any psychiatric disorder, including PTSD, and to obtain an opinion as to whether such is related to service.

The examiner is requested to review and address all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder manifested in service, was aggravated during active service, or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any symptoms or events therein.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

A clear rationale for all opinions and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved should be provided.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Yang, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.