Citation Nr: A25030515
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240331-428288
 

DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served on active duty from May 1984 to April 1988 and May 1988 to May 1992, plus additional periods in the Reserve.

2.  An acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as major depressive disorder (MDD) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), was not shown in service and is not etiologically related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

An acquired psychiatric disorder was not incurred in service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.303, 3.304(f) (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

This decision has been written under the guidelines of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim. In March 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board via a Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.

Turning to the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F. 3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

With specific regard to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) claims, three elements must be present: (1) a current medical diagnosis of PTSD in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); (2) medical evidence of a causal nexus between current symptomatology and a claimed in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f); Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).

There are special provisions relating to PTSD claims based on an in-service personal assault (including military sexual trauma (MST)). The regulations recognize that sexual assaults are often unreported. Therefore, when a PTSD claim is based on an in-service personal assault, the regulations authorize the use of evidence from sources other than a veteran's service records to corroborate a veteran's account of the stressor incident. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

Examples of such evidence include, but are not limited to records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians, and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy.

Evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these sources. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include, but are not limited to a request for a transfer, deterioration in work performance, substance abuse, episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause, or unexplained economic or social behavior changes.

In addition, VA may submit any evidence that it receives to an appropriate medical or mental health professional for an opinion as to whether it indicates that a personal assault occurred.

Turning to the medical evidence, an August 2023 VA medical examiner diagnosed the Veteran with MDD and PTSD. He also found that the diagnoses were not independent of one another, their etiologies overlapped, and that it was impossible beyond mere speculation to determine which individual symptom was attributable to each specific disorder. Therefore, the first element of service connection, a current disability, is met.

As to an in-service incurrence, in August 1984, the Veteran was referred to the mental health clinic. He related that his wife was pregnant and was unable to travel and that they had been separated for all but 4 months of their marriage. He denied suicidal ideation and the diagnosis was possible adjustment disorder. 

In August 1987, the Veteran sought mental health treatment for a newfound fear of heights. The psychologist noted a previous visit to the mental health clinic in April 1986 for jobs stress. After a clinical assessment, where the Veteran denied fear of heights, denied a past history of phobias, and was not suicidal, there was no diagnosis rendered. In a March 1988 separation Report of Medical History, he self-reported that he had no depression, excessive worry, or nervous trouble of any sort. He was separated from service in early April 1988 but reenlisted in late May 1988.

In a January 1990 cardiac work-up, the clinician noted a past history from February to August 1989 of treatment for anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation but the Veteran denied any current problems. After a detailed physical examination, the diagnosis was atypical chest pain and a possible anxiety disorder not currently exacerbated. Although the clinician listed the dates of treatment from February to August 1989, the contemporaneous STRs do not show mental health treatment for that period. 

Records from the second period of active duty include an immunization record, various laboratory tests for complaints of shortness of breath, treatment for a right maxillary injury when he was hit by a tent pole, atypical chest pain, a left varicocele, a vasectomy, a right fibula fracture, asthma, low back strain, and flu symptoms but no mental health complaints. He was discharged from the second period of active duty in May 1992.

Nonetheless, as the Veteran reported mental health complaints during the first period of active duty and there was a reference to a possible anxiety disorder during the second period of service, the second element of an in-service incurrence is met.

As to a medical nexus, an August 2023 VA examiner diagnosed PTSD and MDD and noted that the symptoms had a strong overlap and it was impossible beyond mere speculation to determine which individual symptom was attributed to each specific disorder. The examiner further found that the diagnoses were not independent of each other and resulted from the same etiology and that the symptoms were similar and overlapped significantly.

The examiner attributed the stressor related to PTSD, and by their own assessment also to MDD, as sexual molestation as a child on two occasions by family members. There was no in-service stressor either alleged or confirmed. 

This finding is supported by additional medical treatment records. Specifically, the medical records dated from 2017 are replete with mental health treatment attributed to the childhood trauma. For example, in October 2021, the Veteran reported that he was 8 and 12 years of age at the time of the assaults. 

A May 2022 mental health consultation recorded that the Veteran had attempted to avoid memory of the assault 3 to 4 times in the prior month and to avoid certain types of commercials, such as those related to AIDS, due to memories of such experience. Numerous other treatment notes mention the Veteran's trauma from the reported childhood molestations, but not trauma due to service. There is no contradictory medical opinion of record.

In addition to childhood trauma, a review of the extensive clinical records further focused on the Veteran's mental health complaints, which started in 2017, as related to his spouse's long-term battle with multiple types of cancer, employment difficulties, and financial stress. Until the Veteran filed the claim for benefits and asserted PTSD due to combat in 2023, there was no evidence suggesting that the mental health symptoms were related to service. 

Similarly, the medical evidence since the Veteran filed the claim and within the appeal period reflect ongoing mental health complaints but no evidence that they are related to service but was rather related to the terminal illness of his spouse, lack of social support, and financial hardship.

To the extent that the Veteran initially claimed that PTSD was due to combat and a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, the military personnel records do not support a finding that he engaged in combat. Importantly, the first period of service was from 1984 to 1988 and he was stationed in Korea for a period of time but there were no hostilities in Korea during his period of deployment. Next, a part of his service (from August 1990 to May 1992) was during a period of wartime but the evidence does not show that he was deployed during that period of war. Thus, the provisions regarding PTSD based on combat do not apply. 

To the extent that the record raises an issue of whether PTSD was the result of an in-service personal assault, the record does not support such a contention. Rather, the only reference to a personal assault was the Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD which was submitted on the form for a claim "Secondary to Personal Assault." 

However, a clear reading of the statement itself does not either explicitly or implicitly suggest that the Veteran was a victim of a personal assault. Rather, he described the incident as himself having suicidal thoughts, shaking, and having thoughts of hurting others. There is no indication in the statement that he was assaulted by another person but rather attests to his own feelings toward unnamed "others." 

Thus, while the Veteran listed the incident on the form for personal assault, his own subsequent lay statements do not express, suggest, or imply that he was personally assaulted in service. Thus, the provisions regarding PTSD based on a personal assault do not apply. 

The Board has considered the lay statements, including the Veteran's contention that he was hospitalized for mental health symptoms; however, the STRs reflect that he was hospitalized for a period of about a week due to irretractable headaches. There was no suggestion or finding that the headaches were related to a mental health disorder. 

As to an in-service suicide attempt, the Veteran reported to a June 2021 clinician that he had an in-service suicide attempt through overdosing on painkillers attributed to a divorce while stationed in Korea. Additionally, the August 2023 medical examiner noted a second suicide attempt in service. However, the STRs appear to be complete and there are no findings or diagnosis related to suicide attempts. And, as noted above, the hospitalization was for headaches and not a mental health disorder. 

As noted, the Veteran sought treatment on one occasion for job stress, once for a fear of heights, and once for possible anxiety plus unconfirmed treatment for anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation as reported by the Veteran but a review of the contemporaneous STRs do not reflect more than the three incidents noted above. 

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, but he is not otherwise competent to diagnose a disability or its etiology. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and cause of the Veteran's mental health disorders has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and other clinical evidence) directly address the nature and cause of the Veteran's disorders.  

Moreover, as the examiners have the requisite medical expertise to render a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the disorders and had sufficient facts and data on which to base the conclusion, the Board affords the medical opinion great probative value. As such, these medical records are more probative than the Veteran's subjective statements and assertions.  

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals  

Attorney for the Board	Harry Baumgarten, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.