Citation Nr: A25030408
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-449353
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from August 2010 to October 2010.  

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea most recently addressed in a November 2023 rating decision.  In December 2023 the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In June 2024 the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is remanded.

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran has asserted various causes of his diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran has identified weight gain associated with his service-connected right ankle disability and additional orthopedic disabilities, as a cause of his sleep apnea.  He as additionally indicated that his obstructive sleep apnea may be secondary to his major depressive disorder, include as due to weight gain associated with both the service-connected disability and associated medication.  The Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for major depressive disorder, residuals of a right ankle sprain, and additional orthopedic disabilities. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  Additionally, the Veteran's medical treatment records indicate that the Veteran has been diagnosed with obesity.

In May 2023, the AOJ obtained a VA medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, related to his service-connected orthopedic disabilities.  The VA examiner provided an unfavorable opinion, concluding that as there is no direct mechanism for the Veteran's orthopedic disabilities to cause the airway obstruction that results in obstructive sleep apnea, and therefore, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to his service-connected orthopedic disabilities.  The examiner did not provide an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's service-connected orthopedic disabilities aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea.  Finally, the examiner briefly addressed obesity, noting that any argument that the Veteran's orthopedic disabilities cause weight gain lacks merit, as weight gain is due to the over consumption of calories.  

An additional medical opinion was obtained in November 2023, to address the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea secondary to his service-connected major depressive disorder.  The VA examiner provided an unfavorable medical opinion, concluding that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to the Veteran's major depressive disorder.  The examiner provided the rationale that obstructive sleep apnea is a separate entity entirely from major depressive disorder.  The examiner did not provide an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's major depressive disorder aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner provided a list of risk factors for the development of obstructive sleep apnea, including obesity, however, the Veteran's specific risk factors were not addressed.

Finally, the Veteran was provided with a third VA medical opinion in December 2023.  The December 2023 examiner addressed the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea related to his major depressive disorder.  The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was incurred due to major depressive disorder, as obstructive sleep apnea does not share the same pathophysiologic mechanism that is responsible for major depressive disorder.  The examiner did not provide an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's service-connected major depressive disorder aggravated the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner noted that increased weight gain has multiple causes in addition to a lack of physical activity, including genetics, lifestyle choices, and alcohol intake.  The examiner concluded that it is speculative to state that major depressive disorder was the primary driver of weight gain.  Finally, the examiner briefly addressed the antidepressant used to treat the Veteran's major depressive disorder, noting that a "side effect includes not sleeping well," and therefore does not cause the obstruction that causes sleep apnea.  

While the Board appreciates the provided medical opinions, all three are inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim.  First, all three examiners failed to address aggravation of the Veteran's sleep apnea by his service-connected disabilities.  Additionally, none of the examiners adequately addressed obesity as an intermediary step.  Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain adequate opinions with rationale to address secondary service connection, including aggravation, and to address the possibility of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea being service connected through the "intermediate step" of obesity.  The Board acknowledges that it is VA's longstanding policy that obesity per se is not, in and of itself, a disease or injury for VA compensation purposes, and therefore may not be service connected.  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  However, the Board further acknowledges that the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) issued a decision in Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020), holding that obesity as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection can be established on either a causal or aggravation basis.

Although the Board does not acknowledge obesity as a disease or injury for VA compensation purposes, obesity may be used to link a currently service-connected disability to a secondary service-connected disability.  Id.  As the Veteran's medical treatment record indicates the Veteran has received a diagnosis of obesity, and the VA examiner indicated obesity is a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea, a VA medical opinion is therefore necessary to determine if the Veteran's diagnosed obesity is an intermediate step between any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.

In light of above, the record for review by the Board is inadequate for the purpose of adjudicating the Veteran's appeal and represents a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist that must be corrected on remand.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 138 (2013).  Thus, a remand is necessary to obtain adequate medical nexus opinions.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the claims file to a VA examiner, to provide an addendum opinion to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the addendum opinion.  The examiner should review the entire claims file and address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected disabilities, to include orthopedic disabilities and major depressive disorder, and any medication used to treat the disabilities.  

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include orthopedic disabilities and major depressive disorder, and any medication used to treat the disabilities. 

*The examiner should note that aggravation need not be beyond the natural of progression of the disease for purposes of determining aggravation for this claim.

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, and/or any associated medication for such disabilities, caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity.

(d.) If the examiner finds any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his obesity, identify whether the obesity was a substantial factor in causing his sleep apnea; and

(e.) Determine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by a service-connected disability.

2. In providing the requested opinions, the examiner(s) should specifically address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuation of the disabilities.  The examiner may not dismiss the Veteran's lay statements on the basis that they are not recorded in contemporaneous medical records.

3. All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  If any of the above issues cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. W. Morgan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.