Citation Nr: A25030054
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240615-447837
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), to include as secondary to service-connected migraine headaches, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2019 to September 2019.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for CFS, to include as secondary to service-connected migraine headaches, is remanded.

The claim must be remanded because of a pre-decisional duty to assist error; the December 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate. The examiner concluded no diagnosis was rendered but then provided a negative opinion on both direct and secondary service connection. However, the examiner themselves called into question the value of their opinion. They detailed the Veterans' reports of is history and symptoms but concluded the Veteran did not have a chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) diagnosis because the Veteran "has not had any laboratory studies done yet to work up for his symptoms." The examiner did not explain why such testing was not conducted or whether it was possible to obtain. See Wise v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 517 (2014).  On remand, a new examination is warranted to provide an adequate examination for the Veteran's CFS. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the nonservice-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023). Secondary aggravation exists when the nonservice-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the nonservice-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. A new VA medical opinion must comply with this standard.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate VA examiner, to determine the nature and likely etiology of the claimed CFS. All indicated testing should be conducted. Copies of all pertinent records must be made available to the examiner. 

After reviewing the examination and review of rhe record, the examiner is asked to answer the following questions:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed CFS was incurred in or is otherwise related to service?

(b) If the answer to (a) is no, state whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected migraine headache disability, he would not have had a diagnosis of CFS. 

(c) State whether the Veteran's CFS would have been less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected migraine headache disability. 

(d) If the examiner opines that the CFS would have resulted in less functional impairment but for his service-connected migraine headache disability, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed CFS prior to aggravation by the service-connected migraine headache disability. 

The examiner is advised that a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions, citing to supporting factual data and medical literature, as appropriate. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state why and what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

 

 

M.E. Larkin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. G. Perkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.