Citation Nr: A25030449
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434218
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shin disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1989 to May 1990, December 1990 to April 1991, and from September 1997 to May 1998.  The Veteran had additional service in the Army Reserve from May 1990 to May 2000.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of the Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See April 2024 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that evidence was associated with the claims file after the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, which was during a period of time that is outside the applicable evidentiary window.  

However, as the claim is being remanded, the AOJ will consider the claim in light of the entire claims file upon remand.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition is warranted.

Active military, naval, or air service includes any period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty, and any period of inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled from an injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty.  38 U.S.C. § 101(21) and (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a).

ACDUTRA is defined as full-time duty in the Armed Forces performed by Reserves for training purposes, and includes full-time duty performed by members of the National Guard of any State.  38 U.S.C.A. § 101(22); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c)(1).

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred or aggravated while performing ACDUTRA or from an injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 101(24), 106, 1110, 1131.

Certain evidentiary presumptions, such as the presumption of service incurrence for certain diseases which manifest themselves to a degree of disability of 10 percent or more within a specified time after separation from service are provided by law to assist veterans in establishing service connection for a disability or disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(b), 3.306, 3.307, 3.309.

These evidentiary presumptions do not extend to those who claim service connection based on a period of ACDUTRA.  Smith v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 40 (2010) (presumption of soundness and presumption of aggravation not applicable to ACDUTRA); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470-71 (1995) (Board did not err in not applying presumptions of sound condition and aggravation to claim where appellant served only on ACDUTRA and had not established any service-connected disabilities from that period).

However, for those who have achieved "veteran" status through a prior period of service and claim a disability incurred only during a later period of ACDUTRA, the presumption of soundness applies only when the veteran has been "examined, accepted, and enrolled for service" and where that examination revealed no "defects, infirmities, or disorders."  Smith, 24 Vet. App. at 40.

Initially, the Board notes that there has not been a formal finding for all periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Therefore, a remand is needed to correct this error.  

Additionally, a December 2023 VA examination opinion found that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus pre-existed service and thus could not have had its onset in or have been caused by service.  The Board notes that the service entrance examination does appear to show mild asymptomatic pes planus.  See December 2011 Medical Treatment Record.  However, the examination opinion did not opine as to whether the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was aggravated by service.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Furthermore, the examination only identified bilateral pes planus and bilateral plantar fasciitis as current disabilities.  However, soon after the examination, the Veteran provided medical evidence appearing to show degenerative changes of the first metatarsophalangeal joints and small bilateral plantar calcaneal spurs.  See February 2024 STR - Medical - Photocopy.  However, no medical opinion has opined as to whether these apparent disabilities are related to service.  This is also a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Shedden, 381 F.3d at 1163.  

Therefore, a remand is also needed for a VA medical opinion.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is warranted.

Initially, as noted above, there has not been a formal finding for all periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Therefore, a remand is needed to correct this error.  

Additionally, a December 2023 VA left ankle examination opinion found that the Veteran's left ankle sprain was not related to service.  Specifically, there was a lack of substantiating evidence.  There were records of a right ankle sprain during service, but no records of a left ankle sprain during service.  The service separation examination was negative for ankle problems.  The Veteran may have had left ankle pain or even a sprain during service; however, such would have been acute only and resolved as the separation examination was normal. Post-service records did not list abnormalities, diagnoses, or treatment for the left ankle.  Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury was considered to be a more likely etiology.  

The Board finds problems with this examination.  First, the examination opinion apparently used equivocal language when it stated that the Veteran "may have" had left ankle pain or even a sprain during service.  This does not provide the Board with sufficient detail to make an informed decision on the claim.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Tirpak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 609 (1992); see also Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185 (1999) (holding that use of the term "could," without other rationale or supporting data, is too speculative to support the award of benefits).  

Second, the examination opinion apparently did not consider or address service records apparently showing pain when the Veteran was flexing the ankles.  See May 2000 STR - Medical.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).      

Third, the Veteran apparently reported a continuity of left ankle symptoms ever since service and the use of over-the-counter medication, heat, and a TENS unit, when needed, for self-treatment.  See December 2023 C&P Exam.  However, the examination opinion apparently did not consider or address those reports and did not provide an adequate rationale as to why there had not been a continuity of symptoms since service.  Specifically, the examination opinion did not explain why, if left ankle problems had continued ever since service, as reported by the Veteran, such would be expected to be mentioned in post-service medical records if the Veteran was able to self-treat the left ankle problems.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.    

Therefore, a remand is also needed for a VA medical opinion.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shin disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shin disability is warranted.

Initially, as noted above, there has not been a formal finding for all periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Therefore, a remand is needed to correct this error.  

Additionally, a December 2023 VA shin examination opinion found that the Veteran's history of shin splints was not related to service.  Specifically, the Veteran had shin splints during service which were acute only.  The service separation examination was negative for shin issues.  An examination in 2013 noted that the Veteran had shin splints in 1990 but was currently asymptomatic.  There were no post-service records documenting a diagnosis of or treatment for shin splints.  As such, the diagnosis was history of shin splints, resolved in relation to the shins.  The Veteran's shin pain was more likely pain from the knees that was diffuse and not a separation condition of the shins.

The Board finds problems with this examination.  First, the Veteran apparently had shin splints during service.  See May 2020 STR - Medical.  As such, the Veteran would have had familiarity with the symptoms of shin splints.  Additionally, shin splints appear to have the type of symptoms that a lay person could competently describe.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, the examination opinion apparently did not consider or address the Veteran's report of current shin splint symptoms.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  

Second, the Veteran apparently reported a continuity of shin symptoms ever since service and the use of over-the-counter medication and heat for self-treatment.  However, the examination opinion apparently did not consider or address those reports and did not provide an adequate rationale as to why there had not been a continuity of symptoms since service.  Specifically, the examination opinion did not explain why, if shin symptoms had continued ever since service, as reported by the Veteran, such would be expected to be mentioned in post-service medical records if the Veteran was able to self-treat the shin problems.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.    

Third, the examination opinion apparently summarily stated that the Veteran's shin pain was more likely pain from the knees that was diffuse without providing any rationale as to why this was so.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  

Fourth, the Veteran has a conceded current disability of a history of shin splints.  See March 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative.  The Veteran is service connected for right knee osteoarthritis, limitation of extension, as well as right knee instability.  See March 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet.  The examination opinion appears to suggest that the Veteran's conceded current disability of a history of shin splints may be related to the Veteran's service-connected right knee disabilities.  However, no medical opinion has been provided to address a potential relationship.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509 (1998).  

Therefore, a remand is also needed for a VA medical opinion. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Make a formal finding for all periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and/or INACDUTRA in terms of specific dates.  If necessary, make a request to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS).  Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.  If this cannot be accomplished, provide an explanation.    

2. Schedule an appropriate VA medical opinion for the Veteran's feet claim.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Inform the examiner that "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Following a review of the claims file and a copy of this remand, the examiner is requested to furnish an opinion with respect to the following:

(A) Identify all disabilities related to the evidence appearing to show degenerative changes of the first metatarsophalangeal joints and small bilateral plantar calcaneal spurs.  

(B) For each identified disability from question (A), is it at least as likely as not that such had its onset in or is otherwise related to a period of active-duty service, a disease or injury that occurred during a verified period of ACDUTRA, and/or an injury that occurred during a verified period of INACDUTRA?  If yes, which ones?

(C) If it is determined that any of the identified disabilities from question (A) were not etiologically related to a verified period of service, the examiner must determine whether such disability clearly and unmistakably preexisted any period of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and/or INACDUTRA, and whether there is clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, or undebatable) evidence that the preexisting disability was not aggravated beyond the natural progression of the condition by service.

(D) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was aggravated beyond its natural progression by one or more periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and/or INACDUTRA?  If yes, which ones?

Service connection on an aggravation basis is warranted for any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence.  Secondary service connection may be granted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability.

A complete rationale for all opinions offered should be provided.  Address the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  Address the relevant evidence further up in this remand.

All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation stating why.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is due to the limits of the medical community's knowledge or due to the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

3. Schedule an appropriate VA medical opinion for the Veteran's left ankle claim.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Inform the examiner that "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Following a review of the claims file and a copy of this remand, the examiner is requested to furnish an opinion with respect to the following:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the left ankle sprain disability had its onset in or is otherwise related to a period of active-duty service, a disease or injury that occurred during a verified period of ACDUTRA, and/or an injury that occurred during a verified period of INACDUTRA?  If yes, which ones?

(B) If it is determined that the left ankle sprain disability is not etiologically related to a verified period of service, the examiner must determine whether such disability clearly and unmistakably preexisted any period of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and/or INACDUTRA, and whether there is clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, or undebatable) evidence that the preexisting disability was not aggravated beyond the natural progression of the condition by service.

Service connection on an aggravation basis is warranted for any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence.  Secondary service connection may be granted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability.

A complete rationale for all opinions offered should be provided.  Address the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  Address the relevant evidence further up in this remand.

All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation stating why.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is due to the limits of the medical community's knowledge or due to the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

4. Schedule an appropriate VA medical opinion for the Veteran's bilateral shin claim.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Inform the examiner that "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Following a review of the claims file and a copy of this remand, the examiner is requested to furnish an opinion with respect to the following:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the history of shin splints disability had its onset in or is otherwise related to a period of active-duty service, a disease or injury that occurred during a verified period of ACDUTRA, and/or an injury that occurred during a verified period of INACDUTRA?  If yes, which ones?

(B) If it is determined that the history of shin splints disability is not etiologically related to a verified period of service, the examiner must determine whether such disability clearly and unmistakably preexisted any period of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and/or INACDUTRA, and whether there is clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, or undebatable) evidence that the preexisting disability was not aggravated beyond the natural progression of the condition by service.

Service connection on an aggravation basis is warranted for any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence.  Secondary service connection may be granted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability.

(C) Is it at least as likely as not that the history of shin splints disability was due to or caused by the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis, limitation of extension, and/or right knee instability disabilities?  If yes, which ones?

(D) Is it at least as likely as not that the history of shin splints disability has been aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right knee osteoarthritis, limitation of extension, and/or right knee instability disabilities?  If yes, which ones?  For aggravation, state whether there has been a medically ascertainable increase in disability regardless of permanence.  Any increase in disability should be described in terms of diagnosis, severity, and duration.  The permanence of the aggravation is not at issue.  

A complete rationale for all opinions offered should be provided.  Address the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  Address the relevant evidence further up in this remand.

All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation stating why.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is due to the limits of the medical community's knowledge or due to the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

J. Abrams

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dougan, Adam T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.