Citation Nr: A25030382
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240720-457105
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Since the August 2019 rating decision, new evidence has been received that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5104, 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.160 (d), 3.2500, 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1976 to March 1980.

The Veteran's claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea was denied in an August 2019 rating decision. The Veteran filed a supplemental claim for this issue in June 2023, which was denied as having failed to provide new and relevant evidence in March 2024. 

In July 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement with the March 2024 rating decision and selected the Direct Review docket. Under the Direct Review Lane, the Board reviews the claims based on the evidence of record available to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the decision; therefore, the Board will only consider the evidence received as of the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

New and Relevant Evidence

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is received with respect to a supplemental claim. New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim. Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. The new and relevant standard will not impose a higher evidentiary threshold than the previous new and material evidence standard under § 3.156(a). 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim. For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (b).

1. New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.

The AOJ previously considered and denied the Veteran's claim for obstructive sleep apnea in an August 2019 rating decision. The AOJ found that no link existed between his obstructive sleep apnea and any in-service event or injury. 

Subsequent to the August 2019 rating decision, the Veteran submitted a lay statement provided by his sister, A.J.M. The Veteran's sister stated that after her brother's return from active service in 1980 she noticed that his "sleep habits had drastically changed." She stated that she was living with him and their parents and that she noticed "that he snored loudly, which he had never done before, and it seemed sometimes he would hold his breath while he was snoring." She also stated that the Veteran would be tired during the day. This evidence was not previously part of the record before the AOJ and tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in his claim for sleep apnea. Therefore, the Board finds that this evidence is both new and relevant, and readjudication of the previously denied claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran has contended that his sleep apnea is due to his period of active service or secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. See June 2019 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea during the appeal period. See March 2024 rating decision. 

While the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2021 and a medical opinion regarding secondary service connection was obtained, a medical opinion regarding direct service connection is not associated with the claims file. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to attest to symptoms of snoring that began during active service. Additionally, based upon the lay statement provided by the Veteran's sister that she noted his loud snoring and that the Veteran "seeming to hold his breath while he was snoring" in 1980 after returning from active service, the Board finds that a medical opinion regarding direct service connection should be obtained prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim. 

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that additional development is required to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. As such, the Board finds that this issue must be remanded to obtain a new medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea. The claims file must be made available to the examiner and the examiner must report review of the claims file. Examination of the Veteran is not necessary, unless deemed so by the examiner.

The examiner is asked to provide the following opinion:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's current sleep apnea was incurred in, or otherwise caused by, any incident of his active service. The clinician is asked to consider and discuss the June 2022 statement provided by the Veteran's sister, A.J.M.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history. Such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions. Lay statements cannot be disregarded solely due to lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided.

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P.M. Johnson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.