Citation Nr: A25030868
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-408697
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for dyshidrotic eczema skin rash is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's dyshidrotic eczema skin rash, which is not attributed to a known etiological cause, is presumptively related to his service in Southwest Asia.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for dyshidrotic eczema skin rash have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2007 to April 2008.  

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 0996 Request for Higher Level Review (HLR) to an August 2022 rating decision under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  An error was discovered on November 14, 2022, in the duty to assist to gather evidence in support of the Veteran's claim.  As such, the Veteran's claim was moved to the supplemental review lane on November 14, 2022, and additional development was conducted.  The subsequent decision was rendered in a December 2023 rating decision.  

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, and requested the AMA direct docket review.  Under the rules of the AMA, the Board's review is limited to the evidence associated with the claims file as of the date of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Generally, service connection requires three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Sheddon v. Principi, 381 F.3d. 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In deciding the Veteran's claim, the VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event; or whether the persuasive evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.S. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.

Entitlement to service connection for dyshidrotic eczema skin rash.

The Veteran contends that his eczema disability is due to military service.

Service connection may be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifested either during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2021. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i). 

The term MUCMI refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii). A multisymptom illness is a MUCMI where either the etiology or pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive. Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383, 389-90 (2018). A multisymptom illness is not a MUCMI where both the etiology and the pathophysiology of the illness are partially understood. Id. The determination of whether a MUCMI is "medically unexplained," that is, the etiology and pathophysiology of the multisymptom illness, must be particular to the claimant's case. Id. at 291.

Here, the Veteran had active service in Southwest Asia (Iraq) from September 2007 to February 2008 and is thus considered a Persian Gulf veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).

In December 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA medical examination to ascertain the nature and etiology of his skin condition.  While the examiner noted a diagnosis of atopic eczema dermatitis, the examiner also elaborated that it is a diagnosable, but medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness of unknown etiology, but symptoms can be confused with other conditions.  As the examiner found that the condition can be confused with other conditions, that supports the premise that the Veteran's condition is a MUCMI, because it is inconclusive.  The examiner has stated that it is diagnosable, but difficult to explain, which is the equivalent to a MUCMI.  

The Veteran has been consistent throughout his reports that the condition manifested in 2007 when he was in Qatar.  The December 2023 VA medical examiner noted the Veteran's report of onset of the condition in 2007 and that it was an insidious onset with no known cause.  As such, the Board interprets the examiner's notation that the etiology is unknown.    

In November 2021, the Veteran's attorney submitted a private medical opinion on several of the Veteran's medical conditions, including a skin rash.  This private examiner was unable to attribute the signs and symptoms to a known clinical diagnosis.  The private examiner recounted the Veteran's reports of experiencing rash like patches during his military service in Qatar.  However, the private examiner explained that there is a wide range of noncancer health effects that has been observed primarily in animals following exposures by various routes to the air pollutants detected at Kirkuk, including eye and throat irritation, organ weight changes, histopathologic changes like lesions and hyperplasis.  These effects were found in many organs and organ systems including the adrenal gland, blood, lungs, liver, kidney, stomach, spleen, cardiovascular, respiratory, reproductive, and central nervous systems.  Nerve damage, memory loss, impaired learning birth defects, and increased or accelerated mortality was observed following exposure to these toxins.  The private examiner further explained that while the Veteran attributes his skin condition to fungus in his shower barracks, there are possible causes of eczema, to include warm weather and immune system disorders.  The private examiner further explained that Gulf War veterans report a high frequency of skin symptoms, which increase in frequency and severity with age.  Some studies estimate that the prevalence of Gulf War veterans with skin diseases is between 19 percent and 30 percent.  Airborne chemicals can cause and trigger eczema and other skin conditions.  Short term exposure of humans to dioxins may result in skin lesions, such as chloracne and patchy darkening of the skin.  The private examiner further explained that pre-existing eczema and skin rash are disqualifying to military service enlistment.  Moreover, the heat, stress, and irritation of combat service can trigger eczema.  Servicemembers can have a skin reaction to military hazards, or even vaccinations.  The Board interprets the private examiner's rationale as one providing a wide litany of possible causes (i.e., etiology) of skin conditions/rashes, to include eczema, further supporting their inability to attribute the signs and symptoms a known clinical diagnosis.  The private examiner also explained that skin rash can be a response to stress, chemical or biological hazards that can occur during military deployment; the Veteran experiences periodic skin rash that makes him uncomfortable; considering the Veteran's deployment, combat experience, exposure to burn pits and related medical research, it is possible that the Veteran's skin rash is a result of military service (emphasis added).  As such, the private examiner opined the type of rash the Veteran is diagnosed with is consistent with the circumstances and situations of his time in service.  

The Board interprets the private examiner's medical opinion and rationale as speculative, at best.  Hood v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 295, 298-99 (2009) (medical opinion is speculative when it uses equivocal language such as "could" or "might," without any other rationale or supporting data); Polovick v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 48, 54 (2009) (doctor's statement that veteran's brain tumor "may well be" connected to Agent Orange exposure was speculative); Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (use of term "could," without other rationale or supporting data, is speculative); Goss v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 109, 114 (1996) (use of the phrase "could not rule out" was too speculative to establish medical linkage).  Consequently, the Board affords the private examiner's opinion less probative weight.  However, that the private examiner's opinion is speculative reinforces the unknown etiology of the Veteran's eczema.  

Although the December 2023 VA medical examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, even they were unable to attribute the signs and symptoms to a known clinical diagnosis.  Specifically, the examiner opined atypical dermatitis is less likely as not a previous suspected diagnosis that was resolved and current is due to environmental chemicals like soap or allergic skin reactions.  

The Veteran's signs and symptoms have existed from at least 2007, during his military service.  He is competent to describe these symptoms as they are observable to him and the Board finds his statements to be credible, given the consistency with which he had reported them. Thus, they are considered chronic under the regulatory definition. 

As there is no affirmative evidence to the contrary, see 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (b), the Veteran's signs and symptoms are considered an undiagnosed illness and presumptive service connection is warranted.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.