Citation Nr: A25030772
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-449036
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus, claimed as flat foot, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active service from July 2011 to July 2015 

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision Williams v. McDonough regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has elapsed.  However, since the Board is not adjudicating the claims herein, there is no prejudice in proceeding before this time period expires.

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

The Board notes that in the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made two favorable findings with respect to this issue.  First, that the Veteran has a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus.  Second, that the Veteran had an in-service event or injury, as foot pain is noted in his separation medical examination.  The Board will accept these findings as favorable to the Veteran in the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral pes planus.  The VA examiner provided an unfavorable direct medical nexus opinion, indicating that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was incurred in military service as his May 2055 separation examination indicates the Veteran had normal arches.  A medical addendum opinion was provided by the VA examiner in April 2024.  The examiner was asked to address the note of pain in the right foot and foot trouble status post stabbing in April 2012, as documented in the Veteran's separation examination.  The examiner again provided an unfavorable medical opinion, stating that the April 2012 foot trouble post stabbing is unrelated to bilateral pes planus.  

While the Board appreciates the medical opinions provided, the VA examiner, in both the March and May 2024 opinions, provided conclusive opinions without supporting rationale.  Further, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements, provided in September 2023 correspondence, that he believes his bilateral pes planus was caused by in-service hiking, including hiking hills, while wearing combat boots.  The Board notes that a medical opinion without clear supporting rationale and based solely on the lack of evidence in service treatment records is inadequate.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

As an adequate rationale was not provided, and the Veteran's lay statements regarding in-serving hiking and combat boots, were not addressed, exposure were not addressed, the medical opinion is inadequate.  Therefore, a remand is required to address this pre-decisional error in the duty to assist.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a VA examiner, to provide an addendum opinion to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral pes planus or other foot disability.  The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the addendum opinion.  The examiner should review the entire claims file and address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus or other foot disability is related to service, to include hiking and the wearing of combat boots.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's lay statements.  The examiner may not dismiss the Veteran's lay statements on the basis that they are not recorded in contemporaneous medical records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  If any of the above issues cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. W. Morgan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.