Citation Nr: A25030263
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-449524
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) as secondary to service-connected hyperthyroidism, and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1984 to June 1990. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied service connection for CFS.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) as secondary to service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder.

The Veteran and his representative seek service connection for CFS as secondary to service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder.  See August 2024 Attorney's Brief.  

Following a review of the record, and as discussed further below, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) error.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional DTA errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In May 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, in which a VA examiner diagnosed CFS.  The examiner then provided a negative medical opinion for secondary service connection.  Specifically, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's CFS is related to his service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease.  As a rationale, the examiner noted that the private examinations of record associate the Veteran's CFS with hypothyroidism, which is "considered a completely different condition" from his service-connected hyperthyroidism.  Thus, the examiner found the Veteran's CFS is less likely than not caused by his service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder.

The Board finds that the VA opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  Based on a review of the medical record, the Veteran is service connected for hyperthyroidism and his Graves' disease and has a current diagnosis of CFS with hypothyroidism.  The Veteran has therefore had shifting periods of hyper- and hypothyroidism.  However, while the VA examiner conceded this fact, he/she failed to discuss how such may impact a possible nexus between the Veteran's CFS and service-connected hyperthyroidism.  Additionally, the VA examiner failed to consider whether the Veteran's insomnia disorder, which is associated with his service-connected hyperthyroidism, caused or aggravated his symptoms of CFS, such as fatigue.  

Remand is thus warranted based on a pre-decisional violation of the duty to assist to afford the Veteran an adequate medical opinion as to whether his current CFS is caused or aggravated by his service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified VA examiner for appropriate medical opinions regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) as secondary to service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinion.  Any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted.  The need for a full, in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Following a review of the claims file, the examiner shall address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's CFS is caused by his service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder?  Please state the facts and medical principles and/or medical literature upon which you base this opinion.

(b.) If the answer to (a) is negative, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's CFS is aggravated by his service-connected hyperthyroidism and Graves' disease, with insomnia disorder?  In this regard, please state upon what facts and medical principles and/or medical literature you base this opinion.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner must specifically consider and discuss the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including March 2023 and January 2024 private examinations; May 2024 VA examination and medical opinion; and August 2024 Attorney's Brief.  The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alexander, Lasheyna T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.