Citation Nr: A25030214
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-437494
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbosacral strain was not manifested by forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

2. The Veteran's left knee disability is characterized by symptomatic removal of the semilunar cartilage of the left knee.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5237.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5259.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from January 1981 to January 1986, from January 1986 to January 1990, from November 1999 to January 2000, from July 20003 to October 2003, and from June 2008 to July 2008.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran was granted service connection for lumbosacral strain and a left knee disability in a November 2022 rating decision and awarded a 10 percent initial rating for each disability. 

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the ratings issued for the lumbosacral strain and left knee disability in the November 2022 rating decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which continued the existing 10 percent ratings for both disabilities.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.

If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. However, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

The Veteran contends that his lumbosacral strain warrants a higher rating. Service connection for lumbosacral strain was granted in a November 2022 rating decision. That rating decision also assigned a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5237 with an effective date of May 2, 2022, the day the VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim. 

As an initial matter, the Board has considered the argument by the Veteran's representative that the Veteran's back disability should instead be evaluated as a muscle disability pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5320 and assigned a higher rating accordingly. In support of this argument, the Veteran's representative cites C.F.R § 4.56(d)(3) and its definition of "moderately severe disability of muscles," arguing that the Veteran's lower back symptoms meet the criteria. However, the Board notes that this same section also defines the type of injury which is properly rated under the muscle disability diagnostic codes: penetrating muscle wounds of varying severities. There is nothing in the medical record to suggest that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is the result of such a wound. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability is properly rated under Diagnostic Code 5237, and the remainder of the Board's analysis will address whether the Veteran is entitled to a higher initial rating under that Diagnostic Code. 

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. 

 A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  

A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  

A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  

Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

Turning to the medical evidence of record, the Veteran began seeking treatment for his back pain with a private chiropractic provider in May 2018. During several visits between May 2018 and February 2019, the provider noted pain and tenderness in the lumbosacral spine. He also noted muscle spasm in the left and right lumbar spine. He reported "mild" range of motion limitations for flexion, extension, right lateral flexion, left lateral flexion, right lateral rotation, and left lateral rotation, but did not include any measurements to quantify these limitations. 

The Veteran was afforded an August 2022 VA examination to determine the nature and severity of his lower and middle back pain. A questionnaire was completed in conjunction with an in-person examination and noted review of the VA e-folder. The Veteran complained of a constant, dull, and aching back pain which is aggravated by lifting, bending, and coughing. The VA examiner observed and recorded range of motion (ROM) of the thoracolumbar spine. A goniometer was used for all joint ROM measurements. The examiner noted that initial ROM measurements were normal. Forward flexion endpoint was 90 degrees. Extension endpoint was 30 degrees. Right and left lateral flexion endpoints were 30 degrees. Right and left lateral rotation endpoints were 30 degrees. The combined initial ROM of the cervical spine was 240 degrees. Passive ROM testing was the same as active ROM. The examiner did not observe any evidence of pain, crepitus, or localized tenderness or pain on palpation. 

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions, and there was no additional loss of function or ROM after the same. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time. However, no procured evidence, to include statements from the Veteran, suggested that there are any significant limitations to functional ability with repeated use over time. The Veteran was not examined during a flare-up and denies flare-ups. The Veteran's muscle strength testing results revealed no muscle atrophy. His reflex and sensory examinations were normal. The examiner found no evidence of localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasms, no evidence of radiculopathy, no ankylosis or other neurological abnormalities, and no intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS). 

The Veteran sought further treatment for his back pain in September and October 2023, where he reported pain while walking, climbing stairs, sleeping, and working. His treatment team discussed possible treatment protocols. However, the Veteran then reported that he would be retiring early from his job due to his back pain and elected to delay treatment to evaluate if retiring from his physically demanding job would improve his pain.  

As an initial matter, the Board considered whether the Veteran is entitled to an updated examination based on the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 supplemental claim decision. A new examination is necessary when the Veteran reports a worsening of symptoms, and the available evidence is too old to adequately evaluate the current state of his condition. Olson v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 480, 482 (1992) (citing Proscelle v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 629, 632 (1992). Here, the evidence before the AOJ does not suggest a worsening. Although the Veteran's October 2023 statement references a more aggressive treatment approach, by November 2023, the medical evidence reveals that the Veteran's back pain has actually "significantly improved" due to his retirement from his physically demanding job. As such, the Board finds that the August 2022 examination is adequate, and an updated examination was not necessary for the AOJ to make a determination on the increased rating claim for lumbosacral strain.

Having reviewed all medical evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted. 

At worst, the Veteran's forward flexion was 90 degrees, and his combined range of motion was 240 degrees. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms, including that he experienced daily pain at his job. However, based on the August 2022 VA examination, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees.  

Additionally, although the private chiropractic provider noted muscle spasm, the August 2022 VA examiner did not, and there is no evidence that any muscle spasm that the Veteran does exhibit is severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour.

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, the Veteran does not have IVDS, and the evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. 

Regarding neurological impairment, the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological abnormality associated with the spine disability. The August 2022 VA examination found no evidence of any neurological abnormalities.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability

The Veteran contends that his left knee disability warrants a higher rating. 

Service connection for "left knee status post meniscus repair" was granted in a November 2022 rating decision. The decision also assigned an initial 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 with an effective date of May 2, 2022, the day the VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim.

The Veteran was afforded an August 2022 VA examination to determine the nature and severity of his left knee disability. A questionnaire was completed in conjunction with an in-person examination and noted review of the VA e-folder. The examiner noted a history of bilateral meniscal tear with bilateral meniscectomy. The Veteran reported pain while walking and working on concrete surfaces. The VA examiner observed and recorded range of motion (ROM) of the left knee joint. A goniometer was used for all joint ROM measurements. The examiner noted that initial ROM measurements were normal. Forward flexion endpoint was 140 degrees. Extension endpoint was 0 degrees. Passive ROM testing was the same as active ROM. The examiner did not observe any evidence of pain, crepitus, or localized tenderness or pain on palpation. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions, and there was no additional loss of function or ROM after the same. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time. The examiner opined that procured evidence, to include statements from the Veteran, suggested that pain significantly limits functional use over time. However, the examiner estimated that the Veteran's range of motion after repeated use over time remained normal, with flexion endpoint 140 degrees and extension endpoint 0 degrees. The Veteran was not examined during a flare-up and denied flare-ups. The examiner found no additional factors contributing to disability. The examiner found no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, subluxation or instability, history of ligament tears, patellar instability, patellar dislocation, shin splints, or other tibial or fibular impairment. The examination did not find any imaging indicating arthritis. The examiner noted the Veteran's history of meniscal tear, meniscectomy, and frequent episodes of joint pain. The examiner described the residuals of the Veteran's meniscectomy as pain and difficulty walking on concrete. 

Joint stability testing was performed, and no joint instability was noted. 

In May and July of 2023, the Veteran's medical treatment records indicate that some physical therapy exercises prescribed for his back conditions seemed to aggravate his knee pain. The record does not contain any other medical treatment evidence for his knee condition for the period on appeal. 

The Veteran also submitted an October 2023 statement, in which he asserted that he sometimes feels a "sharp pain" in his knee while walking up and down stairs, and that he feels like his knee may "give out." He stated that he resolves this by bending his knee a few times and resuming the activity. 

The Board has considered whether an updated examination is warranted based on the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 supplemental claim decision. However, the Veteran does not contend that his knee condition has worsened since the August 2022 examination, nor does the record contain any medical evidence supporting a worsening. As such, the Board finds that the August 2022 examination is adequate, and that the AOJ was not required to obtain a new examination to evaluate the severity of the Veteran's left knee disability. See Olson, 3 Vet. App. at 482.

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 5260. 

DC 5260 provides for the evaluation of limitation of flexion of the knee.  A noncompensable rating is warranted when leg flexion is limited to 60 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is warranted when it is limited to 45 degrees, a 20 percent rating is warranted when it is limited to 30 degrees, and a 30 percent rating is warranted where flexion is limited to 15 degrees.

In assigning this rating, the AOJ noted that the Veteran was found to have full range of motion of the left knee during the August 2022 VA examination. However, because the Veteran experienced painful motion, the AOJ assigned the minimum compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 pursuant to 38 C.F.R § 4.59. 

However, during the August 2022 examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran's knee disability as a prior meniscal tear and meniscectomy. Diagnostic Code 5259 assigns a 10 percent rating for symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage, or meniscus.

Given that the Veteran is noted to have suffered a meniscal tear and undergone a meniscectomy, and that his symptoms of pain and difficulty walking are noted to be residuals of that meniscectomy, rather than any other diagnosis, the Board finds that the more appropriate approach is to rate the Veteran's left knee disability under Diagnostic Code 5259. A 10 percent rating is the maximum schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 5259. As such, there is no basis to award a higher evaluation under this diagnostic code.

The Board has also considered the other Diagnostic Codes pertaining to the knee and leg. Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptomatology for a disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of any other disability. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits paying compensation twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment).

The Board specifically notes that there is no evidence of ankylosis, dislocated, tibia/fibula impairment, or genu recurvatum in the left knee. Therefore, higher or separate ratings are not warranted under Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5262, and 5263, respectively. Because the Veteran's semilunar cartilage was successfully surgically removed, a rating under Diagnostic Code 5258 is also not appropriate. 

Regarding Diagnostic Codes 5260 and 5261, as discussed above, the medical evidence suggests that the Veteran's range of motion on both flexion and extension is normal, even taking into consideration the Veteran's statements regarding repetitive use over time. Therefore, assigning separate ratings based on range of motion measurements is not warranted. Further, assigning a separate rating based only on painful range of motion pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is impermissible because there is no x-ray evidence of arthritis, and in any case would constitute impermissible pyramiding, as the Veteran's pain symptoms are already captured by the rating for symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage. As noted by the August 2022 examiner, the Veteran's painful and difficult walking are residuals of his meniscal tear and meniscectomy, and this symptomatology is properly contemplated by the 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5259.

Finally, regarding Diagnostic Code 5257, the Board finds that there is minimal evidence suggesting that the Veteran suffers from recurrent instability of the left knee. During the August 2022 examination, the Veteran underwent joint stability testing, and the examiner concluded that no instability was present. There is no additional medical evidence suggesting recurrent instability. And while the Veteran's lay reports of feeling that his knee is going to give out while using the stairs may suggest instability, the Board finds that the reported frequency of "every so often" does not reach the level of persistent instability. Additionally, the sensation that the Veteran describes, of needing to bend his knee several times to continue his movement, is likely also contemplated by the 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5259, which contemplates symptoms such as "locking" of the knee. Accordingly, the Board finds that a separate rating under Diagnostic Code 5257 is not warranted.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the Veteran's left knee disability is characterized by symptomatic removal of the semilunar cartilage of the left knee, that a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5259 is therefore warranted, and that separate ratings under other Diagnostic Codes are not warranted. Accordingly, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for his left knee disability.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

The Board finds that the issue of TDIU was reasonably raised by the record as part and parcel of the Veteran's increased rating claims. As such, the Board finds that there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that needs to be remedied. 

During an October 2023 medical appointment with a private provider, the Veteran stated that he intended to retire from his job earlier than expected due to the nature of his work aggravating his back pain. Records from a November 2023 VA medical appointment then indicate that the Veteran did, in fact, retire early at the beginning of that month. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the issue of TDIU was reasonably raised by the record prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. On remand, the AOJ should send the Veteran proper notice, afford him the opportunity to file a formal claim for TDIU, and then adjudicate this matter in the first instance.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran the proper notice that advises him about what is needed to substantiate a claim for a TDIU. In addition, ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Utter, Margaret M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.