Citation Nr: A25030118
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240719-456342
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from June 1986 to April 1995.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

?

Because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for a left knee disability and a right knee disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of these issues on remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

2. Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy the duty to assist an appellant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board remands the claims for service connection for a left knee disability and a right knee disability to correct an error in satisfying VA's duty to assist, as the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran has not been provided a VA examination or medical opinion for the knees. VA's statutory duty to assist includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when the following elements are satisfied: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing an an-service event, injury or disease, or a disease manifesting in accordance with presumptive service connection regulations which would support incurrence or aggravation; (3) an indication that the current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability; and (4) insufficient medical evidence to decide the case. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

?

Here, the McLendon elements are satisfied. First, there is competent evidence of recurrent symptoms of a knee disability.  The Veteran asserts she has pain in her left knee and right knee. See October 2023 Claim.  Further, in a February 2024 VA Examination the Veteran reported having arthritis and receiving steroid injections, rendering her unable to jog. This February 2024 VA Examination also reflects medical diagnoses including "arthritis/sciatica"; however, no specific joint was identified.  Regardless, it suggests the possibility of the presence of a right and/or left knee disability.

Additionally, service treatment records show an in-service injury in which the Veteran hit her right knee on a pallet, which required treatment with medication and use of a cane for several days. See Service Treatment Records, October 1988. The Veteran also asserts she experienced overuse and wear and tear on her knees from running and marching during service. See October 2023 Claim. Thus, the Board finds that the second element is satisfied. There is also at least an indication that the Veteran's current left knee and right knee symptoms may be associated with an in-service injury or event, satisfying the third element. Finally, there is insufficient evidence to decide the case, as no medical opinion has been obtained.

Accordingly, as the McLendon elements are satisfied, VA had a duty to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion based on the evidence at the time of the February 2024 rating decision. Therefore, remand is warranted to correct the error in satisfying VA's duty to assist.

In addition, prior to the February 2024 rating decision, the Veteran reported receiving steroid injections for arthritis. See VA Examination, February 13, 2024. However, there are no VA treatment records or private treatment records relating to the Veteran's left knee or right knee disabilities associated with the claims file. A remand is required to allow VA to obtain any necessary authorization and request treatment records relating to the Veteran's receipt of steroid injections for left knee and/or right knee pain or arthritis. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain treatment records relating to the Veteran's claimed right knee and/or left knee disabilities referenced in the February 2024 VA Examination and associate them with the claims file. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any private medical providers that treat her knee disabilities with steroid injections. Make two requests for the authorized records from any such provider unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile. 

2. Then, arrange for a VA examination and medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left knee and right knee disabilities. 

The examiner should identify all current right and left knee disorders found to be present.

For each identified knee disability, the examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least in approximate balance or nearly equal, if not greater) that the disability had its onset during service or is related to any incident of service. 

In formulating this opinion, the examiner should consider the following:   

(a.) Any treatment records obtained pursuant to directive #1 above.  

(b.) Service treatment records relating to a right knee injury dated October 26, 1988 and October 27, 1988. 

(c.) The Veteran's descriptions of her in-service and post-service knee symptoms. 

(d.) The Veteran's in-service duties, which included running, marching, overuse, and "wear and tear" on her knees.

The examiner must include a complete rationale for all opinions provided.

 

 

P.M. DiLorenzo

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boldt, Allison W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.