Citation Nr: A25031177
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240704-452987
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, including diagnosed posttraumatic disorder (PTSD) and insomnia due to other mental disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served with the Air Force National Guard from July 2002 to January 2005 including periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and periods of inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran is seeking service connection for PTSD.  The rating decision on appeal, while favorably finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with PTSD and insomnia due to other mental disorders, denied the claim on the basis that his alleged stressors could not be corroborated and there was therefore, no link to his active-duty service.  

Initially, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  In the context of Reserve or National Guard service, the term active military, naval, or air service includes active duty, any period of ACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and any period of INACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty.  38 U.S.C. § 101(21), (24); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.6.

As noted above, the Veteran's service personnel records reflect that he served in the Air Force National Guard from July 2002 to January 2005 and that he had periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA from July 2002 to July 2003.  He alleges that his stressors occurred during his boot camp training.

However, there is no indication in the record that the AOJ conducted any development to determine whether the Veteran was on active duty, ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA when his alleged stressors occurred.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required.

In his VA Form 21-0781a, Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD, submitted in June 2023, the Veteran stated that he joined the military after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, and that other military members caused hell in his life because he was originally from the Middle East.  The VA Form 21-0781a provided information that alternative evidence from sources other than service records or evidence of behavior changes may constitute credible supporting evidence of stressor events and provided examples of types of alternative evidence.

In a subsequent June 2023 letter, VA advised the Veteran that the information he had provided regarding his claimed stressors was not detailed enough to verify whether the stressful incident occurred and requested he provide more specific details concerning his stressful events.  October 2023 and December 2023 VA letters informed the Veteran that additional evidence was needed and advised him he could submit statements from individuals having knowledge of his claimed condition.  The Veteran did not respond to any of these letters.  

At his January 2024 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran reported that during his basic training, other service members, including fellow recruits, made death threats against him and that military instructors and supervisors also made racist comments to him.  He reported he was subjected to both middle or grade-school level bullying, in addition to a more constant and vicious level of bullying related to his national origin that involved threatening or harassing behavior.  He indicated that he was prescribed Zoloft during his military service and began to abuse it.  After service he reported he abused Percocet, Xanax, oxycontin and eventually heroin.  He also reported he smoked crack cocaine.  He reported he was sent to rehab and had been substance free since 2015.  He also reported he had been arrested about 15 times after service for stealing, fighting and for driving under the influence.   

VA will not deny a PTSD claim that is based on in-service personal assault/harassment without first advising the claimant that alternative evidence from sources other than his or her service records or evidence of behavior changes may constitute credible supporting evidence of the stressor.  The Veteran should be allowed the opportunity to furnish this type of evidence or advise VA of potential sources of such evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).  In fact, in Bradford v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 200 (2006), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) "unequivocally" provides that VA cannot deny a PTSD claim without first providing the requisite notice discussed above.  Gallegos v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 329, 336-37 (2008); Patton v. West, 12 Vet. App. 272, 281-82 (1999) (noting that the AOJ must send the claimant a "special PTSD personal-assault letter" and questionnaire to assist VA in identifying alternative sources of evidence to establish an in-service stressor).

In this case, although the VA Form 21-0781a provided the Veteran with the necessary notice, the January 2024 VA examination report indicates the Veteran identified possible sources of evidence demonstrating behavior changes that could corroborate his alleged stressors, including treatment records for substance abuse rehabilitation and police records regarding criminal activity.  Thus, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that attempts were not made to assist the Veteran in obtaining this identified evidence and remand is necessary to correct this error.

Finally, a medical opinion may be used to corroborate a personal-assault stressor.  See Menegassi v. Shinseki, 683 F.3d 1379, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2011); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).  Although the January 2024 VA examiner found the Veteran's alleged stressors to be adequate to support a PTSD diagnosis under DSM 5 criteria, he did not address whether there was evidence corroborating whether the personal assault stressor occurred.  Thus, the examiner's opinion is inadequate to determine whether the claimed stressor occurred, and it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that clarification of the opinion regarding whether there was evidence of behavior changes that corroborated whether the Veteran's alleged stressor occurred was not obtained prior to issuance of the February 2024 decision.  Remand is needed to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Verify through official sources, including the Air Force National Guard, the specific dates of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA performed by the Veteran for all periods of his Air Force National Guard service, particularly his period of basic training.  

If any records are unavailable, then a negative reply must be obtained and associated with the claims file, and the appellant must be notified.

2. Send the Veteran a corrective notice letter that complies with 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5) and advises him of specific examples of alternative forms of evidence to corroborate his account of in-service personal assault/harassment and that behavioral changes may constitute credible supporting evidence of the stressor, including the police arrest reports.

3. Ask the Veteran to complete VA Form 21-4142a and VA Form 21-4142 for his complete treatment records for his reported substance abuse rehabilitation treatment and ask him to provide information and any authorization needed to obtain any police records regarding arrests he identified during the January 2024 VA examination.  

Make two requests for any authorized records unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

After completion of the above requested development, forward the Veteran's claims file to the examiner who completed the January 2024 examination, or to another appropriate clinician if that examiner is not available.  The electronic claims file should be provided to the reviewing clinician.  

The reviewing clinician is asked to provide an opinion on the following:

For the stressors identified as Stressor #1 and #3 in the January 2024 VA examination report, discuss whether there is any evidence of behavior changes during or contemporaneously to National Guard service that would be sufficient to indicate that these alleged personal assault type stressors occurred during a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided that addresses the Veteran's reported history as well as the January 2024 VA examination report.  If the clinician cannot provide a requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the clinician must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.  The clinician must indicate whether there was any further need for information or testing necessary to make a determination.  Additionally, the clinician must indicate whether any opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of knowledge in the medical community at large and not those of the particular examiner.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wells-Green, L. J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.