Citation Nr: A25031270
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-462052
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected bilateral plantar fasciitis, rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders, and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome, with obesity as an intermediate step is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis, rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders, and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome has been established based on, in relevant part, pain/painful motion.

Limitations associated with the bilateral plantar fasciitis, rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders, and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome caused the Veteran's weight gain and obesity.

The Veteran's OSA would not have occurred but for the Veteran's weight gain and obesity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA, secondary to service-connected bilateral plantar fasciitis, rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders, and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome, with obesity as an intermediate step, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from September 1995 to June 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran timely filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and selected the Direct Review docket.

In selecting the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

?

Service Connection for OSA as Secondary to Service-Connected Bilateral Plantar Fasciitis, Rotator Cuff Tendonitis, Left and Right Shoulders and Lumbosacral Strain with Degenerative Arthritis of the Spine and Intervertebral Disc Syndrome with Obesity as an Intermediate Step

The Board finds for the following reasons that the Veteran has established service connection for OSA as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral plantar fasciitis and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome with obesity as an intermediate step. 

Establishing service connection on a direct basis generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show the following three elements: (1) a current disability that is not already service-connected, (2) at least one service-connected disability, and (3) evidence that the non-service-connected disability is either (a) proximately due to or the result of a service connected disability (causation) or (b) has an increase in severity that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability (aggravation). 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Additionally, although obesity is not a disability for VA compensation purposes, obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). To determine whether obesity is an intermediate step, the following sequential questions must be evaluated: (1) was the Veteran's obesity caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, (2) if yes, was the obesity, or its aggravation, a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's claimed disability, and (3) if yes, would the Veteran not have been diagnosed with the claimed condition but for the obesity, or the aggravation of the obesity. VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017); Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020); Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241 (2021). If the questions are all answered in the affirmative, then secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step will be established.

The Veteran and his representative contend that the Veteran's OSA was caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome (back condition), rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders (shoulder condition), and bilateral plantar fasciitis (foot condition) thereby warranting service connection on a secondary basis. See August 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, they argue that the Veteran's service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions caused the Veteran's obesity which precipitated the Veteran's OSA.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran initially sought service connection for his back, shoulder and foot conditions in May 2019 followed by the claim associated with the appeal in March 2022. See March 2022 VA 21-526EZ.  In July 2019, the Veteran was granted service connection for his foot condition based on pain and extreme tenderness not improved by orthopedic shoe or appliance. See July 2019 Rating Decision. The Veteran was also granted service connection for his shoulder condition based on painful motion and back condition based on range of motion limitations and painful motion.

Pertinent to the Veteran's claim, he carries diagnoses of OSA, bilateral plantar fasciitis (foot condition), rotator cuff tendonitis, left and right shoulders (shoulder condition), and lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine and intervertebral disc syndrome (back condition). VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran is coded as "overweight" and had a body mass index between 40 and 41 prior to the decision on appeal. See May 2023 VAMC Other Output/Reports.

According to the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs), in January 2001, the Veteran reported left shoulder pain for less than 30 days incurred after his December 2000 physical training test. See June 2007 STR - Medical. The Veteran stated that the pain had not improved with rest and worsened with pushups and lifting his tool bag. The Veteran was subsequently diagnosed with possible subacromial bursitis versus impingement and placed on a profile. At the time of the injury, the Veteran's weight was recorded as 195 pounds. No further information regarding the Veteran's left shoulder injury was recorded. In August 2002, the Veteran reported to a follow-up appointment related to a June 2002 right shoulder bursitis injury noted as "resolved" however, was advised to avoid shoulder press activities as it would continue to cause shoulder problems; the weight recorded at the time of the appointment was 219.2 pounds. See May 2019 STR - Medical. Information related to the June 2002 injury is not recorded however, it is evident that an injury occurred as the note indicates the Veteran's engagement in physical therapy and placement on a profile since June 2002. In April 2004, the Veteran complained of lower back pain in which a mild degrative disc disease was considered probable. See June 2007 STR - Medical. The Veteran was provided a referral to physical therapy for his back and also placed on a two-week profile that limited his activity to walking at his own pace. In February 2005, the Veteran reported a historical on-the-job injury within the past year in which he injured his back and was placed on a light duty profile for six nonconsecutive weeks. In April 2005, the Veteran was referred to and attended an overweight management program (OWP) as his weight significantly increased to 230 pounds. In June 2005, the Veteran's performance evaluation for the period June 2004 to May 2005 revealed the Veteran's weight as 232 pounds with a notation that the Veteran's body fat content exceeded standards. See May 2019 DPRIS Response. Performance evaluations for June 2005 to May 2006 and June 2006 to November 2006, showed the Veteran's weight, measured in March 2006, as reduced to pre-2005 weight and noted an improved physical activity based on weight measurements. In September 2006, the Veteran attended an annual health physical and reported job-related right foot planter fasciitis over the past year in which he was placed on a 30-day light duty profile. In January 2007, the Veteran reported bottom right foot pain beginning four to five months prior. The provider subsequently diagnosed the Veteran with plantar fasciitis right and referred the Veteran for orthotics. See June 2007 STR - Medical. In March 2007, the Veteran completed a report of medical history for separation that noted significant weight gain and foot and shoulder issues. Following, the Veteran underwent a separation examination in which the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with, in pertinent part, obesity (weighing 236 pounds), intermittent shoulder pain (bursitis), and plantar fasciitis. The Board finds that, while the Veteran's weight fluctuated between 2001 through 2007, the evidence suggests that the onset of the Veteran's back, shoulder, and foot conditions, had relevant impact on the Veteran's weight, which showed to increase based on activity limitations (profiles).

In relation to the Veteran's experiences, the Veteran reported that due to his service-connected back, shoulder, and foot conditions, he is less able to exercise, unable to sleep on his side, and has difficulty falling and remaining asleep. The Veteran reported weight increases due to said conditions. Related to the back condition, the Veteran reported increased pain as aching, pulling, and burning that worsens with prolonged standing, sitting, using stairs, yard work, house cleaning, and lifting or carrying. See May 2023 VA 21-4138. Related to the foot condition, the Veteran reported increased uneven stance and pain that is exacerbated by prolonged standing or walking and running. See June 2019 C&P Exam. See also July 2023 VA 21-4138. Related to the shoulder condition, the Veteran reported daily moderate symptoms including weekly pain and stiffness limiting his ability to lift, carry, or engage in overhead activities. See June 2019 C&P Exam.

In June 2019, the Veteran underwent VA examinations to assess the nature and etiology of his foot, shoulder, and back conditions. See June 2019 C&P Exam. During the examination, the Veteran reported a gradual onset of the conditions in service due to rigorous training and work activities. Due to the conditions, the Veteran experiences moderate symptoms causing difficulty with recreational, sports, exercise, and work-related activities. Specific to the foot, the Veteran reported, and examiner endorsed heel pain impacting the Veteran's ability to stand or walk for prolonged periods of time and run. Specific to the Veteran's back, the Veteran reported, and examiner endorsed pain, stiffness, and weakness causing functional loss in the Veteran's ability to walk or stand for prolonged periods of time, lift or carry, and bike. Specific to the shoulder condition, the Veteran reported, and examiner endorsed, pain and stiffness that limited the Veteran's ability to lift, carry, or engage in overhead activities.

The Board finds the June 2019 VA examinations as highly probative as to the assessment of the Veteran's pain associated with the foot, shoulder, and back conditions, to include the impact on daily functioning.

In April 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his OSA. See April 2022 C&P Exam. The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of OSA and opined that the condition was less likely than not directly caused by service. The examiner stated that while the Veteran's severe OSA may suggest an onset in service, the absence of in-service complaints of sleep apnea-related symptoms suggested a lesser likelihood of in-service development. Additionally, the examiner noted that though the Veteran provided spousal and buddy statements indicating observable loud snoring, the examiner did not find this solitary symptom as an affirmative indicator that the Veteran OSA had onset in service. Instead, the examiner found a higher likelihood of alternative etiologies as the probable contributor to the development of the Veteran's OSA. The examiner further explained that the Veteran was obese at the time of separation, gained approximately 40 pounds post-separation, and that obesity and aging are major contributors in the development of OSA. While not explicitly stated, the examiner's statements strongly suggested that the Veteran's weight gain/obesity and age caused the Veteran's OSA.

The Board finds the April 2022 VA examination probative as to a probable cause of the Veteran's OSA as it relates to obesity's role in the development of the Veteran's OSA.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical evaluation and opinion that provided a positive nexus opinion as to the Veteran's obesity in relation to OSA and service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions. See May 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. During the examination, the Veteran reported gaining 100 pounds due to inactivity associated with his service-connected conditions that causes difficulty sleeping, difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep, and an inability to sleep on his side. The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of OSA and associated symptomatology including persistent daytime hypersomnolence, snoring, apneic episodes, trouble falling/staying asleep, insomnia, fatigue, headaches, and poor concentration/difficulty completing tasks.

The examiner opined that (1) the Veteran's weight gain/obesity is at least likely as not caused by the Veteran's service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions; (2) the OSA is at least likely as not aggravated by weight gain/obesity from the Veteran's service-connected conditions; and (3) it is at least likely as not that without weight gain/obesity, OSA would not have occurred. First, the examiner stated that the Veteran's progressive weight gain coincided chronologically with the Veteran's service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions. They further explained that due to the persistent pain, the Veteran was unable to engage in the same level of activity as prior to the conditions thereby progressing his weight gain. The examiner cited to a study that found weight gain occurs as secondary to more sedentary lifestyle related to joint pain, knee stiffness, and muscle weakness. Next, the examiner cited to a study concerning the effects of chronic musculoskeletal pain on sleep which found a link between chronic pain and sleep disturbances such as difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep, and causing a less restful sleep. The study further stated that pain causes sleep disturbances and sleep disturbances intensifies pain. Next, the examiner cited to studies concerning the pathophysiology of sleep disturbances on obesity which found that chronic partial sleep loss may increase the risk of obesity and weight gain. Lastly, the examiner cited to studies that show weight gain and obesity as a major/leading risk factor associated with OSA.

The Board finds the May 2023 private medical opinion highly probative as conclusions drawn are supported by medical evidence, to include the evidence of record, and provided intuitive links pertinent to the Veteran's specific conditions.

Utilizing the evidence of record, the Board finds the Veteran has shown that his obesity acts as an intermediate step to demonstrate OSA as secondary to the service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions. First, the Veteran has demonstrated that his weight gain and resultant obesity was caused by the service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions. Specifically, the Veteran showed in-service weight gain associated with his foot, shoulder, and back conditions, self-reported symptomatology impacting his ability to walk, bike, run, lift, carry, and engage in overhead activities, and follow recommendations as to his activity levels recommended by treatment providers in managing weight. The limitations associated with the Veteran's ability to engage in daily life functions including walking, standing, running, biking, lifting, carrying, and engaging in overhead activities were also endorsed by the July 2019 examiner. Next, the Veteran has demonstrated that his obesity was a substantial factor in causing OSA. Specifically, medical research cited by the private medical examiner indicated the major role weight gain and obesity have on the development of OSA; such development was shown to coincide with the stages of the Veteran's OSA. Additionally, the April 2022 VA examiner endorsed this same medical connection when rendering their opinion. Lastly, the Veteran's condition would not have been diagnosed but for the Veteran's weight gain and obesity. Such conclusion was suggested by the April 2022 VA examiner and endorsed by the May 2023 private medical examiner.

Overall, the evidence overwhelmingly supports that the Veteran's service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions caused the Veteran's obesity which subsequently caused OSA. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to the service-connected foot, shoulder, and back conditions with obesity as an intermediate step. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim is granted.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Klemm-Kafel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.