Citation Nr: A25031618
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-450459
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for epidermoid cyst is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for insertional achilles tendinosis with hypertrophic ossifications is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic (extension) is remanded

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder (including degenerative arthritis of the spine) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right leg condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1984 to August 1987, December 1990 to May 1991, July 2000 to March 2001, January 2002 to December 2002, and May 2007 to September 2008.  He had additional periods of service with the Army Reserve.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of rating decisions in August 2023 and September 2023 issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The Veteran appealed those decisions by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), in June 2024.  He chose the direct review docket.  This means that the evidentiary review period closed at the time of the initial decisions on appeal.  The Board docketed the appeal in July 2024.

VA regulations require that the Board contact an appellant and request clarification if the Board cannot identify which review option an appellant intends to select. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).  A NOD may be unclear if an appellant attaches evidence to a NOD indicating that the appellant is seeking Direct Review, as evidence submitted along with a NOD may not be considered by the Board under that review option. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).

In the instant appeal, the Veteran wrote several arguments on his VA Form 10182.  He stated, among other things, that he believed he met the criteria for higher ratings for his ankle and knee disorders, and that the AOJ rater did not consider relevant evidence in his claim for PTSD.  These contentions are posited as errors of application of the law and are properly before the Board. The present appeal is factually distinguishable from Edwards, and the Board can proceed with a decision without clarifying the Veteran's intent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).

The Veteran submitted another VA Form 10182 in August 2024.  He listed many of the same issues as he had on his first 10182 in June 2024, but this time, he checked the evidence submission docket.  He included statements from family members of their recollections and testimony regarding his symptoms.   However, he did not sign the VA Form 10182.  Because the Veteran did not sign the form, the Board may not legally accept it as a valid request to switch dockets.  The Board may not consider the statements provided as they were received outside of an evidence review window.  Yet, the Board is remanding these claims for further development. This additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the re-adjudication.

The Veteran claimed service connection specifically for PTSD.  Applicable law allows VA to broadly interpret a claim based on the functional impairment attributed to the disease as opposed to a specific diagnosis named on a claims form.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Accordingly, the Board has reframed the issue on appeal to broadly encompass all potential diagnoses of an acquired psychiatric disorder (to include PTSD).

Remand Analysis - All Claims

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board finds that the AOJ erred by not obtaining the Veteran's complete VA treatment records, including from the Knoxville VA outpatient clinic (CBOC), prior to the initial decisions.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c).  

The Veteran reported that he was treated by the Knoxville CBOC for PTSD on his application for service connection in May 2023.  He later stated that he was diagnosed with PTSD by a doctor (Dr. S.) and that he could not understand why the claim had been denied.  The Board cannot locate these records in the claims file.  There are records from the VAMC in Mountain Home, the clinic in Knoxville, and the Downtown West VA clinic, but they do not show the treatment that the Veteran reported having with Dr. S.  It appears that the Veteran's complete VA medical records were not associated with the claims file before the initial decisions.  As the existence of a present diagnosis of PTSD and right leg condition and the severity of his left knee, left ankle, rhinitis, sinusitis, and epidermoid cyst were at issue, the Board cannot conclude that the error was harmless.  Remand to obtain outstanding VA medical records is necessary. 

The AOJ also failed to get adequate VA medical opinions prior to the initial rating decision regarding the left ankle and left knee.  The Veteran reported that he takes 400mg of Advil as needed for his left ankle and knee.  The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently clarified that the holding in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), which requires VA to discount the ameliorative effects of medication when rating disabilities when it is not expressly contemplated by the rating schedule, applies to musculoskeletal claims.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (12 Mar 2025).  The AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion addressing the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's Advil on his left ankle and left knee prior to the initial decision at issue on appeal.  Remand is needed for an addendum medical opinion.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d). 

Finally, in remanding these matters, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record.  Such findings will be made when (or if) these matters return to the Board.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain all of the Veteran's outstanding VA medical records, to include treatment for PTSD with Dr. S. at the Knoxville CBOC.  Document all development with respect to this directive in the claims file.

2. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the severity of the Veteran's functional loss without the ameliorative effects of medication for his left knee and left ankle disabilities.  An in-person exam may be scheduled if deemed medically necessary by the clinician.  The clinician is asked to opine as follows:

Estimate the Veteran's functional loss (expressed in degrees of lost range of motion) of the left knee and left ankle if the ameliorative effects of his 400mg of Advil taken as needed were removed.

If such an estimate cannot be provided, the examiner must indicate that he or she has considered all procurable and assembled data, and that the inability to provide an estimate results from limitations in the knowledge of the medical community at large, and not limitations of his or her personal knowledge.

 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Reed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.