Citation Nr: A25031815
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-444613
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal for a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder, to include a separate rating for functional neurological disorder (FND), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2009 to August 2009, July 2010 to October 2010, and June 2012 to October 2012. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot, by law, be considered by the Board as evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. The appeal for a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder, to include a separate rating for FND, is remanded.

The issue of an increased rating for major depression, more accurately addressed as an appeal for a separate rating for FND, is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a May 2024 medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's FND is a separate and distinct disorder capable of a separate rating. However, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's FND is a separate and distinct disorder capable of a separate rating. Specifically, the examiner recites evidence within the record and simply makes a conclusion about why the Veteran's FND is only secondary to major depression. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning). The fact that the Veteran's FND is secondary to MDD does not explain why it cannot be rated separately. Accordingly, a remand for a new VA examination and medical opinion is required. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for an examination of the Veteran to assess the current severity of his service-connected major depression disorder (MDD) with functional neurological disorder (FND). The examiner must review the entire record (including this remand) in conjunction with the examination and note such review was conducted. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability(ies) and report all associated signs and symptoms. PLEASE REPORT symptoms and severity for MDD and symptoms and severity for FND SEPARATELY. If this is not possible because the symptoms overlap and are not distinguishable, please indicate this is so and explain why it is not possible to assign symptoms to each disability separately.

To be specific, the question is NOT whether the Veteran's FND is caused by or secondary to the Veteran's MDD. Instead, the KEY QUESTION OF THIS EXAMINATION is: Based on the examination of the Veteran and review of the evidence within the record, is the Veteran's FND a disability that is separate and distinct in a way that means the FND symptoms and the impairment those symptoms cause are not adequately assessed by the questions on a standard disability benefits questionnaire for psychiatric symptoms? (If that is the case, then VA will need to consider assigning a separate disability rating for the FND instead of continuing to assess the disabilities in combination.)

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to provide information about observable symptoms and events. The examiner should assume, for the purposes of the opinions, that the Veteran's reports are both accurate and credible.

A detailed explanation (rationale) is required for all opinions provided. By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Williams, Michael E. (BVA)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.