Citation Nr: A25031220
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-470014
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent sleep disability to include obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from April 2010 to April 2016.

In September 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent sleep disability to include obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection for a recurrent sleep disability is 

 

warranted as the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service connected depressive disorder and associated weight gain. 

Service connection may be granted for recurrent disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Service connection shall be granted on a secondary basis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a) where it is demonstrated that a service-connected disorder has aggravated a nonservice connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Service connection has been established for persistent depressive disorder with mixed features, major depressive episodes, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; migraine headaches with orgasmic cephalgia; irritable bowel syndrome; left shoulder rotator cuff tendinitis and strain residuals; tinnitus; allergic rhinitis, and hypertension.  

Under the obesity-intermediate step theory predicated on aggravation, consideration must be taken as to (1) whether the service-connected disability caused a veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the claimed disability may be service connected on a secondary basis. Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  

The Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991). 

An April 2023 evaluation from Z. Morcos, M.D., states that "[i]t is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the Veteran's weight gain is due to their service connected condition of depression disorder, and that overweight condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current obstructive sleep apnea."  

VA's duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991).  

The record does not reflect that the Veteran was afforded a sleep study.  That is a pre decisional error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA sleep disorders examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the nature of any identified recurrent sleep disability and obesity and the relationship between such disabilities, active service, and the service-connected disabilities.  The Veteran should be afforded a sleep study.  The examiner must review the record, including all submitted medical articles.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all recurrent sleep disabilities and obesity found.  If a recurrent sleep disability and/or obesity is not diagnosed, the examiner should specifically state that fact.  

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any identified recurrent sleep disability, including sleep apnea, had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service.  

(c.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any identified recurrent sleep disability, to include sleep apnea, is due to, or the result of the service connected disabilities and/or any obesity associated with the service connected disabilities.  

(d) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any identified recurrent sleep disability, to include sleep apnea, has been aggravated by the service connected disabilities and any obesity associated with the service connected disabilities.  

r. 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Macek, M. A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.