Citation Nr: A25031955
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240831-469311
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a sinus condition to include snoring (sinus disability) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1981 to May 2001. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability, most recently addressed in a July 2018 rating decision.  See June 2023 VA Form 20-0995.  In November 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  See November 2023 Rating Decision.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his sinus disability is due to his in-service toxic exposure.  See October 2024 Appellate Brief.  He asserts that he was exposed to the toxins that caused his sinus disability while stationed overseas and at Fort McClellan, Alabama.  See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his sinus disability began in service.  See April 2014 Notice of Disagreement (NOD).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), remands are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  In the present appeal, two pre-decisional duty to assist errors have occurred because (a) VA has not fully complied with its duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining his service treatment records (STRs), and (b) no adequate medical opinion has been obtained.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Alternatively, presumptive service connection may be established for Veterans who were exposed to burn pits.  The applicable regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, lists chronic sinusitis as a disease for Veterans with a qualifying period of service, which means that it is a disease that shall be service connected even though there is no evidence of such disease during the veteran's military service.

However, the Veteran does not meet the conditions set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(5) that are necessary for that presumption to apply.  See Military Personnel Records.  That is, the Veteran did not have a qualifying period of service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War (meaning, in Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above those locations from the period beginning August 2, 1990), nor did the Veteran have a qualifying period of service in Afghanistan, Syria, Djibouti, or Uzbekistan on or after September 19, 2001, during the Persian Gulf War.  Here, the Veteran's foreign service was in Germany, which does not qualify him for presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.  See Military Personnel Records.

Further, under the AMA, the Board is bound by earlier in time findings of fact that are favorable to the appellant.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Favorable findings from the November 2023 decision include that the Veteran (1) has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and a deviated septum; and (2) the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) in service.  See November 2023 Rating Decision.

For Veterans with participation in a TERA, an adequate nexus opinion related to the Veteran's TERA(s) must be obtained.  38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(2).  In rendering a TERA opinion, the examiner must consider: the (1) total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (2) the "synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran."  Id.  In the present appeal, no adequate TERA opinion has been obtained for the reasons explained below.

Turning to the evidence of record, January 2009 correspondence from VA states that the Veteran's STRs were associated with his claims file following his assertion that the RO in Muskogee had his records.  See January 2009 Congressional Correspondence.  After notification from VA that his STRs could not be obtained and VA's request that he submit his STRs or other medical evidence to support his claim, the Veteran submitted his STRs in January 2009.  See January 2009 Correspondence.  However, in May 2014, VA made another request for the Veteran's STRs.  See May 2014 SF 180 Request Pertaining to Military Records.  It is unclear whether any response to that request was received.  While VA has the Veteran's STRs that he submitted in January 2009 and his STRs dated June 2001 that are associated with his claims file, the Veteran, as explained further below, claimed that certain medical records on certain dates reflect his sinus disability in service.  As records from those dates do not reflect a sinus disability, doubt remains as to whether VA has fully complied with its duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining his service treatment records.

The STRs associated with the Veteran's claims file at this time contain no complaints of a sinus disability or related symptoms.  See STRs.  However, the Veteran's STRs reflect that he reported frequent or severe headaches. Id. 

As discussed, the Veteran asserts that his STRs show that he had a sinus disability in service, pointing to specific records from June 16, 1994, April 2001, and October 7, 2001.  See April 2014 NOD.  However, those specific records do not contain evidence of a sinus condition in service.  First, the only medical records from June 16, 1994 pertain to a laceration on the Veteran's upper lip.  See June 1994 STR.  Likewise, no STRs from April 2001 show complaint or treatment for a sinus disability.  Finally, while the October 7, 2001 record shows that the Veteran reported "sinus pain/pressure," that record is from after he left service.  See October 2001 Treatment Record.

Private treatment records show multiple instances of sinus-related complaints and treatment.  In an August 2005 private treatment record, the Veteran reported congestion and headaches.  Likewise, the Veteran complained of sinus problems in March 2009.  In April 2009, the Veteran reported that he had frontal sinus pain, pressure, pressure across the nose and left-mid face for fifteen years.  He stated that he had a frontal headache about every ten days.  However, the treatment record reflected that he had sinusitis for the first time in the prior month.  The Veteran underwent a septoplasty in September 2009.  Overall, throughout his private treatment records, the Veteran consistently complained of sinus issues and sinus headaches.  See Private Treatment Records. 

Furthermore, the Veteran's VA treatment records confirmed his diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and show that he continued to have nasal congestion sinus, pain, and morning headaches that he related to his sinus disability.  He was diagnosed with a sinusitis headache in an October 2013 record; on the same day, he reported that he had chronic sinusitis for twenty years.  See VA Treatment Records. 

In an April 2014 lay statement, the Veteran's wife reported that the Veteran continued to snore even after the surgeries on his septum.  See April 2014 Buddy/Lay Statement.

The Veteran's Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) was associated with his claims file in August 2023.  The duration and nature of his exposure was given for each of his exposure groups.  The nature of his toxic exposure was identified as, in relevant part, exposure to lead, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and biological agents.  See August 2023 ILER; see also November 2023 TERA Memorandum. 

Finally, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023.  He reported that his sinus disability began in 1986 and attributed its onset to in-service TERA.  The VA examiner characterized the Veteran's disability as "pansinusitis (sinus condition to include snoring)" and confirmed his diagnoses of chronic sinusitis and deviated nasal septum.  See November 2023 VA Examination. 

In the accompanying medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's pansinuitis was less likely than not caused by TERA.  As rationale, they stated that the Veteran's ILER did not specify the type of toxic exposure the Veteran experienced, other than generally "Law Enforcement and Howitzer Filed Artillery Training."  They therefore noted that "since the ILER generated does not state any potential chemicals or specific toxic exposures the Veteran would have experienced, [the VA examiner was] unable to associate the claimed pansinusitis to any toxic exposures."  See November 2023 VA Medical Opinion.

As discussed, remands under the AMA are appropriate to correct duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal.  Here, two such errors have occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  First, VA has not satisfied its duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining his STRs; second, no adequate medical opinion has been obtained regarding the Veteran's sinus disability.

Whenever VA attempts to obtain records from a Federal department or agency, the efforts to obtain those records shall continue until the records are obtained unless it is reasonably certain that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain those records would be futile.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A.  In the present appeal, January 2009 correspondence indicated that the Veteran's records could not be obtained, that further attempts were futile, and that the Veteran submitted his own STRs.  See January 2009 Congressional Correspondence.  However, in May 2014, VA made another request for the Veteran's records that does not appear to have been fulfilled; likewise, the Veteran's indication that specific treatment records are evidence of his sinus disability create doubt about whether VA has fully obtained his STRs.  As VA has not continued efforts to obtain the Veteran's records after the renewed May 2014 attempt, a duty to assist error has occurred.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A.

Moreover, where VA obtains an opinion, it must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (stating that as part of the duty to assist claimants, VA must provide a medical examination when such an examination is necessary to decide the claim).  Here, the November 2023 medical opinion is inadequate to decide the appeal. 

A medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is inadequate.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (holding that an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Here, the only medical opinion regarding the Veteran's sinus disability, the November 2023 VA medical opinion, is inadequate because the VA examiner relied on the inaccurate factual premise that the Veteran's ILER did not identify any potential chemicals or specify his toxic exposures.  See November 2023 VA Medical Opinion.  That statement was inaccurate; in fact, the nature of the Veteran's toxic exposure was identified as carbon dioxide, lead, carbon monoxide, and biological agents in his ILER.  See August 2023 ILER.  The Veteran's ILER was associated with his claims file in August 2023, before the November 2023 medical opinion.  Id.  Additionally, a TERA memorandum further identifying the Veteran's exposure as lead, biological agents, and carbon dioxide was associated with his claims file on November 2, 2023, before the November 2023 medical opinion was rendered.  See November 2023 TERA Memorandum.  As the November 2023 medical opinion has no probative value because it is based on inaccurate factual premise, no adequate medical opinion regarding the Veteran's sinus disability has been obtained.

Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to service connection for a sinus disability is remanded to correct the foregoing duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request the Veteran's complete service treatment records.  Document all requests for information as well as responses in the claims file, and associate all records located and obtained within the Veteran's claims file.

2. Obtain an adequate opinion from a VA medical professional with appropriate expertise to determine the onset and etiology of the Veteran's sinus disability.  The entire claims file-including this BVA Remand Decision-must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  If the VA examiner determines that an additional examination of the Veteran is necessary to provide an opinion, such examination should be scheduled; however, the Veteran should not be required to report for another examination if it is not found to be necessary.  The examiner is asked to provide an opinion addressing the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sinus disability had its onset during active service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to an in-service disease, event, or injury, to include his in-service toxic exposure?  In providing this opinion, the VA examiner should consider and discuss:

1. The Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

2. The Veteran's exposure specified in his ILER, to include his exposure to lead, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and biological agents.

3. The Veteran's service treatment records and his assertion that his sinus disability began in service, including whether his in-service headaches and later sinus headaches after service are related.

3. In their rationale, the examiner is asked to provide: 

(a.) A clear and detailed rationale for the opinion, including a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved. 

(b.) If the examiner relies on medical treatises, the examiner should identify and discuss the treatises. 

(c.) If the examiner feels that the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training).

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.G. Canary, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.