Citation Nr: A25031246
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 210604-170625
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral athlete's foot is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for foot pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee pain is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip strain with limitation of flexion is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left hip strain with limitation of extension is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left hip strain with thigh impairment is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's headaches are related to active-duty service.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is related to active-duty service.

3. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bilateral athlete's foot is related to active-duty service.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right ankle disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left ankle disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had foot pain at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

7. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left knee disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

8. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's right knee condition began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

9. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip strain with limitation of flexion was manifested by flexion to 105 degrees with painful motion of the hip. 

10. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip strain with limitation of extension was manifested by extension to 25 degrees.

11. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip strain with thigh impairment has not been manifested by a limitation of rotation of the left leg which prevents toeing out more than 15 degrees, or by a limitation of adduction and the inability to cross the legs; or limitation of abduction, motion lost beyond 10 degrees.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for headaches are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for bilateral athlete's foot are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for right ankle pain are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for left ankle pain are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for foot pain are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for service connection for left knee condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for service connection for right knee condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip strain with limitation of flexion have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5252.

10. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for left hip strain with limitation of extension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5251.

11. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for left hip strain with thigh impairment have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5253.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the Army from May 1969 to May 1971.

In the June 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On September 10, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

For the sake of clarification, the Board must address some preliminary matters before proceeding to the merits of the appeal. First, on January 15, 2025, the Board sent a clarification letter to the Veteran. The letter stated that previous correspondence received from the Veteran was unclear on whether he wished to withdraw only his hearing request or all or part of his appeal. This letter notified the Veteran that he had 60 days to respond, and if no response was received within 60 days, the Board would conclude that he did not wish to withdraw his appeal and would proceed to review and adjudicate the appeal. The Veteran did not submit a response within 60 days of the clarification letter. Accordingly, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the appeal.

Second, in the June 2021 VA Form 10182, the Veteran stated he was appealing the issue of "bilateral hips" with a date of decision of May 2021. The Board finds that the May 2021 rating decision only adjudicated service connection of a left hip disability. Furthermore, in the February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed claim, the Veteran only listed that he was seeking service connection for pain in left hip and in the April 2021 VA examination the Veteran reported that his right hip was okay. Accordingly, the Board finds that the issue of right hip condition is not on appeal and will not be addressed herein. Additionally, the May 2021 rating decision granted service connection for left hip strain with limitation of flexion and assigned a 10 percent rating, left hip strain with limitation extension and assigned a noncompensable rating, and left hip strain with thigh impairment and assigned a noncompensable rating. The AOJ assigned an effective date of February 24, 2021, the date the VA received his claim and is the earliest effective date allowed by law. Consequently, the Board interprets the language on the June 2021 VA Form 10182, "bilateral hips," to mean the Veteran is seeking higher rating evaluations for his left hip service-connected disability.

Third, in the June 2021 VA Form 10182, the Veteran stated he was appealing the issue of "bilateral feet" with a date of decision of May 2021. The Board finds that the May 2021 rating decision denied service connection for bilateral foot pain and bilateral athlete's foot. Accordingly, the Board finds both issues are on appeal and will be addressed herein.  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease that was incurred or aggravated during active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). In general, service connection requires competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the two. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). When a disability is initially diagnosed after separation from service and not within any applicable presumptive period, service connection may be granted if all the evidence establishes that it was incurred in service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

If the positive and negative evidence is evenly or approximately balanced, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another, is the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Service connection for headaches.

2. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 

3. Service connection for bilateral athlete's foot.

The Veteran contends that his headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot began immediately after his return from Vietnam and have continued since separation from service.

In an April 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he started to experience headaches in 1970. The Veteran stated the onset of this condition/symptoms began when he got back from Vietnam in 1970. The Veteran stated that this condition has stayed the same over the years. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with headaches and provided a negative nexus opinion. The examiner concluded that a nexus could not be established due to the length of time between the Veteran's service and the VA examination, that the Veteran did not seek medical attention while in service or after leaving service, and that the Veteran was not currently on prescription medication. See April 2021 Headaches Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).   

In an April 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported his bilateral hearing loss began in service and has gotten worse since its onset. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. The examiner stated that he could not determine a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's left or right ear hearing loss without resorting to speculation. In his rationale, the examiner stated that a review of the Veteran's file indicates that the Veteran's Military Occupation Specialty (MOS) was Infantryman, which had a high probability of hazardous noise exposure. The examiner also stated the Veteran's separation audiogram was not dated but indicated normal hearing bilaterally. The examiner said that a comparison of the Veteran's enlistment and separation audiograms indicates a significant threshold shift bilaterally. Ultimately, the examiner stated, "It is the opinion of the examiner that today's results are inconsistent and not valid for VA rating purposes - repeat assessment to confirm the claimant's bilateral hearing acuity is recommended; therefore, the examiner cannot determine a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right ear hearing loss without resorting to speculation". The examiner provided the same rationale for both ears. See April 2021 Hearing Loss DBQ.

In an April 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported his bilateral athlete's foot began in 1970. The Veteran stated that over the years, the condition has stayed the same. The Veteran reported using over the counter medications but not getting total relief. The Veteran said he sought medical advice from his primary care provider and was given prescription cream. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral athlete's foot and provided a negative nexus opinion. The examiner concluded that a nexus could not be established due to the length of time between the Veteran's service and when he sought medical treatment in April 2021. See April 2021 Skin DBQ.     

For the following reasons, entitlement to service connection for headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot is warranted.

The April 2021 VA examiners diagnosed the Veteran with headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot. Thus, the Veteran meets the current disability requirement for the claims.

Where a Veteran engaged in combat, satisfactory lay evidence that an injury or disease was incurred in service will be accepted as sufficient proof of service connection where such evidence is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of service. 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b). The combat rules not only reduce the evidentiary burden for establishing in-service injury but allow a combat veteran to use "satisfactory lay or other evidence" to establish that he incurred the disability itself in service, even in cases where "there is no official record" that such injury or disability occurred. Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2012). The Veteran's receipt of the Combat Infantryman Badge reflects that he engaged in combat, and his lay statements that he experienced headaches and bilateral athlete's foot in service, immediately after returning from Vietnam, is competent and credible. 

A review of the Veteran's service records establish that the Veteran's MOS was Infantry. Additionally, the record reveals that the Veteran was awarded the Vietnam Campaign Medal, the Combat Infantry Badge, Bronze Star Medal, Sharpshooter M16 Badge, and Sharpshooter M14 Badge. See DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty. The AOJ notified the examiners of this when requesting the appropriate medical examinations and opinions. See April 2021 Exam Requests.  

The Veteran has reported that he experienced headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot in and since his separation from service. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a Veteran is competent to testify regarding continuous pain since service, and lay evidence, when credible, is competent to establish the presence of continuous symptoms for a claimed disability during and since separation from military service); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence). There is nothing to explicitly contradict the Veteran's reports, thus, they are credible and competent. In addition, the VA opinion's that provide a negative nexus are based on a lack of treatment and do not discuss the Veteran's lay statements that the conditions began in service after returning from Vietnam and have continued since then. Consequently, the opinions are inadequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311; Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (a VA opinion must be based on an accurate factual premise).

To the extent that the grants of service connection in these matters are based primarily on lay evidence, "nothing in the regulatory or statutory provisions [relating to evidence to be considered] require both medical and competent lay evidence; rather, they make clear that competent lay evidence can be sufficient in and of itself." Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1335.

At this point, the Board could remand the claims for adequate VA opinions. However, requests for opinions could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying the claims, which is impermissible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

Thus, given the application of 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b) as explained in Reeves, the Veteran's lay statements indicating continuous headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot provide a sufficient basis to conclude that his headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot are related to his service.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot are related to his active-duty service. As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral athlete's foot is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

4. Service connection for right ankle pain.

5. Service connection for left ankle pain.

6. Service connection for left knee pain.

7. Service connection for foot pain.

The February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ indicates that the Veteran is seeking service connection for the disabilities of ankle pain, knee pain, and foot pain. No other information was provided on the form or by the Veteran. See February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for each claimed condition in April 2021. 

Regarding ankle pain, the examiner said the Veteran reported that he has no claim for ankle pain condition on today's appointment. The examiner stated that the Veteran denies any problems in his ankles. Furthermore, the examiner said that there was no objective evidence of pain in either ankle and that objective physical examinations findings were normal for both right and left ankle on examination. Consequently, the examiner provided a negative nexus. See April 2021 Ankle DBQ. 

Regarding foot pain, the examiner reported that the Veteran stated that he has no problem with his feet and that he has no claim for foot pain. The Veteran did not report any foot pain at the examination. Consequently, the examiner provided a negative nexus. See April 2021 Foot DBQ. 

Regarding knee pain, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a right knee condition. However, the Veteran reported that his left knee was okay. The Veteran did not report any left knee pain. The examiner stated the Veteran has no functional loss or impairment due to his left knee. See April 2021 Knee DBQ.

The Veteran's Service Treatment Records (STRs) do not contain any information regarding ankle pain, knee pain, or foot pain, including any complaints, symptoms, treatment, or diagnosis. See generally STRs.  

The Board has carefully reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment records since separation from service and finds no diagnosis, no complaints, and no treatment for ankle pain, left knee pain or foot pain. See generally VA Treatment Records. 

Therefore, upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not meet the first element of service connection, because he does not have a current diagnosis of an ankle, left knee, or foot condition, to include pain, and has not had one during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Board notes the Veteran's VA treatment records contains complaints for bilateral athlete's foot, which the Board has granted service connection for herein and is a separate claim from the Veteran's claim for "foot pain". 

The Board considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but as the evidence is not evenly balanced, or approximately so, it is not for application here. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. Therefore, the Board finds that the claim for service connection for ankle pain, left knee pain, and foot pain is denied.

8. Service connection for right knee condition. 

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right patellofemoral pain syndrome. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Thus, the first element of service connection is met. However, the Board finds the second element is not met.

The Veteran was diagnosed with right patellofemoral pain syndrome. The Veteran reported that his right knee problem began in 1997 and that the condition has stayed the same. The Veteran did not state what he believed caused his right knee condition. The examiner stated that he reviewed the Veteran's VA e-folder. The examiner provided a negative nexus. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service separation examination does not indicate any knee condition or problem. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported his knee condition began in 1997. The examiner concluded that a nexus could not be established due to a huge gap in care and the medical records does not support the chronicity of the condition. See April 2021 VA Examination.

The Veteran's STRs do not contain any information regarding right knee injuries, pain, or conditions, to include any complaints, symptoms, treatment, or diagnosis. See generally STRs. Additionally, the Veteran has not specified any in-service injury or event that he believes contributed to the development of his disability. A review of the post-service treatment records does not reveal any statements made by the Veteran or anyone else pertaining to an in-service injury, event, or onset of a right knee condition. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has not claimed his right knee condition was caused by his service. Instead, the Veteran stated that his right knee condition began in 1997, which is 26 years after his service. He did not report experiencing any right knee pain or conditions during the period between his service and 1997. Additionally, the Veteran has not mentioned any in-service injury or event that he believes contributed to his right knee condition. The only indication that he believes his right knee condition should be service-connected is found in the February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, which contains general statements asserting that service connection is warranted. The issue of causation in this case is complex and requires medical expertise, which the Veteran is not qualified to provide. Furthermore, the Veteran has not submitted any medical opinion to support his claims. There is no competent medical evidence on record establishing a nexus between the Veteran's current right knee condition and any event, injury, or disease that occurred during his service. 

Furthermore, the Veteran has not asserted that his right knee condition is the result of combat, and as a result, the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b) are not applicable. 

The Board considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but as the evidence is not evenly balanced, or approximately so, it does not apply here. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. Accordingly, the Board finds that the claim for service connection for right knee condition is denied.

Increased rating evaluations for left hip disability.

The Veteran is service connected for left hip strain with limitation of flexion with a 10 percent rating under DC 5252. He is also service connected for a left hip strain with limitation of extension with noncompensable rating under DC 5251 and left hip strain with thigh impairment with a noncompensable rating under DC 5253.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Other applicable, general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating many accurately reflect the elements of disability, 38 C.F.R. § 4.2 ; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant, 38 C.F.R. § 4.3 ; where there is a questions as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability pictures more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating, 38 C.F.R. § 4.7; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity, 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

Under DC 5251, a maximum 10 percent rating is warranted for extension of the thigh limited to 5 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5251.

Under DC 5252, a 10 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 45 degrees. A 20 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 30 degrees. A 30 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 20 degrees. A maximum 40 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 10 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5252.

Under DC 5253, the current 0 percent (noncompensable) evaluation contemplates limitation of rotation of thigh, or limitation of adduction or abduction of thigh. A 10 percent rating is warranted for limitation of rotation of affected leg, cannot toe out more than 15 degrees. A 10 percent rating is also warranted for limitation of adduction, cannot cross legs. A maximum 20 percent rating is warranted for limitation of abduction, motion lost beyond 10 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5253.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2021. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left hip strain. The Veteran reported current symptoms of mild aching pain in his left hip. The Veteran stated he was not taking any medications for hip pain. The Veteran did not report flare-ups. The Veteran reported functional loss/impairment of aching pain when he moved or twisted his left hip. Physical examination showed that the Veteran's left hip active range of motion (ROM) was flexion to 105 degrees, extension to 25 degrees, abduction to 30 degrees, adduction to 20 degrees, external rotation to 50 degrees, internal rotation to 30 degrees. Pain was noted with flexion, abduction, and adduction. The Veteran could cross his legs. Passive ROM was same as active. Passive ROM pain was noted with flexion, abduction, and adduction. There was pain with active and passive motion, but it did not result in functional loss. Crepitus was not found. Localized pain and tenderness were found during palpation. Observed repetitive use testing did not show additional ROM loss. During repeated use, the examiner estimated left hip flexion would be to 105 degrees, extension to 25 degrees, abduction to 30 degrees, adduction to 20 degrees, external rotation to 50 degrees, and internal rotation to 30 degrees. The examiner cited pain with repetitive use. The examiner stated that the Veteran's functional loss consisted of pain. Muscle atrophy, femur disorder, ankylosis, or surgical history was not indicated. The Veteran reported regular use of a cane. The examiner stated that the Veteran's left hip condition impacts his ability to work and that the Veteran reported missing a week of work due to his left hip pain. See April 2021 Hip and Thigh DBQ.  

9. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip strain with limitation of flexion.

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for the Veteran's left hip strain with limitation of flexion with a 10 percent rating under DC 5252 based on painful motion of the hip. The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against assignment of an initial compensable rating for his right hip pain with limitation of flexion.

The evidence above reflects that the Veteran's left hip limitations of flexion were limited to at most 105 degrees, including following repeated use over time. The Veteran did not report flare-ups. The examiner specifically considered the Veteran's reports about functional loss/impairment and estimated that after repeated use left hip flexion would be to 105 degrees, thus complying with Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 32 (2017). This assessment is probative because the examiner possesses medical expertise, clinically interviewed the Veteran, and performed a complete physical examination of the left hip. The Veteran has not provided any evidence indicating a different level of functional loss/impairment due to his left hip disability during the appeal period.

The Veteran's functional loss/impairment reports concern decreased mobility due to experiencing aching pain when moving his left hip. His reports do not suggest additional loss of left hip flexion that would more nearly approximate the 20 percent rating criteria (flexion limited to 30 degrees) and do not provide a basis to infer significant additional motion loss with the observed range of motion studies and clinician range of motion estimates during repetitive use periods as a baseline. Thus, the evidence persuasively weighs against a rating higher than 10 percent rating for left hip strain with limitations of flexion, even with consideration to the competent and credible reports of functional impairment. Thompson, supra.; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5252.

For the above reasons, a rating higher than 10 percent for left hip strain with limitation of flexion is not warranted. The Board considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but as the evidence is not evenly balanced, or approximately so, it does not apply here. Lynch, 21 F.4 th at 776. Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted. 

10. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for left hip strain with limitation of extension.

11. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for left hip strain with thigh impairment.

In the May 2021 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for the Veteran's left hip strain with limitation of extension with noncompensable rating under DC 5251 and left hip strain with thigh impairment with a noncompensable rating under DC 5253.

The Board finds that a compensable rating for limitation of extension is not warranted under DC 5251. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip extension was not limited to 5 degrees. Additionally, the Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted for a thigh impairment under DC 5253. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's left hip rotation was not so limited such that he could not toe-out more than 15 degrees, nor was his adduction so limited such that he could not cross his legs, nor was his abduction limited so as to cause motion lost beyond 10 degrees. The key question is what symptoms and functional impairment the Veteran experiences as it's appropriate for VA to award separate disability ratings for disabilities provided it does not compensate the same manifestation more than once. Estevez v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 157, 169-70 (2023) (holding that, when considering the appropriate evaluation level for a disability, VA must catalog the veteran's manifestations and resulting functional impairment of that disability and assign all independently supportable evaluations). Here, the May 2021 rating decision granted a 10 percent evaluation for painful motion of the hip, citing 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, under DC 5252. As such, the Veteran's hip pain has been contemplated and compensated by this 10 percent rating and assigning separate ratings under DC 5251 and/or DC 5253 would constitute impermissible pyramiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

For the above reasons, a compensable rating for left hip strain with limitation of extension or left hip strain with limitation of thigh is not warranted. The Board considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but as the evidence is not evenly balanced, or approximately so, it does not apply here. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. Therefore, higher ratings are not warranted. 

Additional hip ratings 

There is no evidence of left hip ankylosis at any time during the period on appeal. Also, the Board finds that even considering hip pain and other functional factors, the Veteran has not experienced the functional equivalent of hip ankylosis in his left hip at any time during the claim period. In other words, the most persuasive evidence shows that even considering pain and other functional factors, the Veteran's left hip symptoms have not been so disabling to actually or effectively result in immobility or fixation of either hip at any point in the ranges of hip motion. Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted on the basis of ankylosis/functional equivalent of ankylosis at any time during the claim period. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5250.

There is no evidence of any flail joint of the left hip or any impairment of the left femur. Therefore, separate ratings are not warranted under DCs 5254 or 5255 at any time during the period on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DCs 5254-5255.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU.

The May 2021 examiner concluded that the Veteran's left hip disability impacts his ability to perform occupational tasks. Specifically, the examiner stated that the Veteran experiences pain when he moves, twists, and leans to his left hip. Additionally, the examiner stated that the Veteran has previously missed work due to his left hip disability and that the Veteran was currently unemployed. Accordingly, the Board finds that the record has raised the matter of entitlement to a TDIU as part of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating of his service-connected hip disability. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (holding that a request for TDIU, whether expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate "claim" for benefits, but rather, is part of a claim for increased compensation). 

The Board finds that additional development is required. The record reasonably identified that the Veteran's left hip disability impacts his ability to work, and that the Veteran was unemployed, however, the AOJ did not conduct any development of the TDIU claim. The AOJ's failure to do so represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error. On remand, the AOJ should send the Veteran proper notice, and request that the Veteran complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability to allow the AOJ to conduct development of the claim. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Send the Veteran VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability). Conduct any necessary development required if this form is returned. 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welch, Joshua H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.