Citation Nr: A25031751
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230727-365064
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right retrocalcaneal spur secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus is granted.

Service connection for a left retrocalcaneal spur secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus is granted.

Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) as secondary to persistent depressive disorder is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's bilateral retrocalcaneal spurs (claimed as bilateral ankle conditions) are secondary to her service-connected bilateral pes planus.

2. The Veteran's IBS is secondary to her service-connected persistent depressive disorder.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right retrocalcaneal spurs secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left ankle retrocalcaneal spurs secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for IBS as secondary to service-connected persistent depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1985 to November 1990 and from January 1991 to February 1991.  

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2022 decision.  In December 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) found that a duty to assist error had been made, and transferred the appeal to the supplemental claim lane for additional development.  In June 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the July 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ supplemental decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

In July 2023, the Veteran and her then representative were sent a docketing letter giving them the opportunity to submit evidence or argument to support the claims.  The Veteran appointed a new representative in March 2024.  In January 2025, the Veteran's new representative was sent a letter to give him the opportunity to submit additional argument to support the claims.  To date, the Board has not received any such argument, or a request for more time to make a submission.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran and her representative have been afforded an opportunity to provide additional argument.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability resulting from a service-connected disease or injury.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that a current disability exists and that the current disability results from the service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead holding "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

1. Service connection for a right ankle condition, to include retrocalcaneal spur, as secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus is granted.

2. Service connection for a left ankle condition, to include retrocalcaneal spur, as secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus is granted.

The Veteran contends that her bilateral ankle disabilities are secondary to her service-connected pes planus.  See June 2021 claim.  Alternatively, at the July 2021 VA examination, the Veteran indicated that her symptoms of ankle pain gradually developed during service, and as the result of physical training.  See also March 2023 VA examination (reporting onset  of ankle pain in basic training).

In the December 2022 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of right and left retrocalcaneal spurs; she is service-connected for bilateral pes planus; and she had sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.140 (c), the Board is bound by these favorable findings unless there is clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.

Service treatment records show complaints related to the lower extremities.  In August 1985, the Veteran complained of pain in the bilateral legs and heels, with an assessment of stress syndrome.  Imaging in September 1985 was normal, with an assessment of shin splints.  In addition, she also had multiple complaints related to the feet and arches.  See e.g., service treatment records from March 1986,March 1988, and June 1990.  Examination in November 1986 and October 1990 were normal for the lower extremities.  The October 1990 separation note indicated a significant and interval history of left lower leg.  In a February 1991 report of medical history, the Veteran denied having had cramps in her legs; arthritis, rheumatism or bursitis; and bone, joint or other deformity.  She endorsed having had foot trouble. 

After separation from service, the Veteran report that she had ankle swelling in May 2008.  See also treatment records from August 2009 and June 2019. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021, which resulted in a diagnosis of bilateral retrocalcaneal spurs.  The Veteran reported that she gradually developed right and left ankle pain during service due to physical training and as secondary to plantar fasciitis.  In July 2021 imaging of the bilateral ankle noted plantar and retrocalcaneal spurs, with no acute fracture, dislocation, or soft tissue swelling.  

In the opinion, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's claimed ankle conditions were not medically related to her bilateral pes planus.  The examiner explained that the claimed conditions were separate entities from the service-connected bilateral pes planus.  A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship, and a nexus had not been established.  The examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's ankle conditions were aggravated by the service-connected bilateral pes planus.

In support of her claim, the Veteran submitted an October 2021 private opinion written.  The clinician concluded that the Veteran's left and rightretrocalcaneal spur was secondary to, or aggravated by her pes planus because of the associated compensatory walking strategies with biomechanical and kinematic changes.  The clinician cited and discussed medical literature documenting alternation in joint kinematics, which affected other major joints over time by means of compensation and altered biomechanics.  The medical literature also supported an interdependence between the function of the foot and ankle joints as affected by the plantar load distribution.  In addition, the clinician indicated that pes planus hastened and sped up wear and tear of the other joints. 

VA obtained another opinion as to the left and right ankle condition in September 2022.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral retrocalcaneal spurs were not secondary to the service-connected bilateral pes planus because the claims file was silent for a diagnosis of an ankle condition and there was a normal physical examination.  

In March 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination.  The Veteran reported onset of ankle pain in basic training, flare-ups and functional loss.  The examiner provided a general description of the diagnosed retrocalcaneal spur (exostosis) and explained that retrocalcaneal exostosis, also known as Achilles heel spur, can be the result of longstanding tension on the plantar fascia insertion and occur at the back of the heel, where the Achilles tendon attaches the bone.  Although this condition affects more adult women, the other risk factors included age, the existence of flat feet, and obesity.  

The examiner provided several nexus opinions. In the direct opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's retrocalcaneal spurs were not likely related to service.  The examiner indicated that there was no diagnosis associated with the claimed condition and explained that the diagnosis of retrocalcaneal spur, and the calcaneus, affect the foot and not the ankle.

In addition, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus did not cause or aggravate the claimed and left ankle conditions. The examiner explained that there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis. The examiner also explained that retrocalcaneal exostosis is related to insertion site of Achilles tendon and not to the pes planus; the Veteran is diagnosed with retrocalcaneal spur (exostosis); and the diagnosis is a foot condition and not an ankle condition. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis associated with any claimed condition. Regarding the claimed condition of bilateral retrocalcaneal spur, there is no diagnosis because the calcaneus is a part of the foot, not the ankle.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's current right and left ankle disabilities, to include retrocalcaneal spur, is due to or aggravated by the service-connected bilateral pes planus.  Because there is sufficient evidence to grant service connection based on the secondary theory of entitlement, the Board will not address direct service connection for the purpose of judicial economy. 

The Board finds the October 2022 private opinion to be complete, adequate, and persuasive.  The opinion set forth the results of the clinician's review of the claims file, the Veteran's lay statements, and the relevant medical literature.  The clinician provided a clear and consistent explanation for her conclusion that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus caused or aggravated her diagnosed retrocalcaneal spurs.  

The Board notes that the reasoning for the private opinion is also consistent with the risk factors identified by the March 2023 VA examiner.  Hence, the Board finds the October 2022 opinion probative and attaches significant weight to the opinion on the matter of nexus between the Veteran's claimed ankle disabilities and her service-connected bilateral pes planus.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304(2008).

The Board has considered the VA opinions against the claim, including the July 2021, September 2022, and March 2023 opinions; they are not more probative.  The examiners were competent to opine on the matter as each had the appropriate training, expertise and knowledge to evaluate the claimed disability.  However, the July 2021 opinion was conclusory and did not address the aggravation prong of secondary service-connection.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Thus, the Board does not find the opinion probative. 

The September 2022 and March 2023 collective opinions indicated that there was no etiological relationship between the claimed ankle disabilities and service, and between the claimed disabilities and the service-connected bilateral pes planus.  In doing so, the September 2022 and March 2023 examiners based their opinion, in part, on the lack of a current ankle disability because the retrocalcaneal spur was not a disability of the ankle but was a disability of the foot.  However, the Board finds that the scope of the claim includes the retrocalcaneal spur.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) the scope of a claim includes any disorder that may reasonably be encompassed by the Veteran's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record).  The original claim noted pain, swelling, and popping in the ankle.  See June 2021 statement.  The March 2023 examiners noted that the retrocalcaneal spurs occur at the back of the heel.  In addition, the July 2021 VA examination for ankle disabilities noted a current diagnosis relating to the claim of bilateral retrocalcaneal spur.   

Moreover, the AOJ decision found that there was a current diagnosis as it relates to the claimed condition.  A review of the evidence above indicates that there has not been clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.  Thus, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.   

Given the above, a rationale and conclusion based on a lack of a current diagnosis is not persuasive. Furthermore, the rationales are conclusory in nature. Thus, the September 2022, and March 2023 opinions are not probative evidence against the claim.  

In short, the persuasive weight of the evidence is in favor of finding that the Veteran's right and left retrocalcaneal spur is secondary to her service-connected bilateral pes planus.  Where applicable, the Board has applied the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).  Service connection for right and left retrocalcaneal spur secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus is warranted.

3. Service connection for IBS as secondary to persistent depressive disorder is granted.

The Veteran asserts that her IBS is secondary to her service-connected psychiatric disorder.  See June 2021 claim.  At July 2021 and March 2023 VA examinations, the Veteran indicated that her symptoms began during service.

In the June 2023 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of IBS; she was service-connected for the primary disability of persistent depressive disorder (previously posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)); the May 1985 service treatment records show constipation; and she had sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  See also August 2021 rating decisions.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.140 (c), the Board is bound by these favorable findings unless there is clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.

The Veteran had many complaints related to the gastrointestinal system during service.  In May 1985, the Veteran reported constipation for five days.  In June 1985, the Veteran complained of abdominal pain, with an assessment of gas pain.  In June 1987 the Veteran again complained of abdominal pain, and the assessment included ruling out intestinal disease.  Examinations in November 1986 and October 1990 were normal.  In a February 1991 report of medical history, the Veteran denied having had frequent indigestion; or stomach, liver or intestinal trouble.    

In January 2013 VA treatment records, the Veteran reported abdominal movement for two months, weight loss, and nausea.  The assessment noted possible IBS. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of IBS.  The Veteran reported gradually developing constipation while on active duty.  She reported current symptoms of chronic constipation with self-disimpaction, as well as diarrhea 1 to 2 times per month.

In the opinion, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's IBS and psychiatric disorder are not medically related.  The examiner explained that IBS is a separate entity entirely and unrelated to the psychiatric disorder.  A causal relationship was not shown in a review of medical literature.  The examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's IBS was aggravated by the service-connected psychiatric disorder.  

In an October 2021 private opinion, the clinician concluded that the Veteran's IBS was likely secondary to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  The clinician explained that the etiology of IBS is multi-factorial, with a possibly interaction between brain gut axis and the HPA (hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) axis, exacerbating IBS.  In addition, gastrointestinal symptoms have been correlated with psychiatric disorders, and there are comorbidities between mental health conditions and IBS.  The clinician submitted several abstracts and pieces of medical literature on the relationship between IBS and psychiatric disorders, including, "The relationship between irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric disorders: from molecular changes to clinical manifestations."  This article noted that psychological factors appear to be important in the development of IBS symptomatology through several mechanisms including alteration of HPA axis modulation, enhanced perception of visceral stimuli or psychological vulnerability.  Psychiatric disorders and IBS also appear to be bidirectional co-morbidities.  The frequency and severity of the symptomatology of IBS in patients with anxiety and mood disorders have been well documented.  The evolution of IBS symptoms seems to be influenced by affective factors and psychosocial stressors.  Overall, those factors may contribute to predisposition, precipitation and maintenance of IBS symptoms.

Although the Veteran was afforded another examination in September 2022 and March 2023, the examiners noted no diagnosis of an intestinal condition.  The September 2022 examiner indicated that the claims file was silent for a diagnosis of IBS.  Likewise, in the March 2023 opinion, the examiner indicated that there was no objective evidence to support a diagnosis.

In the September 2022 opinion, the examiner also indicated that the Veteran's claimed IBS was not  secondary to the service-connected persistent depressive disorder in partial remission; no rationale or aggravation opinion was provided.  

In the March 2023 secondary opinions, the examiner opined that there was no relationship between the service-connected disability and the claimed IBS.  The examiner again relied on a lack of evidence to support a diagnosis and explained that while there is an accepted clinical correlation between conditions like IBS and depression, there is no objective evidence in the claims file to support the diagnosis of IBS.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that service connection is warranted on a secondary basis.  As such, the Board will limit its analysis to that theory of entitlement for the sake of judicial economy.

As noted above, the AOJ found that there is a current diagnosis of IBS.  The regulations provide that a favorable finding on a question of fact or on an application of law is binding unless the decision is clearly erroneous.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  In this case, the VA treatment records show a possible diagnosis.  The July 2021 VA examiner noted a diagnosis of IBS.  Moreover, the Veteran reported gastrointestinal symptoms, and she is competent to report gastrointestinal symptoms that she experiences.  Although the September 2022 and March 2023 VA examinations indicated that there was no diagnosis, the opinions did not sufficiently consider or explain the symptoms reported by the Veteran.  Overall, the opinions do not render the finding clearly erroneous.  Thus, the Board finds that there is not sufficient evidence to contravene the favorable findings.  

As there is a current diagnosis, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected persistent depressive disorder caused or aggravated her IBS.  On this question, the Board finds the October 2021 private opinion reasonably probative.  The clinician who authored the opinion is a nurse, with the appropriate training, expertise and knowledge to evaluate the claimed disability.  The clinician provided a cogent rationale for her finding and opinion, which included consideration of the relevant medical literature and the lay statements.  The opinion and evidence included in the opinion provided the Board with a clear description of all relevant data points necessary to evaluate this claim.  

The Board has considered the evidence against the claim, but finds it is not persuasive.  As noted, the September 2022 direct opinion and the March 2023 opinions are based on the lack of a current disability.  Because the Board has found that there is a current diagnosis, the rationales are not adequate or probative.  The September 2022 secondary opinion was also conclusory.  Because most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning, the September 2022 opinion is also not probative.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.  The July 2021 secondary opinion provided slightly more explanation based on a lack of a causal relationship shown in the medical literature, but did not consider whether there was any aggravation of the Veteran's IBS by her psychiatric disorder.  

Thus, the evidence against the claim is not as probative as the evidence in favor of the claim.  The Board has applied the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine where applicable.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).  Service connection for IBS secondary to the Veteran's service-connected persistent depressive disorder warranted.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Vuong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.