Citation Nr: A25031654
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-459979
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served from July 1997 until December 1999.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO),

In July 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ unless rebutted by evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  With respect to the Veteran's claim of entitlement for sinusitis, the RO made favorable findings that: (1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with chronic sinusitis; and (2) the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for sinusitis as it is related to his military service. Specifically, he stated, "he has running and stuffy nose, headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge from being exposed to burn pits in the Army."  See August 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. 

The VA has a duty to assist veterans and must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(1).  The medical examination or opinion must also be adequate.  A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023.  The examination showed a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and a deviated nasal septum.  The examiner opined the Veteran's disability is less likely than not incurred in or caused by his military service.  He noted the Veteran's medical records document sinusitis while in service, but his post medical records do not document any sinusitis condition.  The examiner also stated chronicity could not be established for ongoing sinusitis as the diagnosis in service was acute and transitory and seems resolved. The examiner did not provide an opinion based on the Veteran's statements of his exposure to burn pits.

The Board finds the September 2023 medical opinion inadequate and finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's in-service injury was "acute only," but failed to explain upon what medical basis they relied for classifying the injury as acute only.  Secondly, the examiner failed to discuss if exposure to hazardous materials may have caused the Veteran's disability. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Attempt to verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure to toxins.  If more details are needed, contact the Veteran to request the information.  If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to toxins agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to verify the in-service burn pit exposure.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his sinusitis and deviated nasal septum.  The examiner should opine on the following:

a.)	Is the Veteran's sinusitis at least as likely as not related to military service?

b.)	Is the Veteran's sinusitis at least likely as not related to the Veteran's claimed exposure to burn pits? 

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available, and reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  A full rationale must be provided.  In providing the requested opinions, the examiner should consider the Veteran's lay statement regarding symptoms in service and his symptoms post-service.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bond, Tyana N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.