Citation Nr: A25031952
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240616-447917
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 30 percent for tension headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to March 2000. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 30 percent for tension headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an initial increased rating in excess of 30 percent for tension headaches is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his tension headaches warrant an initial rating in excess of 30 percent. 

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including those related to VA examinations and opinions, are eligible for remand. 

In a recent decision, Ingram v. Collins, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) found that when diagnostic codes and special regulations do not explicitly contemplate medication use when rating a disability, the Board must discount the beneficial effects of medication when assigning an evaluation for that disability. 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327. The diagnostic code for headaches, Diagnostic Code 8100, does not explicitly contemplate medication use. Therefore, the holding of Ingram applies to the claim at issue.  

In this case, the Veteran stated in August 2023 correspondence that he takes over-the-counter Tylenol and Motrin to help treat his headache symptoms. He further stated that his "headaches occur 2-3 times per month. The headache pain generally occurs around my temple region, on the front of my head, and on my forehead. At least a couple times a month, they knock me out of commission to the point that I am totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for 8 hours. I just have to isolate and sleep it off. During my headaches, I have extreme light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, and throbbing pain. I have episodes of nausea with these headaches...I have missed events and activities due to my headaches because they render me unable to function at all during the time of my headaches." Additionally, an October 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's current treatment for his headaches included taking NSAIDs. 

The Board is not permitted to substitute its own medical judgment for that of medical professionals. Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991) (stating that the Board may consider only independent medical evidence to support their findings and that if the Board finds that the medical evidence of record is insufficiency, then it may supplement the record by seeking an advisory opinion or ordering a medical examination). As such, the Board finds that a remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion, as the pre-decisional medical record of evidence is insufficient to determine what the symptoms of the Veteran's headache disability would be without the beneficial effects of his medication. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from an appropriately qualified examiner addressing what the severity of the Veteran's tension headaches would be when discounting any beneficial effects of medication. Provide the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, to the examiner for review. Only if deemed necessary to provide the opinion, should the Veteran be afforded a new VA examination. 

(1)	After discounting the beneficial effects of medication, the examiner must opine on the severity of the Veteran's tension headaches, including whether the Veteran would have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain. 

In providing an opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's August 2023 report that he takes Tylenol and Motrin for his headache symptoms and the October 2023 examiner's finding that the Veteran takes NSAIDs for his headache pain. The examiner also must consider the Veteran's August 2023 lay statement describing his headache frequency, severity, and symptoms. 

The examiner must set forth a complete rationale for any conclusion reached, citing to medical literature and/or evidence in the Veteran's claims file as necessary.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Eisenberg

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.