Citation Nr: A25031897
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-464095
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for lumbosacral strain due to lumbar spondylosis (lumbosacral strain) is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's GERD more nearly approximated persistent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; other symptoms productive of severe impairment of health are not shown or approximated.

2. Symptoms of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain have throughout the claim period more nearly approximates forward flexion of the lumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, but not greater than 60 degrees, but have not at any time more nearly approximated forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less or ankylosis or incapacitating episodes.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an increased rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for GERD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Codes 7399-7346.

2. The criteria for a rating of 20 percent but no higher, for lumbosacral strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1984 to January 2004.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, the AOJ continued the Veteran's 10 percent rating for GERD and continued the Veteran's 10 percent rating for lumbosacral strain after the Veteran filed a June 2023 VA 21-526EZ seeking increased ratings for, in relevant part, GERD and lumbosacral strain. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In his August 2024VA Form 10182 the Veteran emphasized the severity of his lumbosacral strain. The Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting a desire to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner rather than waiting for the period to switch dockets to expire.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

General Legal Principles 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in VA's Rating Schedule.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  Where, as here, entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 510 (2007).  Here, as explained below, the uniform 30 rating is proper for GERD and a uniform 20 rating are proper for lumbosacral strain.

1. Entitlement to an increased rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for GERD is granted.

The Veteran's GERD is rated at 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114. The use of Diagnostic Code 7399-7346 reflects that, at the time of the AOJ's June 2023 rating decision, there was no Diagnostic Code specifically applicable to the Veteran's service-connected disability, and that this disability has been rated by analogy to hiatal hernia under Diagnostic Code 7346. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20 (allowing for rating of unlisted condition by analogy to closely related disease or injury).

The rating criteria for the digestive system were amended effective May 19, 2024. See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: The Digestive System, 89 Fed. Reg. 19735 (Mar. 20, 2024). Although the regulation was added outside the evidentiary window, it may be considered because it is not evidence. See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136 (2024) ("Evidence is defined as '[s]omething (including testimony, documents, and tangible objects) that tends to prove or disprove the existence of an alleged fact'"). However, the Board will not apply the amended criteria for two reasons.

First, "the case law is clear that a regulation is not to be applied retroactively unless the regulation is intended to be retroactive." Ervin v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 318, 322 (2011) (citing Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F. 3d 1327, 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2003)). As there is no indication in the Supplementary Information to the Final Rule or elsewhere that the amendments were intended to be retroactive, and the evidence window in this case ends prior to May 19, 2024, assigning a rating based on the amended criteria would result in impermissibly applying the criteria retroactively because such application could only be based on evidence added after the evidence window closed.

Second, the Board interprets the language of 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2), "The evidentiary record for a claim before the AOJ closes when VA issues notice of a decision on the claim," to mean that the appeal period ends on the date of the rating decision on appeal. Although at least one Judge on the Court has expressed a different opinion in a non-binding, single judge memorandum decision, Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) ("A single-judge summary disposition or order is, accordingly, based on clear authority already known and constitutes the law of the particular case. As such, it is fully binding on the Board and the Secretary in that case; however, it carries no precedential weight. A single-judge disposition is not binding in another case before a single judge or a panel. It may be cited or relied upon, however, for any persuasiveness or reasoning it contains"), the Board does not find the reasoning of this decision persuasive. See Meuzelaar v. McDonough, No. 23-0491, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims 446, *4 (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) ("As best we can tell, it seems like the Board concluded that the AMA limits its authority to assign ratings effective only during a 'review period' between when the claim was filed and when VA notified Mr. Meuzelaar of the rating decision on appeal. The Board, however, appears to misunderstand the AMA. Mr. Meuzelaar appealed the October 2019 rating decision, seeking higher ratings for his left hip osteoarthritis from July 8, 2019, to the present day and going forward. Nothing in the AMA defines a review period as the Board does, nor does it limit the Board's authority to assign ratings effective only during this period"). However, if, after an appeal to the Board, the AOJ readjudicated the claim, if in response to an improper concurrent election or otherwise, to allow the Board to then render a decision as to the period following the rating decision would result in potentially overlapping and conflicting decisions as to the rating of the same disability during the same time period. The implication of the rule therefore appears to the Board to be that the appeal period ends on the date of the rating decision. Thus, the appeal period here runs through June 2023. As the amendment to the criteria took effect after the appeal period, it is not for application, and the Board will apply the pre-May 19, 2024, amendment rating criteria.

Increased Rating

Under Diagnostic Code 7346, a 10 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent rating of less severity; a 30 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of a considerable impairment of health; and a 60 percent rating is warranted for hiatal hernia with symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7346.

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran's GERD has been treated by medication (omeprazole). In assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  Indeed, the Board is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use."  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Diagnostic Code 7346 does not contemplate medication. Significantly, the Veteran stated in his August 2023 disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) he took omeprazole daily to manage his symptoms of GERD.  

The Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating for GERD on June 14, 2023.  The appeal period therefore begins one year prior to this date, June 14, 2022.

In an August 2023 disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) the Veteran was diagnosed with GERD. The clinician noted that the Veteran takes omeprazole daily. The Veteran reported his GERD symptoms to include heartburn, vomiting, reflux and regurgitation of stomach content, hoarseness, and coughing that keeps him awake at night. Further, his symptoms are triggered by acidic foods, overeating, and pain medication prescribed for back and shoulder conditions. The clinician noted symptoms to include reflux, regurgitation, sleep disturbances four or more times a year that lasts for less than one day, and vomiting four or more times a year that last less than one day. The clinician noted that that there was no esophageal stricture, spasm of esophagus or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus, tumors or neoplasms, scars, or other pertinent physical findings. The clinician noted the Veteran's GERD did not impact his ability to work. 

In a December 2024 brief submitted by the Veteran's representative, the representative argued that the Veteran's symptoms of GERD are entitled to a higher evaluation. The Board agrees and finds, for the following reasons, that a 30 percent rating for GERD is warranted.

The evidence reflects that the Veteran has taken omeprazole daily to treat his GERD through the period on appeal with varying degrees of effectiveness. 

The above evidence, including the competent and credible lay statements from the Veteran and the medical records, reflects that the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's GERD symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 30 percent rating, specifically persistently recurrent epigastric distress with the equivalent of dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation. Moreover, the frequently episodes of vomiting and sleep disturbances that caused a considerable impairment to his health. As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to a 30 percent rating for GERD is warranted.

However, the evidence shows that the Veteran's overall disability picture does not more nearly approximate the criteria for a 60 percent evaluation during any period of the appeal. Specifically, the Veteran's GERD disability has not produced or more nearly approximated symptoms of material weight loss or hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, as required for the next higher, 60 percent rating. Additionally, there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms are productive of severe impairment of health, with medical records and lay statements showing that the symptoms were not very painful or harmful. Thus, a rating higher than 30 percent is not warranted.  While it is difficult to precisely quantify the degree of amelioration from the medication taken and therefore to precisely discount these effects, the above evidence reflects that the frequency with which the medication was taken and its varying degree of effectiveness does not warrant the conclusion that absent the medication the symptoms would have more nearly approximated either the specific symptoms or their equivalent, or the severe impairment of health required for a higher, 60 percent rating.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating higher than 30 percent is warranted for GERD. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased rating higher than 30 percent. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, is therefore not for application in this regard. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). 

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for lumbosacral strain of 20 percent, but no higher, is granted. 

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237 applicable to lumbar spine. All disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for diseases and injuries of the spine.

Under the General Rating Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion greater than 40 degrees; of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.

A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the lumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, but not greater than 60 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, if there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. 

A 40 percent rating requires forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less. The only higher schedular ratings under the General Rating Formula are 50 percent for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine and 100 percent for ankylosis of the entire spine.

Alternatively, under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes (IVDS Formula), a 60 percent disability evaluation is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12 months. An "incapacitating episode" for purposes of totaling the cumulative time is defined as "period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician." Diagnostic Code 5243, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes, Note 1.

The regulations applicable to rating musculoskeletal disabilities require that VA must also consider the extent that a Veteran may have additional functional impairment above and beyond the limitation of motion objectively demonstrated, such as during times when his symptoms are most prevalent ('flare-ups') due to the extent of his pain (and painful motion), weakness, premature or excess fatigability, and incoordination. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-7 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59.

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that VA examinations include joint testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. Thus, the Court's holding in Correia interprets 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 to establish additional requirements that must be met prior to finding that a VA examination is adequate.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court found an orthopedic examination inadequate where the examiner declined to provide an estimate of the degree of additional loss of motion due to flare-ups because such would require resort to speculation. Id. at 29, 36. Significantly, the Court cited VA Clinician's Guide, where orthopedic examiners are instructed to inquire whether there are periods of flare-ups and, if the answer is yes, to state their severity, frequency, and duration; name the precipitating and alleviating factors; and estimate, "per [the] veteran, "to what extent, if any, they affect functional impairment. Sharp, 29 Vet. App. at 32 (citing VA Clinician's Guide, chapter 11).

The Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating for lumbar strain on June 14, 2023. The appeal period therefore begins one year prior to this date, June 14, 2022.  

During the October 2023 DBQ the clinician diagnosed the Veteran with lumbosacral strain. The Veteran indicated his lumbosacral strain has worsened with symptoms to include decreased ability to walk, stand up, go up and down stairs, and decreased endurance and strength. Further, the Veteran reported pain that is triggered with bending, squatting, prolonged standing and working. The Veteran reported that he manages his pain with Ibuprofen three times daily, stretching, rest, hot/cold compression, and massage. The Veteran did not report flare ups. Further, the Veteran did not report function loss or functional impairment of the lumbar spine including with repeated use over time. The clinician noted the Veteran's initial range of motion (R.O.M.) was abnormal but his abnormal R.O.M. did not contribute to functional loss. The clinician noted that forward flexion endpoint was to 70 degrees, extension endpoint was 20 degrees, right lateral flexion endpoint was to 25 degrees, left lateral flexion endpoint was to 20 degrees, right lateral rotation endpoint was to 25 degrees, and left lateral rotation endpoint was to 25 degrees. The clinician noted pain was exhibited on all active R.O.M. The clinician noted the passive R.O.M. was the same as active R.O.M. with pain evidenced with passive motion. The clinician found there was no objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with three repetitions with no additional loss noted after three repetitions. The clinician noted there was no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. Neither muscle spasms nor guarding was noted. The clinician noted there were no additional factors contributing to the Veteran's lumbosacral strain. No muscle atrophy or ankylosis was noted.  The Veteran constantly used a back brace for pain and support. The clinician noted that the Veteran's employment was not impacted by his lumbar spine strain.

The clinician diagnosed the Veteran with lumbosacral strain. The clinician noted the Veteran, was not impacted by his lumbosacral strain. As to Correia criteria the examiner noted that there was objective evidence of pain when the back was used in non-weight-bearing, and that passive range of motion testing showed objective evidence of pain.

For the following reasons an increased rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for lumbosacral strain is warranted.

The Veteran reported constant use of a brace for his back as well as pain, limitations with bending, standing, and locomotion. The Veteran is competent to report these back symptoms, and there is nothing in the evidence of record to contradict his reports. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Thus, the Board finds his reported back pain symptoms are competent and credible. The October 2023 clinician also noted that the Veteran experienced pain during active motion, but not muscle spasm or guarding and the Veteran's lumbosacral strain causes interference with standing, disturbance of locomotion, and less movement than normal, with limitations in all range of motion testing. 

The Veteran did not report flare-ups; thus, the clinician did not note the range of motion findings to take account of additional loss of motion during flare ups (consistent with Sharp). 

There were additional factors for consideration, in particular, disturbance of locomotion, interference with sitting, standing and going up and down stairs noted by the clinician.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45(f).  These considerations reflect that the evidence of record is evenly balanced to support a finding that the symptoms of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain have more nearly approximated flexion to between 30 and 60 degrees. As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, an increased disability rating of 20 percent is warranted for the entire appeal period. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A rating higher than 20 percent is not warranted as the next rating of 40 percent requires forward flexion limitation to 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. As discussed above, flare-ups were not reported and did not cause additional limitation of motion beyond what was indicated on examination, and the related factors have been taken into account with the 20 percent rating, but do not show additional limitation or functional loss that rise to the level that would result in symptoms more nearly approximating flexion to 30 degrees or less or ankylosis.

Further, neither the VA or private treatment notes, VA examination reports, or the Veteran's statements indicate that there was ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine or the entire spine during the entire appeal period. Rather, these documents contain either specific findings of no ankylosis or findings reflecting that there is no ankylosis.  Moreover, the lay and medical evidence do not reflect symptoms more nearly approximating ankylosis.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 23-24 (2021) (the ankylosis criterion in VA's General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare-up).  In addition, the Veteran does not contend, and the evidence of record does not reflect, that he has suffered from incapacitating episodes due to IVDS throughout the pendency of the appeal.

For the above reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the symptoms and impairment caused by the Veteran's lumbosacral strain more nearly approximate the criteria for a 20 rating.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to an increased rating of 20 for degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  In addition, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial rating higher than 20 percent is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application in this regard.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

The Board has considered the Veteran's claim and decided entitlement based on the evidence.  Neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with respect to her claim.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.D. Strain, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.