Citation Nr: A25031964
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-436152
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for mixed component of obstructive and central sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral varicose veins is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Hyperlipidemia is not a disease or disability for VA purposes but is in the nature of a laboratory finding.

2. The most probative evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not suffer from right ear hearing loss that meets the VA criteria for disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 4.1.

2. The criteria for service connection for right ear hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1154, 5107(b) (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385 (2020).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1993 to June 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Veteran selected the Direct Review lane when he submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, in April 2024. In the direct review lane, the Board reviews the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision for each issue. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

SERVICE CONNECTION

Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381, F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Where a veteran who served for ninety days or more during a period of war (or during peacetime service after December 31, 1946) develops certain chronic diseases, such as hypertension, to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from separation from service, such diseases may be presumed to have incurred in service even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. This presumption is rebuttable by evidence to the contrary. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Where the veteran asserts entitlement to a chronic disease, but there is insufficient evidence of a diagnosis in service, the veteran can establish service connection by demonstrating a continuity of symptomatology since service, if the chronic disease is listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1337-39 (Fed. Cir. 2013). For disabilities that are not listed as chronic under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), service connection may be based upon a showing of in-service incurrence or aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), or by showing that a disease that was first diagnosed after service is related to service under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The determination of whether the requirements of service connection have been met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. See Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 8 (1999). In making these determinations, the Board must consider and assess the credibility and weight of all evidence in the claim file, including the medical and lay evidence, to determine its probative value. In doing so, the Board must provide its reasoning for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Masors v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 181 (1992); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each issue shall be given to the claimant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. A claimant need only demonstrate an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in order to prevail.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his hyperlipidemia began in service. See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) shows no complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of hyperlipidemia in service.

VA treatment records note a diagnosis of hyperlipidemia. See June 2023 VA Treatment Record. 

The Board concludes that service connection for hyperlipidemia may not be granted, as hyperlipidemia is not a disability for VA purposes.

The Board acknowledges that the medical treatment records show a diagnosis of hyperlipidemia. However, hyperlipidemia is a laboratory result and not an actual disability for which VA compensation benefits are payable. Diagnoses of hyperlipidemia, elevated triglycerides, and elevated cholesterol are actually laboratory results and are not, in and of themselves, disabilities. They are, therefore, not appropriate entities for the VA Rating Schedule. 61 Fed. Reg. 20,440, 20,445 (May 7, 1996). The term disability means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). A symptom, without a diagnosed or identifiable underlying malady or condition or associated functional impairment, does not, in and of itself, constitute a disability for which service connection may be established. Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet. App. 282 (1999).

Thus, in this case, while hyperlipidemia may be a risk factor for disability, it is not itself a disability for VA purposes, and the evidence does not show any functional impairment due to hyperlipidemia. Accordingly, the Board finds no basis for awarding service connection for hyperlipidemia, and the appeal must be denied. The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

VA considers impaired hearing to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies of 500, 1,000, 2,000, 3,000, or 4,000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; the thresholds for at least three of these frequencies are 26 or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

For service connection, in-service noise exposure need not be the only source of acoustic trauma; it must only be a contributing source. The absence of in-service evidence of hearing loss disability during a veteran's period of active duty is not fatal to a claim for service connection. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). Competent evidence of a current hearing loss disability (i.e., one meeting the requirements of section 3.385, as noted above), and a medically sound basis for attributing such disability to service, may serve as a basis from a grant of service connection for hearing loss disability. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993).

The Veteran is competent to testify that he has decreased hearing acuity. The Veteran, however, is not competent to establish bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes, as this is a medical question that must be based on audiometric testing pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 3.385. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, incurrence, or disease.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023. The Veteran's puretone thresholds, in decibels, and Maryland CNC results were as follows:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	10	10	10	5	50

LEFT	20	20	35	55	60

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 96 percent in the right ear and of 98 percent in the left ear.

The average decibel loss was 18.75 in the right ear and 42.5 in the left ear.  

Following the examination, the VA examiner reported that the Veteran's bilateral hearing is currently within normal limits. 

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations above, the Board finds that the Veteran's contended bilateral hearing loss does not warrant granting service connection.

First, the audiometric test results of record during the appeal period do not show the Veteran has right ear sensorineural hearing loss with auditory thresholds of 40 decibels or greater, or 26 decibels or greater for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. Furthermore, the speech recognition score was not less than 94 percent. See July 2023 VA Examination Report. Thus, the competent evidence of record does not establish that the Veteran has right ear hearing loss that meets the VA criteria for disability.

A threshold requirement for the granting of service connection is evidence of a current disability. In the absence of evidence of a current disability there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The determination of whether the Veteran's current hearing loss is related to in-service noise exposure is a complex medical question that requires audiological expertise. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d. 1372 (2007); Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316. While the Veteran believes he has a current diagnosis of right ear hearing loss, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

Therefore, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is not warranted. In reaching the above conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for mixed component of obstructive and central sleep apnea is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral varicose veins is remanded.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for GERD, diabetes, sleep apnea, and varicose veins. Specifically, the Veteran contends that these disabilities are secondary to his service-connected right knee disability. See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim. The Veteran states that, due to his musculoskeletal disability, he cannot exercise, which caused and/or aggravates his GERD, diabetes, sleep apnea, and varicose veins. Id.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in October 2023. The VA examiner noted diagnoses of GERD, diabetes, sleep apnea, and varicose veins. Following the examination, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's disabilities are less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected right knee disability. In support of this opinion, the VA examiner reasoned that there is no medical evidence in the Veteran's service treatment records that his disabilities are related to his right knee disability. The VA examiner did not provide an aggravation opinion. 

The Board finds the October 2023 VA examiner's opinion inadequate, and that remand is warranted to correct a predecisional duty to assist error. First, the VA examiner cited to the Veteran's STRs in providing a negative secondary causation opinion. The Veteran's STRs are immaterial when discussing secondary service connection because he is contending that his service-connected right knee caused and/or aggravated his GERD, diabetes, sleep apnea, and varicose veins, not that they developed during service. Second, the VA examiner did not provide an aggravation opinion. Finally, the VA examiner did not address obesity as an intermediate step. 

Obesity, for purposes of service connection, is not considered a disease or disability for purposes of establishing entitlement to service connection under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 and 1131, or for purposes of establishing secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Obesity, however, may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability where a claimant establishes that the obesity was caused by a service-connected disability and caused his or her the current disability. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017. Where obesity is asserted to be an intermediate step, the evidence must show that the service-connected disability "caused the veteran to become obese," that the obesity caused by the service-connected disability "was a substantial factor in causing" the current disability, and that the current disability "would not have occurred but for" the obesity caused by the service-connected disability. Id.

In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020), the Court further held that the Board needs to consider the obesity-intermediate step theorem predicated on 3.310 (aggravation) also where appropriate. In particular, the Court held that proper interpretation of G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017 requires consideration of both causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability (caused the veteran to become obese/aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether the (obesity/aggravation of obesity) as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (obesity caused/obesity aggravated) by the service-connected disability. If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.

Therefore, as the October 2023 opinion is inadequate, remand is warranted to correct this predecisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate medical professional. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file and provide a complete explanation for any decision reached. Based on a review of the record (and a new examination only if deemed necessary by the VA medical opinion provider), the examiner must address the following:

2. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD was caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability;

3. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right knee disability (i) caused or (ii) aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

4. If the answer to (b.) is yes, then whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his GERD; and

5. If the answer to (c.) is yes, then, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the Veteran's right knee disability.

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the medical evidence both for and against a certain conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of such a conclusion as it is to find against it.

"Aggravation" means any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the extent of additional disability resulting from the aggravation.

6. Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate medical professional. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file and provide a complete explanation for any decision reached. Based on a review of the record (and a new examination only if deemed necessary by the VA medical opinion provider), the examiner must address the following:

7. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diabetes was caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability;

8. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right knee disability (i) caused or (ii) aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

9. If the answer to (b.) is yes, then whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his diabetes; and

10. If the answer to (c.) is yes, then, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diabetes would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the Veteran's right knee disability.

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the medical evidence both for and against a certain conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of such a conclusion as it is to find against it.

"Aggravation" means any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is 

due to or the result of a service-connected disease.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the extent of additional disability resulting from the aggravation.

11. Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate medical professional. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file and provide a complete explanation for any decision reached. Based on a review of the record (and a new examination only if deemed necessary by the VA medical opinion provider), the examiner must address the following:

12. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability;

13. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right knee disability (i) caused or (ii) aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

14. If the answer to (b.) is yes, then whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his sleep apnea; and

15. If the answer to (c.) is yes, then, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the Veteran's right knee disability.

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the medical evidence both for and against a certain conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of such a conclusion as it is to find against it.

"Aggravation" means any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the extent of additional disability resulting from the aggravation.

16. Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate medical professional. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file and provide a complete explanation for any decision reached. Based on a review of the record (and a new examination only if deemed necessary by the VA medical opinion provider), the examiner must address the following:

17. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's varicose veins was caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability;

18. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right knee disability (i) caused or (ii) aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

19. If the answer to (b.) is yes, then whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his varicose veins; and

20. If the answer to (c.) is yes, then, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's varicose veins would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the Veteran's right knee disability.

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the medical evidence both for and against a certain conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of such a conclusion as it is to find against it.

"Aggravation" means any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the extent of additional disability resulting from the aggravation.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Slaughter, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.