Citation Nr: A25031444
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 200430-81295
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain, poor prior conditioning, stress phenomenon, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee stress fracture, including as secondary to left knee condition, is remanded.

Readjudication of a claim of entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain, including as secondary to left knee condition, is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from February 18, 1992, to March 31, 1992. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2020 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The appellant filed an April 2020 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, and elected the Direct Review Docket. As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

In an April 2021 decision, the Board denied the appellant's claims for service connection for a bilateral knee condition and denied readjudication of her claim for service connection for right ankle pain. In an October 2024 decision, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) issued a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) after finding the Board provided an inadequate statement of reasons and bases because it failed to discuss relevant evidence regarding the appellant's claim for service connection for a left knee disability. The claim for service connection for right knee pain and the issue of readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain were also remanded as inextricably intertwined. The case was then returned to the Board.   

As a preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that the appellant served 41 days beginning after February 18, 1992, and was discharged from service by reason of physical disability which existed prior to service (EPTS) as she did not meet the minimum enlistment standards. See DD 214. She has not been awarded service connection for any disability. See February 2020 Rating Codesheet. As a result, the appellant does not have "veteran" status. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12a. Therefore, the appellant is not entitled to the benefit of presumptions related to service connection. See Biggins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 474 (1991); see also Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338-39 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (classifying entitlement to service connection under both 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (b) and 3.307(a) as presumptions).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain, poor prior conditioning, stress phenomenon, is remanded.

While further delay is regrettable,?remand?is necessary in order to ensure compliance with the terms of the October 2024 JMPR. See October 2024 CAVC Decision. 

As stated above, in an October 2024 decision, the CAVC issued a JMPR after finding the Board provided an inadequate statement of reasons and bases because it failed to discuss relevant evidence regarding the appellant's claim for service connection for a left knee disability. Specifically, they stated that the Board failed to address a 1994 x-ray report that indicated the presence of medial compartment narrowing consistent with degenerative changes. Id. 

During an October 1993 VA examination for the appellant's left knee condition, the appellant stated she was currently asymptomatic. The examiner noted her recent bone scan and MRI were both normal. The physical examination indicated normal function of her left knee, leg and ankle and there was no evidence of swelling, deformity, or instability. Id. The appellant had normal range of motion in her left knee. The examiner opined the appellant had a healed remote left tibia stress fracture, absent sequelae, and she was fit for full duty or for re-enlistment. Id. 

During a June 1994 VA examination for the appellant's left knee condition, the appellant stated she had intermittent fleeting pain in her left knee, but no long-term pain, locking or swelling. The examiner stated that both left and right knees and tibias were normal on examination, she could stand on her heels or toes and could hop vigorously on either leg. Id. There was no effusion or tenderness and her range of motion was normal in both left and right knees. An attached 1994 x-ray report indicated medial compartment narrowing consistent with degenerative changes. The examiner opined that the appellant did not have any abnormality of her left knee, leg, or ankle. Id.  

During an April 2016 private medical evaluation, the appellant reported chronic intermittent pain in her left knee that had been ongoing for approximately 6 months, but without any injury or event. See October 2016 Private Medical Treatment Records. The appellant denied any mechanical symptoms or instability. X-rays indicated trace degenerative changes in the patellofemoral joint, but the physician stated advanced imaging, including MRI's, were currently unnecessary and recommended multiple conservative treatment options. Id. A May 2016 x-ray of the appellant's right knee indicated a possible osteochondral defect but there was no fracture, dislocation, or joint effusion. Id. 

In a January 2020 Disability Benefits Questionnaire, the appellant's private examiner diagnosed her with bilateral knee tendonitis, left tibia stress fracture and left knee pain. The appellant reported left knee pain in 1992, a confirmed stress fracture, and stated she has had pain since that time. The examiner opined the appellant's left knee condition was due to her active service because her pain started during service. In addition, they opined her right knee condition was due to her service-connected left knee condition due to compensating for her chronic left knee pain. Id. The examiner concluded it is well known overcompensation from one knee can lead to tendonitis in the other knee, and therefore, the left knee condition caused the right knee condition. Id. 

Unfortunately, the medical evidence in the claims file is insufficient to decide the claim on the merits. First, while the January 2020 private examiner provided a positive nexus opinion, they failed to provide adequate rationale in support of their opinion and failed to consider the two VA examinations in October 1993 and June 1994, including the x-rays, MRI, and bone scan, that all indicated the appellant's bilateral knees and legs were normal, that she was asymptomatic and fit for full duty. Id. However, the June 1994 examiner failed to discuss why they disregarded the 1994 x-ray indicating the presence of degenerative changes in the left knee prior to opining her left knee was normal. 

The Board finds that due to conflicting medical evidence and inadequate rationale, a new medical opinion is necessary before the claims can be adjudicated on the merits. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"), see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). 

The Board finds there is a deficiency in the record that existed prior to the decision on appeal, VA's failure to provide the appellant with an adequate VA examination prior to the rating decision and to comply with current regulations. Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee stress fracture, including as secondary to left knee condition, is remanded.

3. Readjudication of a claim of entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain, poor prior conditioning, stress phenomenon, is remanded.

As the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for left knee pain, and as a decision on the merits of that claim could significantly impact the issue of service connection for a right knee and ankle condition, including secondary to a left knee condition, it finds the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee and ankle condition is inextricably intertwined with the claim and therefore must also be remanded. See Harris v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?180 (1991). 

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. 

The Board finds there is a deficiency in the record that existed prior to the decision on appeal, VA's failure to provide the appellant with an adequate VA examination prior to the rating decision and to comply with current regulations. Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from a new and appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the appellant's left knee condition. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review. After reviewing the record, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Provide an opinion whether the appellant's left knee condition 1) began during service; or, 2) was caused by, or is related to, any incident of service. The examiner must discuss 1) the appellant's statements that her symptoms started during service and continued since that time, 2) the STRs that indicate she reported left knee pain, 3) the June 1994 x-ray that indicated medial compartment narrowing consistent with degenerative changes, and 4) the January 2020 private medical opinion. 

The examiner is advised that the appellant is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the appellant's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

2. If the examiner opines the appellant's left knee condition was due to service, then provide a VA medical opinion from a new and appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the appellant's right knee and right ankle conditions. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review. After reviewing the record, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Provide an opinion whether the appellant's right knee and ankle conditions 1) began during service; or, 2) were caused by, or is related to, any incident of the appellant's service. 

b.	Provide an opinion whether, but for the appellant's left knee condition, she would not have a current disability of a right knee condition or right ankle condition.  

c.	Whether the appellant's right knee and right ankle condition would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for her left knee condition. 

If the examiner opines that the right knee or right ankle condition would result in less functional impairment but for the left knee condition, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

The examiner is advised that the appellant is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the appellant's reports, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Aubee, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.