Citation Nr: A25031692
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-436140
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial, 50 percent rating, but no higher, for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder (other specified trauma) is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

Entitlement to an initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, for status post closed fracture of left 3rd finger (fracture of the left third finger), is granted, subject to controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected other specified trauma symptoms and overall impairment have more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity but have not more nearly approximated deficiencies in most areas. 

2. Symptoms of the Veteran's fracture of the left third finger have not at any time during the claim period more nearly approximated limitation of motion of the finger with a gap of one inch (2.5 centimeters) or more between the fingertip and the proximal transverse crease of the palm of the hand, with the finger flexed to the extent possible and extension is limited by no more than 30 degrees.  However, the symptoms fall within the actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, for which the minimum compensable rating for the joint is warranted.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for other specified trauma have been met.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §§?4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9410.

2. The criteria for an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for fracture of the left third finger have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5229. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2004 to July 2014.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, the AOJ granted service connection for other specified trauma disorder with an evaluation of 30 percent effective November 1, 2021, and continued the noncompensable rating for fracture of the left third finger after the Veteran filed a February 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review. Previously, the AOJ denied service connection for other specified trauma disorder in an April 2022 rating decision and granted service connection with a noncompensable rating for fracture of the left third finger in a February 2022 rating decision. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. In the April 2024 VA Form 10182 the Veteran sought to appeal his 30 percent rating for other specified trauma and his noncompensable rating for fracture of the left third finger. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 and February 2022 AOJ decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

General Legal Principles 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology and impairment with the criteria set forth in VA's Rating Schedule.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Where an award of service connection for a disability has been granted and the assignment of an initial evaluation for that disability is disputed, separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Here, however, as shown below, the evidence warrants a uniform 50 percent rating for other specified trauma and a uniform 10 percent rating for fracture of the left third finger.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent for other specified trauma is granted.

The schedular criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities incorporate the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130. The Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder is rated 50 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9410, and is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Other specified trauma is rated using the same criteria under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders per 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, a 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent disability rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. On the other hand, if the evidence shows that the veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned. Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The AOJ granted service connection and assigned an initial rating of 30 percent for other specified trauma effective November 1, 2021.  The appeal period therefore begins on November 1, 2021.

During a December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported he lives with his long-term girlfriend, and they have a son together. He reported sporadic contact with military friends, civilian friends, and family members. He noted that he was close with one sister. The Veteran reported he enjoyed various hobbies including surfing, snowboarding and martial arts, and that he had a social group with his gym. Further, the Veteran is employed teaching tactical training to military forces and jiujitsu at the gym. The Veteran denied mental health services, suicide attempts, self-harm, hospitalizations, and medications. The clinician found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The clinician noted symptoms to include depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, and disturbances of motivation and mood. 

For the following reasons an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for other specified trauma is warranted, as requested by the Veteran's representative in the brief attached to the notice of disagreement.

Throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran has endorsed, and the clinician reported, symptoms of flattened affect and disturbances of motivation and mood. Further, the Veteran reported feelings of social isolation. Although the evidence does not show each specific symptoms listed in the criteria for a 50 percent rating, the symptoms noted in the?criteria are not intended to constitute an?exhaustive list, but rather are?to?serve as examples?of?the type and degree?of?the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular disability?rating. Mauerhan, supra. Thus, even though not all the listed symptoms warranting a?50?percent?rating?are shown, the type and degrees of symptomatology contemplated for a 50 percent rating appear to be demonstrated through the period on appeal.  Based on the above lay and medical evidence, the Veteran's symptoms and impairment throughout the appeal period more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board recognizes that the symptoms listed in the?rating?schedule are essentially examples?of?the type and degree?of?symptoms indicative?of?the level?of?impairment required?for?each such?rating, and that the Veteran need not demonstrate those exact symptoms to warrant a higher disability?rating. The above evidence?of?record reflects that the Veteran's?other specified trauma?has manifested in sufficient symptoms?of?the type and extent, frequency, or severity to result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

However, the Veteran?is?not?entitled?to?a higher, 70?percent?rating. The evidence of record does not show that the Veteran experienced symptoms such occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. In addition, VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran is currently employed teaching tactical training to military forces and jiujitsu. The Veteran did not indicate that his occupational functioning was impaired by his other specified trauma. Moreover, the Veteran maintains, even if to a somewhat limited degree, family and other social relations.  Thus, the record reflects that the overall impairment did not more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking and/or mood. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the symptoms and impairment caused by the Veteran's other specified trauma more nearly approximate the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent for other specified trauma is warranted.  38?U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. § 4.3.  However, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial rating higher than 50 percent is warranted.? Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §§?5107(b), 4.3, is therefore not for application in this regard.? Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). 

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the facture of the left third finger is denied. 

The AOJ in the February 2022 rating decision rated the Veteran's fracture of the left third finger under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5229, applicable to the left third finger.

Diagnostic Code 5229 pertains to limitation of motion of the index finger or of the long finger. Diagnostic Code 5229 provides that a noncompensable (0 percent) evaluation is warranted for limitation of motion of the index finger or the long finger with a gap of less than one inch (2.5 centimeters) between the fingertip and the proximal transverse crease of the palm of the hand, with the finger flexed to the extent possible and extension is limited by no more than 30 degrees. A rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 5229 requires limitation of motion of the index finger or of the long finger with a gap of one inch (2.5 centimeters) or more between the fingertip and the proximal transverse crease of the palm of the hand, with the finger flexed to the extent possible and extension is limited by no more than 30 degrees.

The AOJ has rated the Veteran's left ring finger disability as noncompensable under Diagnostic Code 5229, effective from November 1, 2021.  The appeal period therefore begins on November 1, 2021.

In the December 2021 VA examination, the clinician reported a diagnosis of closed fracture distal phalanx third left ringer, resolved. The Veteran indicated that tip of his left third finger was cut off after an accident where a 50-cal gun smashed his finger.  He underwent surgery in 2009. The Veteran reported his current symptom in his left third finger is numbness.  The Veteran did not report flare ups. However, he did report functional loss as he has difficulty typing with his left hand. The clinician noted that the Veteran's initial range of motion (ROM) was all normal. The clinician reported the flexion and extension endpoints were all normal. Further, there was no gap between the pad of the thumb and fingers, no gap between the finger and proximal transverse crease of the hand on maximal flexion, and no evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation on the joint or associated soft tissue. The clinician noted the Veteran's flexion and extension on passive ROM was the same as on active ROM, all normal.  Further, his left third finger did not exhibit pain on passive ROM, weight-bearing, non-weight-bearing, active motion, passive motion, or on rest. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with no additional functional loss after three repetitions. The Veteran's hand grip was 5/5 with no muscle atrophy noted, no ankylosis, and no other pertinent physical findings.  Further, the Veteran did not require any assistive devices. Moreover, the clinician noted that the Veteran would not be equally well served by an amputation of the left third finger. Diagnostic testing was performed including imaging studies with no degenerative or post-traumatic arthritis, or other significant findings identified.   The clinician reported that the Veteran lost 0-1 week of work time in the last twelve months in his occupation as an instructor due to his difficulty typing with his left hand. 

The above evidence does not show that the fracture of the left third finger more nearly approximates either favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of 2 or more digits, or the thumb which is required for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Codes 5216 to 5224.  There was a specific finding of no ankylosis, and range of motion findings to include repetitive use testing and consideration of significant loss of functional ability after repeated use and during flare-ups reflect that there was no additional loss of motion or functional equivalent of such ankylosis.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 23-24 (2021) (the ankylosis criterion in VA's General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis during a flare), id. at 8, fn. 7 ("Ankylosis is not limited to spinal joints, but can occur in any joint, as is reflected throughout various DCs within the Rating Schedule. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5200 (shoulder), DC 5205 (elbow), DC 5214 (wrist), DCs 5216-5227 (digits of the hand), DC 5250 (hip), DC 5256 (knee), DC 5270 (ankle). Our analysis is limited to the General Rating Formula, and we take no position on the application of the principle of functional equivalence to other parts of the Rating Schedule").

In addition, a compensable rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5229 based on the gap between the fingertip and crease of the palm. Under DC 5229 a noncompensable (0 percent) evaluation is warranted for limitation of motion of the index finger or the long finger with a gap of less than one inch (2.5 centimeters) between the fingertip and the proximal transverse crease of the palm of the hand, with the finger flexed to the extent possible and extension is limited by no more than 30 degrees. A rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 5229 requires limitation of motion of the index finger or of the long finger with a gap of one inch (2.5 centimeters) or more between the fingertip and the proximal transverse crease of the palm of the hand, with the finger flexed to the extent possible and extension is limited by no more than 30 degrees. Here, the clinician in the December 2021 examination noted that the Veteran did not have limitation of motion or any other findings that would suggest a compensable rating.  

In the brief attached to the notice of disagreement, the Veteran's representative requested a 10 percent rating under DC 8515, asking that the disability be rated by analogy because of the symptom of numbness.  However, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, "[i]t is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint," and the numbness from the Veteran's healed left third finger fracture appears to the Board to fall within this language.  A 10 percent rating is therefore warranted under the current DC 5229, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.  The request for a 10 percent rating under DC 8515 therefore need not be considered.

For the forgoing reasons, a 10 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's left third finger disability.  However, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether the Veteran's facture of the left third finger symptoms more nearly approximate a rating higher than 10 percent.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a rating, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application in this regard.  Lynch, 21 F. 4th at 781-82.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board has considered the Veteran's claims and decided entitlement based on the evidence of record.  The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.D. Strain, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.