Citation Nr: A25031601
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 241114-489206
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from November 1967 to November 1970.

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the January 2024 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for COPD is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

VA examinations and negative etiology opinions were obtained for the Veteran's chronic sinusitis and COPD in September 2024.  However, the Board finds the negative etiology opinions inadequate because the examiner stated that he relied upon there being "no medical or scientific evidence" available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the conditions at issue and the herbicide agents, but he failed to provide citations to any such medical literature he relied upon. The Board acknowledges that the examiner provided two links for each condition, but the hyperlinked articles do not address the issue, i.e., whether there is a connection between the conditions and herbicide agent exposure.  Thus, without knowing which medical literature he relied upon, which formed the basis of the opinions, the Board cannot assess the adequacy of the opinion or make an informed decision using the opinions as to whether service connection is warranted for the Veteran's claims. See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105 (2012).

Remand is therefore required to obtain new etiology opinions by a new VA examiner. Furthermore, if medical literature is relied upon in rendering this determination, the VA examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain addendum opinions to assess the natures and etiologies of the Veteran's COPD and chronic sinusitis. 

Regardless of who offers the opinions, if the examiner determines that an opinion may not be offered without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination.

In providing the etiology opinions, the examiner must consider the Veteran's statements regarding onset of the Veteran's symptoms, regardless of whether there is any contemporaneous, corroborating medical records.

The examiner is then specifically instructed to provide the following opinion:

Is it "at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher)" that the Veteran's condition began in (i.e., temporal onset) or is otherwise related to his time in service, including his conceded herbicide agent exposure, yes, or no?

If medical literature is relied upon in rendering this determination, the VA examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized and discuss how such literature is being relied upon in formulating the requested opinions.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.J. Cho

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.