Citation Nr: A25031196
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240426-437526
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

As the claim was granted in a June 2024 rating decision, entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

In a June 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) granted entitlement to service connection for other trauma and stressor related disorder (claimed as an acquired psychiatric condition to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD); thus, the AOJ fully awarded the benefit sought on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD has been resolved in full; the appeal is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202(a), 20.801.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1974 to September 1977.  This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for OSA, sinusitis, a right knee disability and a right ankle disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for PTSD

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific determination with which the claimant disagrees.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a) ("[T]he Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees.").  

In this case, the AOJ granted service connection for other trauma and stressor related disorder in a June 2024 rating decision, noting that the Veteran's claim was for an acquired psychiatric disorder generally, to include PTSD.  As the AOJ granted in full the benefit sought by the Veteran, there is no remaining allegation of error of fact or law for appellate consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d).  Thus, the June 2024 rating decision constituted a full grant of the benefit sought by the Veteran, thereby resolving the issue in full.  Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (noting that a grant of service connection extinguishes appeals before the Board).  

With regard to the April 2024 appeal of the AOJ's denial of service connection for PTSD, no determination remains with which the Veteran disagrees.  Moreover, in the current appeal the Veteran filed his intent to file on December 14, 2023, and he is currently assigned an effective date of December 14, 2023.  Therefore, the claim is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA 

2. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis 

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability 

The Veteran contends that service connection for OSA is warranted as secondary to service connected tinnitus.  See February 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ; February 2024 Lay Statement.  The Veteran's representative asserts that direct service connection for OSA is also warranted.  See May 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation.  With respect to the other disabilities, the Veteran and his representative contend that direct service connection is warranted.  See May 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation; February 2024 Lay Statement.  

However, the Board cannot yet adjudicate the Veteran's claims because the AOJ failed to obtain medical opinions with sufficient information to decide the claims.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

In a March 2024 opinion addressing the Veteran's toxic exposures, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by exposure to jet fumes and fuel after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  As rationale, the examiner reasoned that OSA was "a   structural disease characterized by recurrent collapse of the pharyngeal airway during sleep, resulting in substantially reduced or complete cessation of airflow despite ongoing breathing efforts," which "leads to intermittent disturbances in gas exchange."  The examiner listed contributing risk factors of OSA to include age; endocrine disorders; heart or kidney failure; lifestyle habits such as alcohol use and smoking; and obesity.

In another March 2024 VA medical opinion addressing direct and secondary service connection, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of tinnitus.  As rationale, the examiner did not consider tinnitus.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a service connected respiratory condition.

In the same March 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by a respiratory condition during service.  As rationale, the examiner relied on the "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of [OSA] and military service or Tinnitus."  The examiner attributed OSA to a post service event, illness, or injury in light of the lack of chronicity during service or afterward.  The examiner explained that OSA was a "structural disease characterized by recurrent collapse of the pharyngeal airway during sleep, resulting in substantially reduced or complete cessation of airflow despite ongoing breathing efforts."  The examiner stated that the "single strongest risk factor" for OSA is "an obese body habitus, which results in an anatomical crowding of one's airway due to excess soft tissue from a large neck circumference."  The examiner concluded that OSA was not caused by tinnitus. 

These opinions do not provide sufficient information to adjudicate the claim because they recite general medical principles without applying them to the facts of the Veteran's case.  See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60-61 (2018) (holding that a medical opinion was inadequate as a matter of law because the rationale was based solely on general articles and did not discuss any facts pertaining to the Veteran's condition or individual circumstances).  Additionally, the opinion for secondary service connection did not address aggravation.  See El Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (stating that a secondary service connection medical opinion was inadequate because it did not discuss aggravation).

Regarding the claimed condition of sinusitis, in a March 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's sinusitis was less likely than not caused by jet fumes and fuel exposure after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  As rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran was exposed to jet fumes, exhaust, and jet fuel during service from September 1974 to September 1977.  The examiner based the negative opinion on "a lack of evidence to support a nexus or chronicity," considering the Veteran's "exposure and common etiologies of chronic sinusitis," in addition to review of the Veteran's medical history.

In a separate March 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's sinusitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by a sinus condition during service.  As rationale, the examiner relied upon the "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and military service."  Because of the lack of chronicity during service or afterwards, the examiner attributed the Veteran's sinusitis to a post service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner stated that service treatment records were absent for evidence of sinusitis during service.

These opinions do not provide sufficient information to adjudicate the claim because they rely upon the lack of evidence to form a negative nexus and the opinions do not address all relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements.  See Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272 (2015) (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (finding that an examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions that he had sustained a back injury in service); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (stating that an examiner's opinion failed to consider whether lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of the Veteran's disability such that his claim could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence).  

Regarding the latter, during the March 2024 VA examination for sinusitis, the Veteran reported the onset of symptoms in 1975.  He described difficulty breathing through his nose and constant drainage at that time.  The Veteran stated that since onset, the condition "continued for the next several decades," with an eventual surgical intervention in December 2021.  The March 2024 VA nexus opinions should have considered the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.  See also February 2024 Lay Statement (describing in service treatment for sinusitis, which continued to worsen since onset).  Additionally, the Veteran's service treatment records contain record of treatment for rhinitis.  See February 1977 Service Treatment Record.  The medical opinion of record should have addressed in service treatment for this respiratory condition.

In a March 2024 VA medical opinion for the Veteran's bilateral knees, the examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee pain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his in service knee pain.  As rationale, the examiner relied upon the "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of bilateral osteoarthritis of the knees and military service."  The examiner again found that a post-service event, illness, or injury was a more likely etiology based on the lack of chronicity during service or after service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had knee pain and abrasions during service that "were acute, resolved[,] and less likely than not related to current diagnosis."

The March 2024 opinion regarding the Veteran's right knee does not consider all relevant evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements, and it relies upon a lack of evidence in support of a negative nexus.  During the March 2024 VA examination of the knees, the Veteran reported 1974 onset of bilateral knee pain while stationed at the infantry base in Ft. Polk, with bilateral knee discomfort since 1974.  In his February 2024 statement, he attributed his knee pain to in service "forced marches, double time runs or cattle trailers," with "extreme jarring."  Additionally, during service, the Veteran injured his right femur in a bicycle accident.  See December 1974 Service Treatment Record.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that addresses all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including relevant service treatment records and the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

Last, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right ankle condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by ankle pain during service.  See March 2024 VA Medical Opinion.  As rationale, the examiner stated that there was a "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of   bilateral plantar calcaneal spurs and military service."  The examiner stated that a post-service event, illness, or injury was a more likely etiology in the absence of chronicity during service or after service.  The examiner also noted the absence of reports of an ankle injury in service treatment records.  Without explanation, the examiner stated that even if ankle pain during service had been recorded, "it   would be less likely than not related to current diagnosis."

The March 2024 ankle opinion does not address the Veteran's lay statements, is conclusory, and relies upon the absence of evidence.  During the March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms as pain during training exercises in 1974.  Since onset, the Veteran had intermittent pain that had progressed to daily pain by the time of the examination.  The Veteran claimed that his ankle pain was due to "forced marches, double time runs or cattle trailers," and "the extreme jarring" caused "constant deterioration" of his ankles.  Additionally, the Veteran had a bicycle accident during service.  See December 1974 Service Treatment Record.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that addresses all relevant evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements and the impact of a bicycle accident, if any.

On remand, the AOJ will readjudicate the claims for service connection for OSA, sinusitis, a right knee disability, and a right ankle disability.  In so doing, the AOJ will consider all relevant evidence of record, including the May 2024 informal hearing presentation.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain medical opinions from an appropriate VA clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's OSA, sinusitis, right knee, and right ankle disabilities.  No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the clinician determines otherwise.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be provided to, and reviewed by, the clinician before rendering the opinions.  

The reviewing clinician must opine on:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include in service exposure to jet fuel and fumes.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not due to the total potential exposure from the Veteran's military deployments.

(c.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

(d.) Whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase in severity due to) the Veteran's service connected tinnitus.  The opinion must address aggravation.

i.	If the service-connected tinnitus did not cause, but aggravated, the Veteran's OSA, specify, to the extent possible, the degree of disability (pathology or impairment) that has resulted from such aggravation.

(e.) Whether the Veteran's sinusitis is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include in service exposure to jet fuel and fumes; difficulty breathing/nasal drainage; and rhinitis.

(f.) Whether the Veteran's sinusitis is at least as likely as not due to the total potential exposure from the Veteran's military deployments.

(g.) Whether the Veteran's sinusitis is at least as likely as not due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

(h.) Whether the Veteran's right knee disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include an in-service bicycle accident, right knee pain, marching, double time runs, and riding in cattle trailers.

(i.) Whether the Veteran's right ankle disability is at least as likely as not related to an in service injury, event, or disease, to include an in-service bicycle accident, right ankle pain, marching, double time runs, and riding in cattle trailers.

The clinician should provide full explanation of the rationale for each opinion.  In formulating any opinion, the reviewing clinician should also address all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including all lay statements during VA examinations, the February 2024 lay statement, and all relevant service treatment records.

The reviewing clinician is not to mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.  The Board reminds the clinician that the absence of in-service evidence of a medical diagnosis is not always fatal to a service connection claim, as the laws and regulations do not require in-service complaints of, or treatment for, a diagnosed condition to establish service connection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Garcia, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.