Citation Nr: A25031286
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-456207
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to revision of an October 2016 rating decision that denied service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE). 

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no greater, for  the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability is granted effective June 25, 2015. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's claim of service connection for PTSD was denied in an October 2016 rating decision that became final because he did not submit a Notice of Disagreement, or new and material evidence within the appeal period.  

2. Although the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were before the regional office (RO) in October 2016, the statutory or regulatory provisions then extant were not correctly applied, and the failure to correctly apply those laws and regulations manifestly changed the outcome of the October 2016 rating decision.

3. During the appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability symptoms did more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment was not shown.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Clear and unmistakable error is shown in the October 2016 RO rating decision and it is revised to grant service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability effective June 25, 2015.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 5109A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.303.

2. During the appeal period, the criteria for an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for service-connected acquired psychiatric disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2009 to June 2015.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the March 2024 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found that there was no clear and unmistakable error by not establishing service connection for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder prior to April 25, 2023.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board has rephrased the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder, major depressive disorder, and general anxiety disorder as a claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (stating that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record). 

1. Entitlement to revision of an October 2016 rating decision that denied service connection for acquired psychiatric disability is granted on the basis of CUE.

The Veteran asserts that an October 2016 rating decision that denied him entitlement to service connection for PTSD, anxiety, depression and memory loss was CUE.  

A previous RO determination that is final and binding will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. Where evidence establishes such error, the prior decision will be reversed or amended.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). Here, the Veteran did not submit a timely Notice of Disagreement challenging the October 2016 rating decision that denied service connection for PTSD, anxiety, depression and memory loss, and new and material evidence was not procured within one year of its promulgation. Accordingly, the October 2016 rating decision became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(a), 3.160(d), 3.156(b), 20.302, 20.1103.

Once a decision becomes final, it may only be revised by a showing of CUE.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105. CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error." It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error.  Simply to claim CUE on the basis that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE.  Similarly, neither can broad-brush allegations of "failure to follow the regulations" or "failure to give due process," or any other general, nonspecific claim of "error."  Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993).  In addition, failure to address a specific regulatory provision involves harmless error unless the outcome would have been manifestly different.  Id. at 44.

Where evidence establishes CUE, the prior decision will be reversed or amended.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).  For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision.  Id. 

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely "a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated"; and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was rendered.  Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).

The error must be of a type that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision.  See Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 235-36 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999).  A manifest change in the outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset.  King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433, 441 (2014).  The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different.  Id. at 442. "The governing law requires that the error be 'undebatable' and that the commission of the alleged error must have 'manifestly changed the outcome' of the decision." Id.  As such, the evidence of record at the time of the decision being challenged must show that the benefit sought "undoubtedly would have been granted" but for the error.  Id. at 441.  If the Board determines that "the evidence of record would not have been so unequivocal that the outcome would undoubtedly be different," revision on the basis of CUE is not warranted. 

CUE is a collateral attack on an otherwise final rating decision by an RO.  Smith v. Brown, 35 F.3d 1516, 1527 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  As such, there is a presumption of validity that attaches to a final decision, and when such a decision is collaterally attacked, the presumption becomes even stronger.  Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44. Therefore, a claimant who seeks to obtain retroactive benefits based on CUE has a much heavier burden than that placed on a claimant who seeks to establish prospective entitlement to VA benefits.  Akins v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 228, 231 (1991).

Assertions that the previous adjudication at issue "improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence" does not satisfy the stringent legal requirements for CUE. See Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43.

As a threshold matter, the Board finds that the arguments advanced by the Veteran allege CUE with the requisite specificity. See Simmons v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 104 (2003).  The Board will therefore adjudicate the merits of the claim.

In the October 2016 rating decision, the RO found that the Veteran was not entitled to service connection for PTSD because the evidence did not show an event in service, he failed to appear for a VA examination and the evidence did not show a diagnosed disability.  

In order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The Board finds that there are clear and unmistakable errors in the October 2016 rating decision.  The RO found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed disability, but the evidence includes VA medical records showing that the Veteran had been diagnosed with major depressive disorder and panic disorder.  At an April 2016 initial VA psychiatry assessment, the Veteran reported psychiatric symptoms and reported a stressful parachute jump in service.  he reported that he was referred for mental health treatment in the Army and saw a provider one time.  The Veteran was diagnosed with major depressive disorder, and panic symptoms with a notation to rule out PTSD. The advanced registered nurse practitioner (ARNP) stated that the diagnosis was "based on the DSM-5 criteria."   

At a July 2016 VA psychiatry appointment, the Veteran reported experiencing a distressing parachute jump in 2012.  The psychiatric nurse practitioner diagnosed the Veteran with major depressive disorder, and panic symptoms with a notation to rule out PTSD.  The psychiatric nurse practitioner stated that the diagnosis was "based on the DSM-5 criteria."   

Thus, the October 2016 rating decision was factually incorrect.  These records were before the RO at the time of the rating decision and were not addressed.  Instead, the RO arrived at the incorrect conclusion that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with a psychiatric condition.  

The October 2016 rating decision was also incorrect in stating that there had not been an event in service.  The service medical records include treatment in March 2012 following a parachute jump in which he injured his ankle.  He was noted to be in mild distress.  In December 2013, it was noted in the service medical records that the Veteran had a positive depression screening.  

Although there is no record reflecting that the Veteran appeared for a VA examination, the VA medical records that were evidence at the time included a positive nexus statement.  A clinician, in a March 2016 VA medical record, stated that the Veteran had prominent symptoms of depression as well as indications of anxiety relating to a malfunctioning parachute incident during active service.  

Accordingly, the Board concludes that a reasonable adjudicator could have determined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder warranted service connection at the time of the October 2016 rating decision. The AOJ's findings can be said to constitute an error about which reasonable minds could not differ.  Therefore, the Veteran has met the heavy burden required to support a CUE claim and an earlier effective date for service connection for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is warranted on that basis.

The Veteran's motion seeking revision of the October 2016 rating decision on the basis of CUE is granted.  The Veteran filed his claim for service connection for his psychiatric disorder on May 31, 2016.  He separated from service on June 24, 2015.  He filed his claim within one year of his separation from service.  Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is granted effective June 25, 2015.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating of 70 percent, but no greater, for an acquired psychiatric disability is granted. 

The Veteran is of the position that he is entitled to a higher disability rating for his acquired psychiatric disability.  He is currently rated at 50 percent from September 8, 2022 under Diagnostic Code 9411.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, psychiatric impairment is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  A veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Additionally, while symptomatology should be the primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating, § 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused the requisite occupational and social impairment.  Id.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for PTSD in October 2022.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have more than one mental disorder diagnosed.  The examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The examiner noted that, according to the reviewed medical records, the Veteran was diagnosed with major depressive disorder.  The Board finds that this conflicts with the examiner's earlier assessment that the Veteran did not have more than one mental disorder.  

At the time of the examination, the Veteran indicated that he had been employed by his employer for six months.  He stated that he had not been disciplined or written up due to misbehavior or rule-breaking at work.  The examiner noted that he exhibited persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about himself others, or the world; persistent negative emotional state; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; exaggerated startle response; problems with concentration; sleep disturbance; depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent event; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationship.

The claims file includes an April 2023 Independent Medical Examination completed by a private medical practitioner.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran experiences hyperarousal in the form of poor sleep initiation, awakening in the middle of the night, poor concentration, anxiety and panic.  His symptoms result in avoidance behaviors inclusive of avoiding people and crowds, avoidance of talking about past experiences, emotional numbing and isolation.  His triggers include helicopters, aircrafts, loud vehicles, and slamming doors.  

The Veteran exhibits depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including in a worklike setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, flattened effect, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in understanding complex commands, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, impaired impulse control, suicidal ideation, and disorientation to time or place.   

The Veteran has recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic events that he experienced; dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which he feels or acts as if the traumatic events were recurring; intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic events; marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event. He advised the clinician that he has become distant with his family.  He also has difficulty connecting with others.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2023.  He was diagnosed with PTSD, major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and panic disorder.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran has more than one mental disorder and it is not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis.  He has occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  This level of social and occupational impairment is contemplated by the 70 percent criteria. 

The Veteran advised the examiner that he does not like to interact with his coworkers and that he feels as if he does not have anything in common with them.  He was noted as having a depressed mood; loss of interest or pleasure in most activities; significant weight loss; sleep disturbances; psychomotor changes (either moving slower than usual or being unusually agitated) that are significant enough to be noticed by others; low energy, tiredness, or fatigue, may also lose efficiency when working on routine tasks; "quite a bit" of a sense of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt; difficulty concentrating or diminished ability to make decisions; and suicidal ideation/suicide attempt or self-harm.  He reported having suicidal ideation the weekend prior to the examination, but did not have a plan.  He worries that he might actually kill himself and has been fantasizing about it.  

He also has restlessness, difficulty concentrating, irritability at times, sleep disturbances, palpitations, sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, feelings of choking, chest pain or discomfort, nausea or abdominal distress, dizziness, paresthesias, derealization, fear of losing control, fear of dying, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, problems with concentration, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and sleep disturbances.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's diagnosis progressed to PTSD to include major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder.

The Veteran stated that he worries about his relationship with his wife, children, and extended family.  He made the decision to remove himself from his extended family.  He also worries about his health.

In the Veteran's September 2022 Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, the Veteran stated that he has nightmares every night.  The evidence also includes an October 2022 statement submitted by the Veteran's mother stating that he is unhappy and does not talk to her about anything.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the VA examination and treatment records, including the Veteran's lay statements show that the Veteran's?PTSD?disability was manifested by symptoms associated with a?70 percent?rating.  The Veteran reported suicidal ideation during the appeal period, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

The Board notes that the Veteran expressed suicidal ideation, which is similar to persistent danger of self-harm and contemplated by the 100 percent criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin,?29 Vet. App. 10, 19?(2017).  However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating because her symptoms do not result in both total occupational and total social impairment. 

The Board also finds that the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating.  As noted above, the Veteran's?PTSD?symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a?70 percent?rating.  A 100 percent rating warrants evidence showing both total occupational and social impairment.  The treatment records and examination findings showed that the Veteran's thought process was clear and logical, and his communication was normal and cooperative. The evidence did not show delusions or hallucinations, and there was no indication of inappropriate behavior.  As noted above, while the Veteran did report suicidal ideation, he also denied the same at other times during the appeal period and thus, the evidence did not show evidence of persistent danger of hurting self or others.  He was consistently observed as well groomed.  In April 2023, the Veteran reported being married to his wife of over 10 years.  He was employed full time as a mechanic in April 2023, although he reported having irritable outbursts with his coworker in the past.  

The evidence of record supports finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a?70 percent?rating, but not higher, for his acquired psychiatric disability.  The criteria for a 100 percent or higher rating are not met. 

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sanders, Danielle A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.