Citation Nr: A25031132
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 181207-395937
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

The Veteran's request for entitlement to service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been withdrawn.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity, carpal tunnel syndrome is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Veteran both submitted a November 2024 letter and testified before the Board at a November 2024 hearing and stated that he wished to withdraw his request for service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

2. The competent evidence of record shows that the Veteran's right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is causally related to his active duty military service.

3. For the period on appeal, the competent evidence of record fails to establish that the Veteran currently suffers from left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome or any other left hand or wrist condition.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the appellant (or his or her authorized representative) have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from January 1982 to May 1990 and from May 1990 to January 2002.  Among his awards, the Veteran received the Meritorious Service Medal x 2, the National Defense Service Medal, and the Southwest Asia Service Medal with 2 bronze service stars.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2018 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

In the December 7, 2018, VA Form 21-4138, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on November 18, 2024.  A copy of the transcript has been prepared and is associated with the claim file.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2018 RAMP opt-in, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after VA received the RAMP opt-in and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The claim of entitlement to service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to PTSD  is dismissed.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 19.55.  Withdrawal may be made by the Veteran or by his or her authorized representative.  38 C.F.R. § 19.55.  

In the present case, the Veteran withdrew his appeal prior to the Board promulgating a decision.  Specifically, the Veteran submitted a November 11, 2024 letter in which he expressly stated that he wished to withdraw the issue of entitlement to service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to PTSD.  Further, the Veteran appeared at a November 2024 Board hearing and reiterated his position that he would like to withdraw the issue of entitlement to service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to PTSD.

In Acree v. O'Rourke, 891 F.3d 1009 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that the withdrawal must be explicit, unambiguous, and done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action by the Veteran and the subsequent Board dismissal must include findings as to all three elements.  

At the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran explicitly and unambiguously withdrew the issue of entitlement to service connection for periodic limb (leg) movements and sleep disturbances as secondary to PTSD.  The Veteran further indicated that he fully understood the consequences of this withdrawal.  

As the Veteran has withdrawn this appeal, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal and it is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is granted.    

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for right upper extremity, carpal tunnel syndrome.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted.

The July 12, 2018, treatment record documents that the Veteran underwent an electromyography (EMG) diagnostic test which confirmed a diagnosis of right carpal tunnel syndrome.  Further, the Veteran testified at a November 2024 Board hearing, and he indicated that his right hand and wrist problems developed in-service and persist to this date.  The Veteran testified that, as a helicopter pilot, he was required to manually operate hand controls because the hydraulic systems frequently failed.  The Veteran additionally stated that firing a .50 caliber machine gun and Hellfire missiles impacted his hands.  The Veteran testified that he did not want to report his symptoms in-service because he did not want to be taken off flight status and lose his flight pay.  The Veteran added that he self-medicated and performed his job for as long as he could and to the best of his ability.   As the Veteran engaged in combat and his testimony is consistent with the circumstances of his service, his testimony establishes proof of an in-service event.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(b).  Therefore, the first two elements of service connection are satisfied.

Turning to the question of whether there is a nexus, or causal link, between the Veteran's right carpal tunnel syndrome and his military service, the Veteran credibly testified that his pain began in-service and has continued to the present.  

The VA did not obtain a medical examination on this issue.  The Board acknowledges the May 2024 VA examination which does consider the Veteran's hands, but this report is outside of the evidentiary window and therefore could not be considered.  

In the present case, the evidence shows that: 1) the Veteran currently has right carpal tunnel syndrome, 2) the Veteran has credibly reported that his symptoms began during service and have persisted since service, and 3) these same symptoms were diagnosed as right carpal tunnel syndrome after discharge.  For these reasons, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for service connection for right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his bilateral hands and wrists in May 2024.  However, this report could not be considered for the reason that it is outside of the evidentiary window.

Initially, the competent evidence of record does not identify a current left hand or wrist disability.  For the period on appeal, the only evidence of a left wrist condition is contained in a September 2004 treatment record which mentions that the Veteran had a recent MRI which showed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome right greater than left.  The record further documents right elbow, hand, and wrist complaints but records no symptoms for the left elbow, hand, or wrist.  The record also does not report any treatment for the left hand, wrist, or elbow.  Under the assessment section of the report, the physician only diagnoses the Veteran with right cubital syndrome and right carpal tunnel syndrome.  The physician does not diagnose the Veteran with any left hand, wrist, or elbow condition.  There are no additional medical records documenting any complaint of left wrist, hand, or elbow pain or treatment for left wrist, hand, or elbow pain.  

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran has not provided any competent evidence indicating that he suffers from a current left wrist or hand condition.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has stated that he believes that he suffers from a left wrist or hand condition.  The Board accepts that the Veteran is competent to testify as to his symptomatology.  A Veteran is competent to report on that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  However, there is no indication that the Veteran has the medical expertise and training necessary to diagnose his own medical condition or to opine as to its etiology.  These issues are outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

(Continued on the next page)

?

As there is no medical evidence, or any other evidence, demonstrating the existence of a current left wrist or hand disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome by any theory of causation, including direct service connection and presumptive service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992) (finding service connection presupposes a current diagnosis of the condition claimed).  The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation, and without a current disability, service connection is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 1110.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran has failed to show credible evidence of a current left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome or any other current left wrist or hand disability.  As such, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), is therefore not applicable to this claim.  Accordingly, service connection for left upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is denied.

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Litts, Norman W. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.