Citation Nr: A25031640
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240731-462318
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition to include degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease as secondary to his service-connected disabilities is remanded.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 

The Veteran had active air service from February 1981 to February 2001.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.2400(a)(1). Here, a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for a back condition to include degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease as secondary to his service-connected disabilities is remanded. The November 2023 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the AMA applies. The Veteran appealed that decision by submitting a July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)). The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As a result, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition to include degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease as secondary to his service-connected disabilities is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his back condition is due to active service to include as secondary to his service-connected disabilities, right ankle laxity, left/right foot injury, and bilateral ingrown toenails.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023. The September 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion for direct service connection on the question of to whether the Veteran's back condition was due to active service. The November 2023 VA examiner also provided negative nexus opinions for secondary service connection as to whether the Veteran's back condition was proximately due to and/or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities. 

The Board finds the November 2023 negative nexus opinions associated with secondary service connection to be adequate. 

However, the September 2023 medical opinion is inadequate. The VA examiner stated conclusions that were not supported by appropriate rationale. Further, the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay reports regarding the onset of his back disability in service and his symptoms/medical treatment associated with his back that continued after service. See January 2023 C&P Exam; March 2023 Buddy/Lay Statement; and March VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. The RO's reliance on the inadequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, the Board finds further development of medical opinion evidence in this matter is required. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).      

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file for addendum medical opinion(s), by a physician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion in this appeal, to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Another VA examination for the Veteran's claimed back disability should only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinion.

Based on the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's back disability was incurred in or etiologically related to his active service.

The VA examiner must address the Veteran's lay reports that reflect his back disability began in service and that the symptoms/medical treatments associated with his back continued after service. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In forming the opinions, the examiner is advised that to be adequate, medical literature presented is not a substitute for medical rationale based on medical principles and facts. The Veteran's specific medical conditions must be discussed in arriving at the conclusions. 

All opinions must be supported by a sufficient rationale and not just conclusions. A negative opinion cannot be solely based on the absence of medical evidence. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without resort to speculation, the examiner should explain his/her inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Ivan Franklin.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.