Citation Nr: A25031326
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 221018-286838
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of whether the Appellant's character of discharge is a bar to entitlement to VA benefits, exclusive of health care and related benefits authorized under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, for tinnitus is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to VA compensation for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Appellant served on active duty from May 13, 1991 to September 4, 1992. He received an other than honorable discharge.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2021 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Appellant elected the direct review docket. As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the decision on appeal (November 15, 2021). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. Because these matters are being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) upon readjudication of this claim.

The Appellant seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. Additionally, the Appellant seeks VA compensation for PTSD. Service connection, for treatment purposes only pursuant to Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, for PTSD was established in the rating decision on appeal. 

Service Connection for Bilateral Hearing Loss and Tinnitus

The September 2023 rating decision relied on a November 2021 VA audiology examination and opinion. This opinion, in part, states:

There is no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation, which is objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty from conceded noise. There is no report of complaint/treatment for hearing decrease in STRs or at separation. Although noise exposure is conceded and the relationship of noise, auditory damage and hearing loss is well-established, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone. There must be a nexus of auditory damage to relate current hearing loss to military noise and not another etiology. The evidence is against a nexus in this case, therefore it is less likely than not that the hearing loss is related to military noise exposure. 

In providing a negative nexus regarding the Appellant's tinnitus, the examiner noted that the symptoms began after the Appellant left military service and the onset as the early 1990's. However, the examiner did not address whether this onset was within one year of the Appellant's discharge from active duty or otherwise causally related to his military service, including his conceded exposure to hazardous noise. 

An Appellant does not have to show diagnosed hearing loss at the time of discharge in order to establish service connection. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993); see also Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). The essence of the proffered opinion is the lack of any documented hearing loss in service or during the one-year period post-discharge; the examiner does not address whether exposure to hazardous noise caused the Appellant's hearing loss. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the appellant's report of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in the service medical records to provide a negative opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding a medical opinion must contain clear conclusions with supporting data, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two). Therefore, the November opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes. Accordingly, in order for the Board to adequately assess the service connection claims, a remand is necessary in order to obtain an adequate VA examination. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (a VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007). This remand is required to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

Character of Service and Entitlement to VA Compensation for PTSD

The initial question for the Board is whether the characterization of the Appellant's period of service from May 13, 1991 to September 4, 1992 is in appellate status. 

In determining the scope of a claim for benefits, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has determined that the scope of the issues on appeal must be understood from the viewpoint of a claimant who may not be required to understand sophisticated legal or medical distinctions, and that "the claimant's intent in filing a claim is paramount to construing its breadth." Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). VA must apply a sympathetic reading to pleadings. Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 232, 254 (2007). Moreover, VA must look beyond the 4 corners of the application for benefits. Shea v. Wilkie, 926 F.3d. 1362, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2019). The proper inquiry is "informed by, but not limited to, looking to what the particular veteran could have reasonably expected to have included in the filing of such a request and the evidence of record." Murphy v. Wilkie, 983 F.3d 1313, 1319 (2020). 

Generally, a claim which has been denied in an unappealed Board decision or an unappealed AOJ decision may not thereafter be reopened and allowed. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104 (b), 7105(c). The exception to this rule is 38 U.S.C. § 5108, which provides that if new and material evidence is presented or secured with respect to a claim which has been disallowed, the Secretary shall reopen the claim and review the former disposition of the claim. New and material evidence received prior to the expiration of the appeal period will be considered as having been filed in connection with the claim which was pending at the beginning of the appeal period. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b).

Turning to the record, a March 1993 VA administrative decision determined that the Appellant's period of service from May 13, 1991 to September 4, 1992 was dishonorable for VA purposes and therefore a bar to VA benefits under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12. The Appellant was notified of this decision on March 26, 1993. 

An October 2021 VA medical opinion states, in part, 

The veteran is also diagnosed with Unspecified Personality Disorder, and Alcohol Use Disorder. The personality disorder accounts for his lifelong enduring pattern of experiences and behaviors that deviate markedly from the expectations of the individuals culture (DSM-5). This veteran has an Under Other Than Honorable Conditions, Misconduct-Pattern of Misconduct, a significant legal/criminal history, as well as a pervasive pattern of negative interactions with others while a work history remarkable for frequent terminations. 

The Appellant has asserted that he was insane at the time of the misconduct leading to his other than honorable discharge. The November 2021 rating decision on appeal granted service connection, for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, for PTSD. This decision states that compensation is not payable for this disorder due to the character of the Appellant's discharge from service. 

After careful consideration of the record, the Board finds that the character of the Appellant's service is properly before the Board. Specifically, the issue of insanity was raised during the October 2021 VA examination. However, the VA examiner did not expressly or properly address the issue of insanity. In this regard, it was a pre-decisional error for the AOJ to not readjudicate the character of discharge claim. 

A discharge or release from active service under conditions other than dishonorable is a prerequisite to entitlement to VA pension or compensation benefits. 38?U.S.C. §?101(18); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(a). The designation of a discharge as honorable by a service department is binding on VA as to the character of discharge. Id. VA has no authority to alter the discharge classification, and the claimant's recourse is with the service department. 38?C.F.R. §?3.203(a); Spencer v. West, 13. Vet. App. 376, 380 (2000); Venturella v. Gober, 11?Vet. App.?240, 241 (1997); Cahall v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?232, 237 (1994); Duro v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?530, 532 (1992).

There are two types of bars to establishing entitlement to VA benefits: (1) statutory bars and (2) regulatory bars. 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a); 38?C.F.R. § 3.12(c), (d).  

A statutory bar precludes the payment of VA benefits when a former service member was discharged or released under one of the following conditions: (1) as a conscientious objector who refused to perform military duty, wear the uniform, or comply with lawful order of competent military authorities; (2) by reason of the sentence of a general court-martial; (3) resignation by an officer for the good of the service; (4) as a deserter; (5) as an alien during a period of hostilities, where it is affirmatively shown that the former service member requested his or her release; and (6) by reason of a discharge under other than honorable conditions issued as a result of an AWOL for a continuous period of at least 180 days, with certain exceptions. 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).

Regulatory bars are discharges or releases due to one of the following offenses: (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-martial; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude, which includes, generally, conviction of a felony; and (4) willful and persistent misconduct.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d). 

If?the appellant is shown to have been "insane" under VA regulations at the time of the offense leading to his discharge, the bar to payment of benefits imposed by the nature of the Appellant's discharge will be lifted.?38 U.S.C. § 5303(b);?38 C.F.R. § 3.12(b).

Under VA regulations, an insane person is one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides. 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a).

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the insanity need only exist at the time of the commission of the offense leading to the person's discharge, and that there is no requirement of a causal connection between the insanity and the misconduct. Struck v. Brown, 9?Vet. App.?145 (1996). There still must be competent evidence, though, establishing the appellant was insane at the time of the offenses in question leading to the other than honorable discharge. Zang v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?246, 254 (1995). In addition, the Court held that "a determination of whether a person is insane is, in effect, a determination of whether the person's actions were intentional, and, thus, the result of willful misconduct." Id. at 254. The Court further indicated such a determination is not warranted when the record does not reflect that a veteran suffered from insanity due to disease or that he or she did not know or understand the nature or consequences of his or her acts, or that what he or she was doing was wrong. Id. Significantly, the burden is on the appellant to submit competent medical evidence that the servicemember was insane at the time of the offenses. Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 449 (1995).? Furthermore, mental illness is not identical to "insanity." Beck v. West, 13?Vet. App.?535, 539 (2000). 

In May 1997, VA General Counsel discussed the intended parameters of the types of behavior, which were defined as insanity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). It was indicated that behavior involving a minor episode or episodes of disorderly conduct or eccentricity does not fall within the definition of insanity in that regulation. It was further indicated that a determination of the extent to which an individual's behavior must deviate from his or her normal method of behavior could be best resolved by adjudicative personnel on a case-by-case basis in light of the authorities defining the scope of the term insanity. VAOPGCPREC 20-97 (May 22, 1997).?

Following a review of the record, particularly the Appellant's the diagnosis of PTSD, a personality disorder, and alcohol abuse disorder, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion regarding the Appellant's mental state at the time of his misconduct. 

The issue of entitlement to compensation for PTSD is inextricably intertwined with the issue of whether the Appellant's period of service from May 13, 1991 to September 4, 1992 is a bar to entitlement to VA benefits. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two or more issues are inextricably intertwined if one claim could have significant impact on the other). Therefore, this claim must also be remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Appellant for a VA audiological examination with an appropriately qualified examiner to determine the etiology of the Appellant's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. The Appellant's claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examination in conjunction with the examination. All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

During the examination, the examiner must elicit a full medical history regarding the onset of symptoms of the Appellant's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, as well as any medical course since onset of symptomatology.

Thereafter, after examination and review of the claims file, the examiner must opine whether any bilateral hearing loss or tinnitus began in service, within one year of discharge from service, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include the conceded noise exposure therein.

The examiner is specifically reminded that an absence of hearing loss and/or tinnitus during service cannot, standing alone, serve as a basis of a negative opinion. Rather, the examiner should focus on whether the Appellant's symptoms began in service or are otherwise the result of his service, including the noise exposure therein. Specifically, in so addressing, the examiner must address any statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions and should reflect consideration of the competent lay assertions of pertinent symptomology.

2. Schedule the Appellant for a VA psychiatric examination to assess the Appellant's mental state leading up to his discharge from service. The examiner should review the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand. 

The examiner should be advised that 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a) defines "insanity" as "one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides." The term "insanity" refers to a condition involving conduct which deviates severely from the social norm or interferes grossly with the capacity to meet the ordinary demands of life. See VAOPGCPREC 20-97. 

The examiner should also be informed that VA's General Counsel has held that behavior which is generally attributable to a particular substance-abuse disorder does not exemplify the severe deviation from the social norm or gross nature of conduct which is generally considered to fall within the scope of the term insanity, and therefore, does not constitute insane behavior under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). 

The examiner should be informed that disorders that are not subject to service connection may be considered in determining the issue of insanity. Therefore, the examiner should consider and address the Appellant's diagnosed personality disorder and substance abuse disorders when rendering the requested opinions. 

After a review of the claims file the examiner must answer the following:

(a.) Does the evidence, either lay or medical, indicate the Appellant exhibited mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the in-service misconduct? If so, to what extent? Please explain why or why not.

(b.) Discuss the Appellant's mental state during service, to include consideration of his age, cultural background, educational level, and judgmental maturity at the time of the offenses that resulted in his other than honorable discharge.

(c.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the Appellant exhibit a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior?

(d.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the Appellant, due to disease interfere with the peace of society?

(e.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, was the Appellant, due to disease, so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides?

(f.) Was the Appellant otherwise insane at the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge?

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Appellant's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning her condition. The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the Appellant's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence. The examiner may not dismiss the Appellant's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Stricker, Katherine M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.