Citation Nr: A25031623
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 250220-519479
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's OSA is the result of his service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and hypertension (HTN).

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA secondary to service-connected PTSD and HTN have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1969 to July 1971.

The initial rating decision denying the Veteran's claims for service connection for OSA and ED was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for OSA and ED most recently addressed in the February 2024 rating decision.  In December 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the first supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim for service connection for ED based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision; and in February 2025, the AOJ issued the second supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim for service connection for OSA based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2024 decision on appeal regarding ED, and the February 2025 decision on appeal regarding OSA. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for ED, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

This matter has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

Except as noted below, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board . . . to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to duty-to-assist argument).

Entitlement to service connection for OSA

The Veteran contends that his OSA is due to his military service. Initially, the Veteran argued that his OSA was caused by his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). In argument submitted with his February 2025 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran argues that secondary service connection is warranted because his OSA is caused by his service-connected PTSD and HTN. 

The February 2025 rating decision denied service connection for OSA because it found, based on a November 2024 VA medical opinion, that the Veteran's OSA was not the result of his in-service TERA. In the February 2025 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's in-service TERA is conceded due to his presumed exposure to Agent Orange during his service in Vietnam. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Service connection is also warranted for disability due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Such secondary service connection is warranted for any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disability that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365-66 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding all that is needed is a "but for" causation or aggravation to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

The Board must consider all theories of entitlement argued by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-53 (2008). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The February 2025 AOJ rating decision granted service connection for the Veteran's PTSD, effective August 2023. A February 2024 AOJ rating decision granted service connection for the Veteran's HTN, also effective August 2023. 

In October 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding his claim for service connection for OSA. The VA examiner noted that he had an OSA diagnosis based on the results of a November 2024 sleep study. The only opinion requested by the AOJ was regarding whether the Veteran's OSA was due to his in-service TERA. The VA examiner opined that his OSA was less likely than not the result of his TERA, because 

Medical studies and literature [do] not support a link or correlation between sleep apnea and Agent Orange. The veteran has a medical history of PTSD and hypertension. This is more likely the cause of the veteran's OSA.

. . .

This examiner cannot state which condition, PTSD or HTN, that caused the veteran's OSA. Medical literature and study support both of these conditions can cause OSA. It is more likely than not the combination of these two conditions that led to the development of OSA.

Because the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's current diagnosed OSA is the result of his service-connected PTSD and OSA, the Board finds that service connection for OSA secondary to PTSD and OSA is warranted. His appeal as to this issue is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for ED is remanded.

The Veteran argues that his ED is secondary to his service-connected HTN. In argument submitted with his February 2025 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran contends that the October 2024 VA examiner should have given him an ED diagnosis based on his description of his symptoms, and should have considered the medical literature he had submitted regarding the relationship between ED and HTN.

The December 2024 rating decision denied service connection for ED because it found, based on an October 2024 VA examination, that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis for ED. In the December 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the claimed primary condition of HTN is service connected. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran's service treatment records and private treatment records in the file do not reflect any diagnosis of or treatment for ED.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2024 regarding his ED claim. The VA examiner noted that there was no diagnosis for any conditions of the male reproductive system, including ED. In the medical history section, the VA examiner noted that the "Veteran reports symptoms of difficulty achieving and maintaining erection. He has no clinical diagnosis noted in medical records or C-file." The Veteran reported that since the onset of his ED symptoms in the 2000s, he "[c]ontinues to have symptoms but is not currently diagnosed or treated for this condition." His current symptoms are "difficulty achieving and maintaining erection." The VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion, with the rationale that the "Veteran has no medical diagnosis of erectile dysfunction in his STR. Veteran's symptoms are subjective in nature. Unable to render diagnosis day of exam due to lack of medical evidence of diagnosis or treatment for condition. Therefore no diagnosis rendered day of exam."

The Board finds that the above VA examination was inadequate because it failed to explain why a diagnosis could not be made based on the Veteran's reported symptoms which he is competent to make. There is no indication that the VA examiner doubted the credibility of the Veteran's lay statements. Additionally, the VA examiner improperly relied on the absence of evidence of ED in the Veteran's service treatment records. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 43-44 (2007). 

In the December 2024 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum examination and opinion to address the deficiency above. This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to address the claimed erectile dysfunction (ED). The examiner must review the claims file, including the Veteran's lay statements made during the October 2024 VA examination and the medical literature submitted in support of his claim in August 2024.  

1. The examiner must determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of migraine headaches at any time during the appeal period (i.e., since August 2023). 

2. The examiner must then opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's ED is due to OR aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include hypertension (HTN) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions.

3. If the answer to (2) is negative, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's ED is due to his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). 

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

S. Kim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.