Citation Nr: A25031363
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-464143
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hemorrhoids is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from July 2018 to March 2019.

The Veteran has appealed rating decisions issued in January 2024 (granting service connection and an initial noncompensable rating for IBS) and March 2024 (granting service connection and an initial noncompensable rating for hemorrhoids).  The January 2024 and March 2024 rating decisions are initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 and March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, respectively. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for IBS and entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hemorrhoids, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors, are eligible for remand. Here, VA has not met its duty to assist the Veteran, as it has failed to obtain identified relevant private treatment records.  

In his August 2023 Form VA 21-526 EZ (Application), the Veteran indicated that she was seeing a gastroenterologist for IBS and hemorrhoids. At the time of the claim, the Veteran provided portions of treatment note showing a gastroenterology consultation at Johns Hopkins Medicine in March 2022, consisting of print outs from "my chart" including only the first page of what appears to be a multipage "progress notes" and an "after-visit summary."  This does not appear to be a complete copy of the record from this visit.  Further, the "after-visit summary" referred to additional laboratory testing that was requested and a planned follow-up visit, which are not contained in the records provided.  Although these private treatment records related to the treatment of IBS and hemorrhoids were relevant as to the severity of these conditions, there is no indication that the AOJ sought to obtain the complete records before making a decision as to the rating for these disabilities. VA's duty to assist includes obtaining relevant treatment records, including private treatment provider records. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(1).   As these?records?were identified, but have not yet been obtained, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to make reasonable efforts to obtain the adequately identified private treatment records amounts to a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is warranted.

By this remand, the Board makes no determination, expressed or implied, as to the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the Veteran to request that she identify all private treatment providers providing care and/or treatment for IBS and hemorrhoids.  The Veteran should submit a complete copy of those records or provide written authorization for release of those records to VA. VA must make reasonable efforts to obtain these private treatment records and associate those with the claims file. VA shall document its efforts in the claims file.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fuller, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.