Citation Nr: A25031186
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220911-275627
DATE:  April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD has been productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; it has not been shown to cause total social and occupational impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active naval service from February 2003 to February 2007 and from January 2008 to April 2010, with additional service in the Reserve. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2022 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the August 2022 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating - PTSD

The Veteran asserts that she is entitled to a higher rating for her PTSD, as her symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. The Veteran's PTSD is currently rated at 70 percent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

By way of background, the Veteran has been service connected for PTSD since October 2015, and the current appeal stems from an October 2021 intent to file and May 2022 claim for an increased rating.

Turning to the evidence, in November 2020, the Veteran began seeking treatment for her PTSD from the local Vet Center. The intake assessment notes a psycho-social focus of frequent nightmares and flashbacks accompanied by intense hyperarousal and coping with migraines, which had increased in frequency and intensity over the previous months. The Veteran reported poor appetite when depressed, sleep disturbances, low energy levels, and that she did not like silence because she had been hearing voices in her head that criticized her and told her not to go to work. On mental status examination, the provider described the Veteran as having a neat appearance, an anxious manner, and average intelligence. Her speech was rapid and pressured. She had impaired memory function, an anxious affect, impaired judgment, and she had agitated, restless motor activity. The provider noted the Veteran's associations were within normal limits, and she was oriented to person, place, and time. The provider noted there was evidence of hallucinations, but no evidence of delusions, disorganized thinking, or grossly disorganized catatonic behavior. The provider noted the Veteran endorsed some suicidal ideation with no plan or intent, and she denied homicidal ideation. The provider further noted the Veteran endorsed mild auditory and visual hallucinations, but the Veteran reported that she knew they were not real. 

A November 2020 VA mental health treatment record reflects the Veteran was re-engaging in mental health treatment with complaints of depressed mood, insomnia, irritability, and headaches. The provider noted the Veteran had a history of PTSD and major depressive disorder with no psychiatric hospitalizations or suicide attempts. The provider noted the Veteran had previously been treated in 2015 and was presenting with similar symptomatic complaints. These complaints included irritability and verbal aggression with people at work, low mood, sporadic tearfulness, intermittent passive suicidal ideation without intent or plan, insomnia and nightmares, hypervigilance, anxiety, hyperstartle, and intrusive thoughts of military experiences. The provider noted the Veteran admitted passive suicidal ideation but adamantly denied intent or plan. She denied hopelessness, and reported that she liked her job. She complained of trouble with concentration and memory, sporadic appetite, anxiety, and irritable moods, but denied homicidal ideation and audio/visual hallucinations. The provider noted the Veteran had no history of mania or psychosis. The Veteran reported she was divorced and single with no children or grandchildren. She reported she had a supportive friend group, and that she was employed. On mental status examination, the Veteran was described as casually dressed and well groomed. Her speech was normal, and her affect was euthymic, full range, and reactive. Her thought process was linear, and there was no paranoia or delusions in her thought content. Her insight and judgment were fair, and her cognition was grossly intact. 

A March 2021 Vet Center treatment record reflects the Veteran reported altercations with a coworker and people on the subway. On mental status examination, the provider described the Veteran as well dressed and groomed. She was fully oriented, had appropriate eye contact, and appeared somewhat restless. Her thought process at times was slightly tangential and overly inclusive but able to be rerouted, and her speech was pressured with a good deal of output. Her affect appeared otherwise euthymic and congruent with her stated mood. The Veteran denied any current auditory or visual hallucinations, and denied homicidal and suicidal ideations. 

A June 2021 VA mental health treatment record notes the Veteran's chief complaint was headaches/migraines. The provider noted the Veteran reported she tended to isolate and preferred the comfort of her residence with no social contacts. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations, and reported some visual hallucinations which she described as something like "fudge." She stated these hallucinations could be due to her migraines, and she denied auditory hallucinations. The provider noted the Veteran was employed, unmarried, and had no children. On mental status examination, the provider described the Veteran as medium height with normal weight, and that she related well to the provider. The provider described the Veteran's attitude as somewhat lethargic, and her orientation as coherent. The provider described the Veteran's speech as low tone and monotonous with long pauses. The Veteran reported her mood as groggy, numb, and "just going with it," and her affect was euthymic. She was attentive and cooperative, her thought process was linear, her insight and judgment were fair, and her cognition was intact.

A December 2021 VA mental health treatment record reflects the Veteran reported that she worked "crazy hours" and was "embarrassed, pissed, and irate" mostly about toll tickets, but she reported that she loved her job. The Veteran reported she would forget things like toll and parking tickets, and had a significant outstanding balance. She reported she had been in a relationship with her boyfriend for approximately four years. However, she stated she felt distant with him because he was not a Veteran, and she did not feel like he understood her. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations. The provider noted the Veteran was employed and unmarried with no children, but had been in a stable, long term romantic relationship. On mental status examination, the provider described the Veteran as adequately groomed, related well to the provider, and had a somewhat hurt/complaining attitude. The Veteran's orientation was coherent, and her speech and language were circumstantial. She described her mood as "irate most of the time," and her affect was anxious, irritable, and upset. The provider described her as attentive and cooperative with linear thought processes, fair insight and judgment, and intact cognition. 

Throughout other VA treatment records during the period on appeal, the Veteran reported similar symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, irritability, and sleep disturbances with her mood and affect regularly being described as euthymic, anxious, irritable, upset, full range, and reactive. The Veteran was also regularly described as attentive and cooperative with coherent orientation and adequate grooming. While the Veteran was noted to experience passive suicidal ideations and some mild auditory and visual hallucinations, she was regularly noted as denying delusions and hallucinations as well as suicidal and homicidal ideation, intent, and plans. These records reflect the Veteran remained employed, and records beginning in December 2021 note the Veteran reported being in a stable, long term romantic relationship. See April 2022, May 2022, June 2022, and July 2022 VA treatment records) 

In May 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA review PTSD examination. The Veteran reported she lived alone, was unmarried, and had no children. She stated she had been in a few on and off relationships, but she was not currently in a romantic relationship. She reported she was not close to any of her family members, and had a few military associates but no civilian friends. She reported she used to enjoy being outdoors, but she no longer did anything for fun. She reported she either stayed at home or went to work. The Veteran reported she remained employed and had worked for the same security company for the last 7 years. The Veteran stated she had not been psychiatrically hospitalized or attempted suicide, but she reported she sometimes engaged in self-injurious behavior such as punching things in the shower especially when she had difficulty sleeping. She reported experiencing some auditory hallucinations, but the examiner noted that upon further exploration, these seemed to be her own voice telling her positive things instead of a voice coming from the outside. The Veteran reported suicidal ideation approximately twice a month, panic attacks that occurred twice a week, difficulty sleeping, nightmares, and avoidance of crowds, family gatherings, and funerals. The examiner confirmed the PTSD diagnosis and found the following symptoms were associated with the Veteran's PTSD: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. On mental status examination, the examiner described the Veteran as cooperative, euthymic, and oriented times three. She was casually dressed and well groomed, and there were no abnormalities in her speech or volume. The examiner noted that she reported auditory hallucinations, but found these were more likely her own thoughts. The examiner noted the Veteran reported suicidal ideations but no intent and denied homicidal ideations. The examiner noted there was no evidence of circumstantial or tangential thinking, and described the Veteran's insight, judgment, and impulse control as fair. The examiner found the Veteran's PTSD resulted in social and occupational impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. 

In considering the evidence as a whole, and in providing the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD warrants no more than a 70 percent rating. In this regard, the evidence reflects problems such as: depressed mood, anxiety, irritability, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation, mild auditory and visual hallucinations, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence

There is no evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication, intermittent inability to perform the activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. The evidence of record reflects the Veteran was regularly described as attentive and cooperative with adequate grooming, appropriate dress, and coherent orientation. While the Veteran was noted to have impulse control deficiencies, there is no indication from the record of grossly inappropriate behavior or a persistent danger of hurting self or others. While the evidence reflects the Veteran reported regular passive suicidal thoughts, she consistently denied suicidal and homicidal ideation, intent, or plan. The records also reflect she denied any psychiatric hospitalizations or suicide attempts. While the records contain notations of mild auditory and visual hallucinations, the Veteran reported the visual hallucinations could be due to her migraines, and the May 2022 examiner found the Veteran's reported auditory hallucinations were more likely her own thoughts. Further, while the Veteran reported isolative behavior and difficulty maintaining relationships, the record reflects that she has maintained relationships with some military associates, has a supportive friend group, and was in a stable, long term romantic relationship. Additionally, while the evidence reflects the Veteran's PTSD symptoms have interfered with her employment, the record reflects that she has maintained gainful employment throughout the period on appeal. Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the symptoms and effects experienced by the Veteran as a result of her PTSD, do not cause total occupational and social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.