Citation Nr: A25031631
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240903-470665
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

An initial 10 percent disability rating, but not higher, for the service-connected dry eye syndrome, right eye (right eye injury) (hereinafter "right dry eye syndrome") is granted.

A total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a pulmonary condition (originally claimed as a respiratory disorder) manifested by shortness of breath is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the competent and probative evidence of record shows that the Veteran has not been medically diagnosed with a TBI resulting from disease or injury in service.  

2. The Veteran's right dry eye syndrome manifests in symptoms of dryness, itchiness, foreign body sensation, redness, and watering eyes, with some blurred vision, and the most prominent symptoms are most analogous to those of active chronic conjunctivitis.

3. The evidence of record does not show the Veteran is unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment as a result of his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(b), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

2. The criteria for an initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, for dry eye syndrome, right eye (right eye injury) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.20, 4.75-4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6018, 6025, 6066.

3. The criteria for the assignment of a TDIU have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1968 to February 1970.  This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).   

In that decision, the RO (i) granted service connection for hypertension and service connection for dry eye syndrome in his right eye only due to right eye injury in-service and, assigned noncompensable ratings for each disability; (ii) continued previously assigned noncompensable evaluations for service-connected tinnitus and hearing loss; (iii) denied service connection for a respiratory disorder; and (iv) denied service connection for TBI.  Additionally, the RO deferred decisions for the Veteran's claims of service connection for: bilateral radiculopathy, a cervical spine disability, sleep apnea, and vertigo. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the Hearing docket.  The Veteran appealed the initial noncompensable rating for service-connected right dry eye syndrome; the denial of service connection for TBI; and the denial of service connection for a respiratory disorder.  A Board hearing was held on November 6, 2024.  The Veteran and his spouse testified at a videoconference hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  A transcript of the hearing is associated with the claims file. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Regarding the claim for entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issue of a TDIU has been added to the appeal because it is part of an increased rating claim when such claim is asserted by the Veteran or raised by the record (both of which are present in this case).  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Service Connection

1. Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI)

The Veteran contends that he has a TBI from claimed head trauma incurred while on active duty in Vietnam.  At his November 2024 hearing, the Veteran endorsed his agent's suggestions of current symptoms of dizziness, headaches, forgetfulness, short-term memory loss, and long-term memory loss.  See November 2024 hearing transcript at 28-29.  He asserted that, while driving an armored personnel carrier, he would often it his head on the inside of the tank when he was driving and during combat.  See November 2024 hearing transcript at 26-27.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a).  To substantiate a claim of service connection there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the claimed disability and the disease or injury in service.  See Shedden v, Principi, 381 F.3d 1153, 1166-1167?(Fed. Cir. 2004).   

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d). 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has current TBI residuals from a TBI that occurred during service.  

When the Veteran filed his claim for service connection for TBI (and other unrelated disabilities), he did not furnish any evidence or argument of complaints, clinical findings, or diagnosis of TBI.  Similarly, the Veteran did not refer to any medical records to corroborate his claim.  Nor did he assert that he had received any treatment for TBI.  In fact, there is no post-service medical evidence to corroborate the presence of TBI or symptoms thereof.  Treatment records on file pertain to other disabilities, including service-connected right eye dry eye syndrome and PTSD; they do not contain evidence of TBI or complaints of symptoms that are routinely associated with TBI residuals, such as headaches, for example.

Service treatment records show the Veteran complained of tiredness, dizziness, and malaise in October 1968 and October 1969 and reported headaches, tiredness, dizziness, and malaise in December 1968; however, dizziness was noted on the Veteran's entrance exam due to a history of anemia.  No headaches or dizziness were noted on discharge.  The records do not contain any other complaints of headaches or notes of any head injury.  The Veteran was discharged from service in February 1970.  At that time, there was no indication of complaints, clinical findings, or diagnosis of TBI.   On separation examination, the Veteran checked "No" to frequent or severe headaches, dizziness or fainting spells, and history of head injury.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2017 for an unrelated posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) claim, at which time the examiner noted symptoms of mild impairment in short-term memory, but that long-term memory was intact.  The examiner recorded that the Veteran did not have a TBI and attributed his symptoms to PTSD.  [Service connection was subsequently established for PTSD in a February 2015 rating decision.] 

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination with respect to his claim for entitlement to service connection for TBI.  To comply with VA's duty to assist, the AOJ must provide an examination when the record: (1) contains competent evidence of a current disability, (2) indicates that the signs and symptoms of the disability may be associated with active service, and (3) does not contain sufficient information to decide the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  In this case, the Veteran is competent to report that he hit his head while being bounced around driving an armored personnel vehicle during service as this is capable of lay observation, and there is no reason to doubt the Veteran's credibility in this regard.  However, the Veteran is not competent to know whether hitting his head in the armored vehicle caused a TBI.  This cause and effect relationship requires medical expertise and the ability to interpret complicated imaging, and there is no indication that the Veteran has the medical education and experience to provide a competent opinion on causation in this case.  Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).

Neither the Veteran nor his representative provided any statements or assertions of any symptoms that he believed were associated with his claimed TBI at any point prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  Accordingly, he did not provide a basis to warrant an examination under McLendon.

Symptoms of a TBI without a diagnosis may constitute a disability, but only if it reaches a level of functional impairment of earning capacity.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-69 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).  However, the Veteran did not persuasively point to any specific evidence indicating his reported symptoms affected functional impairment of his earning capacity.  

At his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he served as a driver on an armored personnel carrier while in Vietnam.  He said that the personnel carrier had a very small hole to get in and out to sit, and that he would bang his head often, both while driving and in combat.  He testified that he reported his head injury to a medic in Vietnam and that he was given Ibuprofen and put on two days bed rest.  He said that he had follow up care when he returned to Fort Knox in 1969.  See November 2024 hearing transcript at 26-28.

He testified that he began to have headaches after his head injury in Vietnam and that he has had headaches ever since then.  He testified that he reported symptoms of dizziness around the time of his head injury, but that he did not notice any forgetfulness until later on.  See November 2024 hearing transcript at 31.

Although the Veteran provided pertinent information about his symptoms and in-service head injuries at his November 2024 hearing, these statements were not a part of the record prior to the July 2024 AOJ rating decision on appeal.  Therefore, the AOJ did not commit a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not obtaining a VA examination based on the Veteran's statements, and under the AMA, the Board cannot remand for an examination or opinion absent such an error.  It is unclear why neither the Veteran nor his representative put forth the pertinent details of the Veteran's claimed in-service head injury and symptomatology he experiences prior to the rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.

Based on review of the evidence, the Veteran does not have a current medical diagnosis of TBI that is related to service and has not had a diagnosis at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim in August 2023.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). 

While the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms that he believes are manifestations of a TBI since service, and he is also credible to describe those symptoms, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of a TBI.  This issue is medically complex, as they require knowledge of the pathology of TBI and the interpretation of medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran is not shown to possess such specialized medical knowledge, nor has he claimed to have such knowledge.  

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for service connection for TBI, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Increased Ratings

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for the service-connected right dry eye syndrome

The Veteran seeks a compensable disability rating of at least 10 percent for his service-connected dry eye syndrome.  At his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran endorsed his agent's suggestions that his dry eye syndrome is manifested by loss of peripheral vision, pain, itchiness, scratchiness, redness, teary eyes, crustiness, and difficulties driving at night.  The Veteran testified that he always feels like there is dirt in his eye and that his symptoms are worse in his right eye.  See November 2024 hearing transcript at 11-13.

Although the Veteran experiences symptoms in both eyes, only the right dry eye syndrome is service connected, as a residual of an in-service injury to his right eye.  

Disability evaluations are determined by application of the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  An evaluation of the level of disability present must also include consideration of the functional impairment of the Veteran's ability to engage in ordinary activities, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

The assignment of a particular diagnostic code is "completely dependent on the facts of a particular case." See Butts v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 532, 538 (1993).  One diagnostic code may be more appropriate than another based on such factors as an individual's relevant medical history, the diagnosis and demonstrated symptomatology.  Any change in a diagnostic code by a VA adjudicator must be specifically explained.  See Pernorio v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 625, 629 (1992).  It is permissible to switch diagnostic codes to more accurately reflect a claimant's current symptoms.  See Read v. Shinseki, 651 F. 3d 1296, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (holding that service connection for a disability is not severed when the situs of the disability, or the diagnostic code associated with it, is corrected to more accurately determine the benefit to which a veteran may be entitled for a service-connected disability).

The Veteran's dry eye syndrome is currently assigned a noncompensable rating pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6025-6066.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the assigned rating; the additional code is shown after the hyphen.  Here, the use of Diagnostic Codes 6025-6066 reflects that there is no diagnostic code specifically applicable to the Veteran's service-connected right dry eye syndrome and that the disability has been rated by analogy to disorders of the lacrimal apparatus under Diagnostic Code 6025, with the basis for the assigned rating being visual acuity pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6066.  In this regard, right dry eye syndrome is not a disorder specifically listed in the rating schedule and must therefore be rated by analogy to a closely related disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27.  Disorders of the lacrimal apparatus (Diagnostic Code 6025) and chronic conjunctivitis (Diagnostic Code 6018) have symptoms such as watering of the eyes, redness, and itching, which more nearly relate to the Veteran's symptoms.

Diagnostic Code 6025 assigns a 10 percent rating for evidence of a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus affecting one eye, while a 20 percent rating is assigned for evidence of a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus affecting both eyes.  38 C.F.R. §4.79.  The lacrimal apparatus includes the bodily parts which function in the production of tears, including the lacrimal glands, lacrimal ducts, lacrimal sacs, nasolacrimal ducts, and lacrimal puncta.  See "Lacrimal apparatus." Merriam-Webster.com Medical Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/lacrimal%20apparatus (last accessed 4 Mar. 2025).

Diagnostic Code 6018 assigns a minimum 10 percent disability rating for active non-trachomatous chronic conjunctivitis evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.  For inactive disease process, both the former and revised criteria instruct to evaluate based on residuals, such as visual impairment (Diagnostic Code 6066) and disfigurement (38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7800).

The General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye instructs to evaluate based on either visual impairment due to a particular condition or on incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation.

The evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a).  To determine the evaluation for visual impairment when both decreased visual acuity and visual field defect are present in one or both eyes and are service connected, visual acuity and visual field defects are evaluated separately, and then combined under the provisions of § 4.25. Visual acuity is evaluated on the basis of corrected vision, unless the lens required to correct distance vision in the poorer eye differs by more than three diopters from the lens required to correct distance vision in the better eye and the poorer eye or both eyes are service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b)(1).  

Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 10 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 3 but less than 5 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 20 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented, incapacitating episodes requiring at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 40 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 60 percent rating is warranted.  Note (1) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes.  Note (2) indicates that examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.79 (2022).  Additionally, ratings are assigned based on the level of impairment of visual acuity, visual field, and muscle function.  A non-compensable disability rating is assigned when vision in both eyes is 20/40.

Turning to the relevant medical evidence of record, VA treatment records show the Veteran has been prescribed artificial tear drops to treat his service-connected right dry eye syndrome (as well as for his nonservice-connected left dry eye syndrome) throughout the period on appeal.  The Veteran underwent a comprehensive eye exam in January 2024 where he reported blurry vision in his right eye at a distance.  He reported using over the counter eyedrops 3-4 times per day with no relief and the use of a warm compress about two times per week.  The examiner assessed the Veteran as having very symptomatic dry eye syndrome in both eyes and early combined age-related cataracts in both eyes.  The Veteran was prescribed Restasis eyedrops.  In May 2024, the Veteran returned for follow up and noted continuing use of Restasis without noticing an improvement in symptoms.  He reported foreign body sensation, irritation, and itchiness in both eyes and denied discharge or changes to his vision.  The clinician assessed the Veteran with dry eye/meibomian gland dysfunction in both eyes and noted that he remained symptomatic.  He was advised to use a warm compress 1-2 times per day and begin additional lubricating eye drops and artificial tears. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA eye examination in connection with his claim in April 2024.  The Veteran reported symptoms of irritation to eyes and blurry vision.  The examiner rendered diagnoses of dry eye syndrome with current treatment by prescription medication, and mild age-related cataracts in both eyes.  Physical examinations showed corrected distance and near visual acuity of 20/40 in both eyes.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a visual field defect or a condition that may result in a visual field defect.  The examiner marked "no" to the questions of whether the Veteran had any incapacitating episodes attributable to any eye condition and whether the Veteran's right dry eye syndrome condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus.  

Based on the above evidence, the Veteran's right dry eye syndrome has manifested in symptoms of dryness, itchiness, foreign body sensation, and redness throughout the period on appeal, for which he has required the use of prescription eyedrops; albeit without relief.  Additionally, the Veteran has, at times, reported blurred vision, although his vision examination indicated corrected vision to 20/40 and age-related bilateral cataracts, without visual field defect.  The cataracts are deemed age-related, and the competent medical evidence does not otherwise support any relationship between the cataracts and the service-connected dry eye syndrome.  Accordingly, there is no logically related and reasonably raised claim of service connection for cataracts.  Additionally, although the Veteran has indicated some blurry vision associated with his right dry eye syndrome, rating based on visual impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6066 would result in a noncompensable rating because the corrected vision is 20/40 in both eyes, and there is no visual field impairment and no muscle function impairment.  Again, the rating schedule does not provide rating criteria specific to dry eye syndrome, so this disability must be rated by analogy.

Based on the Veteran's reported symptoms, as noted above, a rating under Diagnostic Code 6025 is not appropriate because the evidence does not show that the Veteran has a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus.  The April 2024 VA examiner specifically indicated that the Veteran does not have a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus.  Additionally, VA treatment records note that the Veteran's dry eye condition was due to a disorder of the meibomian gland, which is not considered part of the lacrimal apparatus.  The examples provided in the rating criteria for disorders of the lacrimal apparatus (epiphora and dacryocystitis) are characterized by watery eyes and inflammation of the lacrimal sac.  See e.g., "Epiphora." Merriam-Webster.com Medical Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/epiphora (last accessed 4 Mar. 2025); "Dacryocystitis." Merriam-Webster.com Medical Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/dacryocystitis (last accessed 4 Mar. 2025).  Here, the Veteran's symptoms do include watering of the eyes, in addition to dryness and itchiness necessitating frequent use of prescription eyedrops, which, based on the Veteran's self-reported history, do not alleviate his symptoms at all.  However, the maximum schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 6025 when only one eye is service connected, is 10 percent.  

The Veteran's reported ongoing symptoms of constant dryness, itchiness, redness, and foreign body sensation, with the eye susceptible to watering, are substantially similar to the symptoms considered in the rating criteria for evaluating active conjunctivitis.  As such, a rating by analogy under Diagnostic Code 6018 is more appropriate.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.79.  This results in a minimum 10 percent rating for active pathology, and to that extent, the appeal is granted.  Here, although the Veteran's symptoms include watering eyes, his most predominant symptoms based on the Veteran's self-reported history include dryness, itchiness, redness and foreign body sensation.  Thus, a rating under Diagnostic Code 6018 is more appropriate than a rating under Diagnostic Code 6025.  

A separate rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7800 is not warranted, as there is no evidence of scarring or disfigurement attributable to the Veteran's disability.  Further, a higher rating under the General Rating Formula is not warranted, as the evidence does not show that the Veteran's eye disability has resulted in documented decreased visual acuity or other visual impairment severe enough to warrant a higher rating based on visual impairment, impairment of muscle function, and there is no evidence of incapacitating episodes from impairment of any other eye function.  Finally, while the Veteran describes blurriness from the dry eyes, it is not shown to be permanently blurry, otherwise, it is reasonable to infer that the visual acuity testing would have reflected such, but it does not.  Likewise, the examination report of the eye does not support that a separate rating is warranted for impairment of visual acuity or muscle impairment.

In reaching this decision, the Board must discount the ameliorative effects of medication.  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  However, because the Veteran has consistently reported that treatment, which includes medicated eye drops, does not help relieve his symptoms, there are no ameliorative effects to discount.

While the criteria for the assignment of a 10 percent rating are more nearly approximated under the criteria for rating chronic conjunctivitis, and therefore a 10 percent rating is granted; the evidence does not show that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted, for the reasons set forth above.  The evidence does not show that the Veteran meets the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent based on visual acuity, or other visual defect.  Likewise, the record does not support a finding of eye muscle impairment, and the evidence does not show incapacitating episodes requiring at least 3 but less than 5 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months.  Additionally, the Board has considered all of the other criteria pertaining to other eye disabilities not rated based on the General Rating Formula, but the Veteran does not have retinal scars, glaucoma, or malignant neoplasm of the eye, orbit or adnexa.  Additionally, as noted by the eye examiner, the Veteran's cataracts are age-related and have no relationship to the service-connected dry eye syndrome.  

As the competent evidence of record weighs persuasively against the claim for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right eye dry eye syndrome, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to TDIU

The Veteran's representative advanced his contention that the Veteran is entitled to TDIU at his December 2024 hearing, conducted in relation to separate appeals.  Coincidentally, the December 2024 Board hearing was conducted during the 90-day evidentiary window following the Board hearing in relation to the instant appeal, conducted in November 2024.  

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned when a veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component simply means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id; see Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993) (the ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he can find employment).  Factors such as age or impairment by non-service-connected disabilities are not to be considered.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19. 

A total rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when it is found that a Veteran is unable to obtain or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities and has a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or two or more service-connected disabilities when one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability or disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For the period on appeal, the Veteran has been in receipt of service connection for PTSD, rated as 70 percent disabling; tinnitus, rated as 10 percent disabling; right eye dry eye syndrome, rated as 0 percent disabling (now increased to 10 percent); hearing loss, rated as 0 percent disabling; and hypertension, rated as 0 percent disabling.  Prior to the increased rating for the dry eye in the instant decision, the Veteran had a single disability of 70 percent.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the threshold percentage criteria for consideration of a schedular TDIU.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Accordingly, the question is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him unable to secure or follow a substantial gainful occupation.  The evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 rating decision on appeal does not contain the necessary information to grant a TDIU; and the AOJ did not fail in its duty to assist the veteran prior to the rating decision on appeal.  

During the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran asserted that he had to retire earlier than he wanted to, initially going from Full-time to Part-time, then retiring altogether.  Notably, while this was during an appropriate evidentiary window, this was after the AOJ decision on appeal.  There was no indication prior to the rating decision on appeal, and the Veteran did not allege or assert that he was unemployable due to his service-connected disabilities prior to his December 2024 hearing, or prior to the rating decision on appeal.  

Although a determination regarding TDIU may not be based on age, in order to make an informed decision, information about the Veteran's educational background and prior work history is required for the Board to fairly decide the claim, which is not part of the record on appeal in this case.

As the issue of TDIU was raised for the first time after the AOJ decision on appeal, there is no pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand for additional information related to his claim for TDIU.  

The evidence of record for the period covered by this claim does not support a finding that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to service-connected disabilities.  Even considering the December 2024 Board hearing testimony during the 90-day evidentiary window following the November 2024 Board hearing in conjunction with this appeal stream, the Veteran's statements alone, do not provide the requisite information that would warrant the assignment of a TDIU for the period covered by this appeal.  Therefore, TDIU is not warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a claimed respiratory disorder manifested by shortness of breath, to include whether the Veteran's claimed symptoms are due to a pulmonary disorder due to disease or injury in service.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2024 in connection with his claim for service connection for a respiratory disorder.  

The July 2024 examiner noted that the Veteran did not have and has never had a respiratory disorder.  The Veteran reported that he began having shortness of breath intermittently at any point in time during the day since deployment.  He reported that he tries to relax when he experiences shortness of breath, but he denied being on any treatment for any respiratory disorder.

The examiner remarked that no diagnosis was warranted, and that the Veteran reported that he had not been officially diagnosed with a respiratory condition.  

Notably, however, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had a pulmonary condition, marking that the Veteran had "other pulmonary conditions, pertinent physical findings, or scars due to pulmonary conditions."  Additionally, pulmonary function testing (PFT) was performed in conjunction with the July 2024 examination, and results showed moderate obstruction.  

A toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) specific opinion was also obtained in conjunction with the July 2024 examination.  The rationale simply states a conclusion that the Veteran's claimed respiratory disorder was less likely than not caused by TERA because the Veteran reported that he had not been officially diagnosed with a respiratory condition.  

Given the circumstances above, however, it is clear that there was evidence of a pulmonary disorder at the time of the Veteran's examination, and that his claim was submitted based on his symptoms, and not any particular diagnosis.  As a lay person, the Veteran is not expected to know whether his reported symptoms are part of a respiratory disorder or a pulmonary disorder.  Based on the examiner's report, the claim for a respiratory disorder reasonably encompasses a claim for a pulmonary disorder.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  The RO's failure to expand the claim in this regard is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Accordingly, a new examination and opinion are warranted to determine whether the Veteran has a pulmonary disorder that is etiologically related to service, including as secondary to a TERA.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of any diagnosed pulmonary disorder, which should include a TERA-specific opinion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner should indicate that the claims file was reviewed in the examination report.  Any indicated tests should be accomplished.  The examiner should review the record prior to examination and elicit from the Veteran a detailed medical history.

Based on review of the record, including but not limited to the pulmonary function testing results, the Veteran's report of his symptoms, applicable medical literature, and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Provide a diagnosis, if applicable, for any pulmonary disorders. 

(b.) Discuss the relevance, if any, of the July 2024 Pulmonary Function Testing (PFT) results noting a moderate obstruction of the Veteran's breathing.

(c.) State whether it is as least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least evenly balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed pulmonary disorder was incurred in or is otherwise related to active duty service, or whether it manifested as a chronic disease to a compensable degree within a year of separation thereof. Why or why not?  The examiner must discuss the Veteran's risk factors for any diagnosed pulmonary condition.

(d.) State whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least evenly balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed pulmonary disorder is related to or otherwise caused by a TERA, as per 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).  Why or why not?  The examiner must discuss the Veteran's risk factors and consider both the total potential toxic exposure as well as the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

In providing the requested opinions the examiner is asked to consider and address the Veteran's description of onset of shortness of breath during service and continuing since then.

The examiner is also advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be recorded on the examination report; and, if the Veteran's reported symptoms are not considered in forming the medical opinion, please indicate why this is so.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Provide a complete rationale for all opinions. If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion(s), without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. A. Feroce

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.