Citation Nr: A25031278
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240731-460895
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude him from obtaining or maintaining gainful employment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1968 to February 1970, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran asserts that he is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  For the reasons that follow, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that a TDIU is warranted, as his service-connected disabilities combined have rendered him unable to obtain or maintain a substantially gainful occupation from the beginning of the period on appeal.

VA will grant a total rating for compensation purposes based on unemployability when the evidence shows a veteran is precluded from obtaining or maintaining any gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational experience, by reason of his service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  In reaching such a determination, the central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  In arriving at a conclusion, consideration may be given to a veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 has two components.  First, there is an economic component which essentially contemplates an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Second, there is a non-economic component dealing with the individual veteran's ability to "follow and secure" employment.  For the second component, attention must be given to: (a) the veteran's history, education, skill and training, (b) the veteran's physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory and visual, and (c) whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as memory, concentration, and ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers and demonstrate reliability and productivity.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  

As "sedentary" is defined as "[r]equiring or marked by much sitting <a sedentary desk job>" the Board finds that sedentary employment is a job where the worker primarily sits down.  WEBSTER'S II NEW COLLEGE DICTIONARY 999 (1999).

If there is only one service-connected disability, it must be rated at least 60 percent disabling to qualify for TDIU benefits; if there are two or more such disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  

Here, the Veteran meets the TDIU schedular requirements based on his service-connected prostate cancer residuals (60 percent), PTSD and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depression (50 percent from January 19, 2024; 70 percent for the period prior), bilateral hearing loss (40 percent), and tinnitus (10 percent). 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's military personnel records reflect the Veteran's military occupation specialty (MOS) rating was that of a Military Police Officer.  In his TDIU applications, the Veteran reported completing a college education and that he worked full-time as an automotive engineer until 2008.  He then work part-time as a sandwich maker and in maintenance at a restaurant.  

In a VA Form 21-4192, Request For Employment Information In Connection With Claim For Disability Benefits, submitted by the restaurant in November 2019, it was reported that the Veteran was removed for the sandwich-making line due to his hearing loss and impatience with other staff, to a position in maintenance where he could work independently.  However, he was eventually asked to resign.  

As noted above, a VA PTSD examination was afforded to the Veteran for his TDIU claim in January 2024.  The Veteran stated that he retired in 2008 due to having increased difficulties performing his job, to include emotional outbursts. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he struggles with symptoms that include irritability, hypervigilance, problems with concentration, depressed mood, anxiety, and crying spells.  The examination report also notes symptoms of panic attacks, sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation or mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  The portion of the examination report that discusses the criteria for a PTSD diagnosis also notes a persistent negative emotional state, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, feelings of detachment or estrangement from others, and persistent inability to experience positive emotions.  It was also specifically noted that the Veteran struggles to speak to groups of people without becoming overwhelmed by emotion due to his anxiety and, as a result, "his ability to function in a professional environment would be significantly impacted."  

During a VA audiological examination that resulted in his disability rating being significantly increased from noncompensable (zero percent) to 40 percent, the Veteran reported that he cannot hear speech clearly, and that he was forced to retire due, in part, to his inability to hear his coworkers. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran has a radical prostatectomy in 2003.  While the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of his prostate cancer residuals, he is currently in receipt of a 60 percent rating for this disability.  Under Diagnostic Code 7528, a 60 percent rating is assigned for voiding dysfunction that requires the use of an appliance or the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed more than 4 times per day.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.115a, 4.115b.  

Based on the foregoing, and after considering the Veteran's education and work history, the Board finds the evidence to be at least in equipoise as to the question of the Veteran's ability to secure and maintain a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected disabilities.  While no VA examiner has indicated that any single service-connected disability renders the Veteran unemployable (notably, the VA PTSD examiner found the Veteran's occupational and social impairment amounted to only reduced reliability and productivity), the record suggests that it is the combined effects of his service-connected disabilities that render him unemployable.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's last place of employment, a restaurant franchise, was owned and operated by his son.  Even in this protected environment, the symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD and hearing loss resulted in circumstances so difficult that his employment could not be continued.  The Board has considered sedentary employment, including independent, isolated employment that might better suit this Veteran's PTSD symptoms.  The record, however, does not necessarily reflect any education, training, or work history that would suggest that the Veteran could work in any actual "desk job."  Moreover, the rating assigned for his voiding dysfunction suggests that the Veteran would require frequent breaks from work. 

The determination of whether a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities is a factual determination rather than a medical question.  Thus, the Board is not bound by any medical and non-medical expert opinion.  Rather the Board makes its decision herein based on the facts of the case, which are summarized above.

Therefore, resolving the benefit of the doubt in his favor, the Board finds that the combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.  Accordingly, entitlement to a TDIU is granted.

The Board thanks the Veteran for his service. 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Scarduzio, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.