Citation Nr: A25031470
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 201217-125704
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines, claimed as secondary to service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, or bilateral tinnitus, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1974 to August 1977.

In June 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2020 rating decision that denied service connection for migraines.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) subsequently identified a duty to assist error during the HLR process.  See November 2020 rating decision.  Following additional development, and later in November 2020, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

After consideration of the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) issued a decision in April 2024 which denied service connection for migraines, claimed as secondary to service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, or bilateral tinnitus.  The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In December 2024, the Court issued an Order that vacated the Board's April 2024 decision and remanded the matter on appeal for adjudication consistent with the instructions outlined in the November 2024 Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) by the parties.

Because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for migraines, claimed as secondary to service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, or bilateral tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for migraines, claimed as secondary to service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, or bilateral tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran claims he suffers from migraines which are secondary to his service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, or bilateral tinnitus.

As part of his claim, the Veteran was provided a VA examination and medical opinion in June 2020 with an addendum VA medical opinion obtained in November 2020.  The June 2020 VA examiner addressed the question of whether the Veteran's migraines are secondary to his service-connected tinnitus and the November 2020 VA examiner addressed the question of whether the Veteran's migraines are secondary to his service-connected somatization disorder and obstructive sleep apnea.  In the November 2024 JMR, questions were raised as to the adequacy of these medical opinions.  

Specifically, for the June 2020 VA examination and medical opinion, it was pointed out that the examiner had only addressed whether the Veteran's migraines were proximately due to or the result of his service-connected disabilities and did not address whether his migraines were aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.  Similarly, it was found that the November 2020 VA examiner did not provide an adequate opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities had aggravated his migraines, as insufficient rationale was provided for the statement, "There is no evidence to suggest that the headache condition is due to or in any way aggravated by any one particular cause, namely the somatic symptom disorder with insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea."  The November 2024 JMR further observed that the November 2020 VA examiner did not discuss whether the Veteran's migraines were aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus.

Given the inadequacies raised by the November 2024 JMR, the Board finds that remand is warranted for an additional VA medical opinion that adequately addresses whether the Veteran's migraines are secondary to his service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and/or bilateral tinnitus.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's migraines are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by his service-connected somatization disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and/or bilateral tinnitus.  In providing the requested opinion, the examiner should consider and discuss the private medical opinion received in June 2020.  The examiner should also include a rationale for all opinions expressed.  

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Churchwell, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.