Citation Nr: A25031634
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-449887
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is granted. 

REMANDED 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in her favor, the Veteran has a right hip disability that is at least as likely as not related to her active military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a right hip disability are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2022 to July 2023.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left hip and low back disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection - Right Hip

Service connection generally will be awarded when a veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence establishes that it was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a link ("nexus") between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009). 

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance-which includes but is not limited to equipoise-the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

The Veteran asserts that she has right hip pain that began during her active military service, to include physical training.  A VA hip examination during the appeal confirms a diagnoses of a right hip stress injury.  While no limitation of motion was noted upon physical examination, painful motion was nevertheless noted. Additionally, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) note complaints and treatment for right hip pain in October and November 2022.  October 2022 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the Veteran's pelvis showed mild marrow edema of the bilateral femoral necks, right greater than left, and mild bilateral gluteus medius and minimus tendinopathy.

Service connection was denied by the AOJ in the decision on appeal, however, based essentially on the determination that there are no treatment records since the in-service records that document a continuity of symptomology of any right hip disability.  The Board notes that this determination was made by the AOJ itself.  No etiological opinion was actually provided by the examiner as to whether the Veteran's current symptoms of right hip pain are related to her in-service pain and the in-service MRI findings. 

The Board notes, however, that while the Veteran's VA examination was not afforded until March 2024, the Veteran filed her service connection claim for a right hip disability in June 2023, just prior to service separation and less than one year since her diagnosis and treatment or a right hip stress injury.  She has consistently asserted that her right hip pain continued, particularly during flare-ups, since her initial in-service complaints.  There has also been no medical opinion or proposal as to an alternative etiology for the Veteran's current right hip disability.

Given the Veteran's competent and credible assertions as to her continuity of right hip symptomology, the in-service medical findings, the lack of evidence of any intercurrent cause, and the lack of any opinion by a VA examiner, the Board will resolve all doubt in her favor and finds that her right hip disability is related to her military service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  Therefore, entitlement to service connection for her right hip disability is granted.  The Board thanks the Veteran for her service.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).? The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.? Id.? The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ.? Id.

1. Service connection for a left hip disability.

In addition to the right hip, the Veteran also seeks service connection for a left hip disability.  The claim has been denied by the AOJ based on the lack of a diagnosis of a left hip disability for service connection purposes.  While the Veteran has reported left hip pain, the record, including a March 2024 VA hip examination, is negative for any functional impairment resulting from left hip pain.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-68 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 404 (2020) (any condition resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity, even with no underlying diagnosis, can constitute a disability).

As noted above, the examination report notes that in-service magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings in October 2022 showed "mild bone marrow edema of femoral neck, R> L" and mild bilateral gluteus medius and minimus tendinopathy.  No diagnostic testing was completed at the time of the VA examination, however, to determine if these findings were still present for the purposes of a current disability for service connection purposes.  An additional VA examination is therefore necessary to correct this pre-decisional error in VA's duty to assist. 

2. Service connection for a low back disability.

The Veteran also seeks service connection for a low back disability.  Similar to the Veteran's left hip claim, and while the Veteran's STRs note treatment for back pain, the claim for a low back disability has been denied based on the absence of a current disability for service connection purposes.  While the March 2024 VA examiner reported that there was no functional impairment resulting from the Veteran's back pain, the Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups of back pain approximately once a week lasting for two hours, precipitated by walking.  See Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1367-68; Martinez-Bodon, 32 Vet. App. at 404.  Further during service in March 2023, just one year prior, the Veteran complained of a pinched nerve in her lower back that occasionally caused pain.  An additional VA examination is therefore necessary to correct this pre-decisional error in VA's duty to assist, that is, to clarify whether the Veteran has a current low back disorder.

The matters are therefore REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any current left hip disability.  After review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current left hip disability, to include pain resulting in functional impairment, had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, to include her in-service reports of bilateral hip pain in late 2022. 

In answering the above, the examiner should address whether the Veteran's October 2022 MRI findings of mild marrow edema of the bilateral of bilateral femoral necks and mild bilateral gluteus medius and minimus tendinopathy represent the presence of a left hip disability at the time, and whether those findings continue to exists.  Any necessary diagnostics testing should be completed.

In answering the above s, and if a current left hip disability is determined to exists (including pain resulting in functional impairment) the examiner is asked to consider the statements from the Veteran regarding her history of left hip symptoms during and since service.  She has specifically asserted that her bilateral hip pain began during basic training.  See, e.g., March 2024 VA hip examination.  

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any current low back disability.  Any necessary diagnostics testing should be completed.

After review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current low back disability, to include pain resulting in functional impairment, had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, to include her in-service reports of back pain and/or a pinched nerve in 2023. 

In answering the above, and if a current back disability is determined to exists (including pain resulting in functional impairment) the examiner is asked to consider the statements from the Veteran regarding her history of back symptoms during and since service.  She has specifically reported an in-service onset of back pain that began in 2023 "while moving offices and lifting equipment."  See March 2024 VA back examination.  

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Scarduzio, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.