Citation Nr: A25031895
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240730-460246
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1965 to March 1969.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy most recently addressed in an October 2023 rating decision. In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal. While the rating decision stated that new and relevant evidence had not been received for the claims, it essentially readjudicated the claims on the merits. The Board finds that the AO implicitly found new and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate the claims, which is a favorable finding. Therefore, the Board may proceed to address the underlying merits of the service connection claims without consideration of whether new nad relevant evidence is required to readjudicate the previously denied claims.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On December 13, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or the Veteran's representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy

Right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy

Left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy

Right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy

The Veteran asserts that he suffers from bilateral upper extremity peripheral neuropathy and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy that is the result of his time in active service. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Board notes that these issues have previously been before the Board. Most recently, in November 2022, the Board remanded these issues for outstanding VA medical records as well as an adequate VA examination. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023. The VA examiner noted the Veteran did not have a peripheral nerve condition or peripheral neuropathy. The Veteran asserted that he suffered from peripheral neuropathy symptoms beginning in 1969. The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner noted there was no objective evidence of a peripheral nerve condition. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's neuro examination was normal and there was no EMG on file. 

The Board finds the May 2023 VA examination to be inadequate as the VA examiner did not address a previous November 2021 VA examination that provided the Veteran with a diagnosis of bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and the discrepancies between the November 2021 diagnosis and the lack of diagnosis made by the May 2023 VA examiner. Additionally, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he began experiencing symptoms of bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy while he served on active duty. As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service injury and symptoms thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate).

Additionally, at the July 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he was seen by a private physician for his bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. However, the record is absent of the Veteran's current private medical history or treatment notes. 

VA has a duty to assist the veteran in obtaining evidence to support all substantially complete initial and supplemental claims. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). VA's duty to assist includes making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant records from private medical care providers. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1). Reasonable efforts will include an initial request and, if the records are not received, at least one follow-up request to the new source or an additional request to the original source. Id.  

Accordingly, a remand is required to assist the Veteran to obtain the private medical records related to his treatment for bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran VA Form 21-4142, and request the Veteran complete the form for any private physician or facility who has provided treatment for the Veteran's bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. Make reasonable requests to obtain the authorized records from any identified provider and associate the records with the claims file.

2. After completing the above development, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy that may be present. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner(s) prior to the examinations. The examiner(s) must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file has been reviewed. 

The examiner(s) should elicit a full history from the Veteran. The examinations should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation. All pertinent symptomatology should be reported in detail. 

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay statements to include the July 2021 and July 2022 hearing transcripts.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy that manifested in or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology therein.

Additionally, if direct service connection is not found, provide the Veteran an examination addressing the Veteran's presumed environmental toxin exposures with a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. The examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is due to presumed in-service toxic exposure. 

Under the PACT Act, the Veteran has established a TERA, and the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service and conduct a synergistic and combined effect analysis of all toxic exposure risk activities that may provide a basis to service connect the claimed disability.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.