Citation Nr: A25031377
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-450906
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for hypertension is denied. 

Service connection for a bilateral eye disability is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a gastrointestinal disability is remanded.

Service connection for a sinus disability is remanded.

Service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's hypertension and bilateral eye disabilities are not attributable to service in the U.S. Marine Corps, and hypertension was not manifest within one year of separation from service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypertension and a bilateral eye disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307. 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2001 to October 2005 in the United States Marine Corps.  His awards and decorations include the Combat Action Ribbon.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March and April 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March and April 2024 rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the rating decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

[If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As for the claims being remanded, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the VA Regional Office in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

VA provides compensation for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  This is referred to as a "service connection."  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, in order to show a service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999). 

Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b), combat veterans, such as the Veteran, may establish service incurrence of a disease or injury through satisfactory lay or other evidence which is consistent with the circumstances, conditions or hardships of service, even in the absence of official record of such incurrence.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(d).  While the combat presumption can assist a veteran in establishing the in-service injury, it does not aid in otherwise establishing a medical nexus.  See Libertine v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 521, 522-23 (1996). 

Additionally, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) recently established that exposure to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT) is presumed for "covered veterans," i.e., those who served in specific locations on or after specific dates.  38 U.S.C. § 1119.  While the Veteran qualifies as a "covered veteran" with presumed BPOT exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1119, his bilateral eye disabilities and hypertension are not among the diseases that can be presumed due to BPOT exposure.  Therefore, presumptive service connection due to BPOT exposure is not warranted under 38 U.S.C. § 1120.  Similarly, although he qualifies as a "Persian Gulf Veteran" under 38 U.S.C. § 1117, the presumptions referable to Persian Gulf veterans are inapplicable as the record does not show a qualifying chronic disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1); December 2022, January 2023, & December 2023 VA Memoranda; April 2024 & March 2024 VA examination reports.

The PACT Act further provides that if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the TERA.  38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also 38 U.S.C. §§ 1710(e)(4), 1119; 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.  Here, as indicated in December 2022 & December 2023 VA Memoranda, the Veteran participated in toxic exposure risk activities during military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1117, 1119.  As discussed below, opinions in this regard have been obtained.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  Evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Service connection for hypertension is denied. 

In addition to the above regulations, for certain chronic diseases, including hypertension, a presumption of service connection arises if the disease is manifested to a degree of 10 percent within one year following discharge from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  For those listed chronic diseases, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection when the requirements for application of the presumption are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

Further, under VA regulations, hypertension must be confirmed by readings taken two or more times on at least three different days.  The regulation also clarifies that the term "hypertension" means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension means that the systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104 Diagnostic Code (DC) 7101, Note (1).  Additionally, in order for hypertension to be considered disabling to a compensable degree, the evidence must show that diastolic pressure is predominantly 100 or more, systolic pressure is predominantly 160 or more, or there is a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more requiring continuous medication for control.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7101.

Turning to the evidence, the Board notes that the Veteran has current hypertension, documented on VA examination in March 2024.  See also March 2024 Rating Decision (favorable findings).  He reports his disability was caused by vaccines and unhealthy eating in service.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not show complaints, diagnoses, or treatment pertaining to hypertension.  On his October 2005 service separation examination, his blood pressure measurement was 124/78.  In the accompanying Report of Medical History, he denied having a history of either high or low blood pressure.  With regard to immunizations, his service treatment records show that he received several vaccines. The immunization records were completed fully, and include information on the types of vaccines administered, and dosages.  No adverse reaction to any immunization was documented.

As for the etiology of the disability, the record contains the opinion of the March 2024 VA examiner.  The examiner reviewed the claims file and examined the Veteran.  Based on a review of current medical literature, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not caused by his toxic exposure risk activities, considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effects of all TERAs.  Rather, the examiner noted that a known etiology, and the most likely risk factor, in the Veteran's development of hypertension was his history of cigarette smoking.  The Board's review of the claims file documents a 20 year history of smoking one pack of cigarettes per day.  

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the governing legal authority, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against claim.  The probative evidence does not show that the Veteran's hypertension is related to active military service, including any exposures or immunizations therein, or that a chronic disability was incurred in service.  No reactions to the immunizations were documented on the fully-completed immunization records, and subsequent service treatment records and post-service treatment records are silent for any adverse reactions.  His service treatment records are similarly silent for documentation pertaining to hypertension, and no abnormalities were found on his October 2005 service separation examination.  Rather, the post-service medical record reveals an onset of hypertension in 2019, many years after discharge.  

The fact that the Veteran sought treatment for other conditions in and after service, but not hypertension, weighs against the credibility of any assertion that the current disability was present in and persisted since discharge.  See AZ v. Shinseki, 731 F.3d 1303, 1315 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The claims file contains post-service treatment records dating back to 2006 documenting other medical complaints and treatment, without mention of hypertension.  Because he described other complaints and provided overall assessments of is health and functioning to his general practitioners, without mention of hypertension, it is reasonable to conclude that the disability was not present.  Id.

The medical opinion evidence is also persuasive.  The VA examiner addressed the Veteran's TERA participation, but opined that the Veteran's current disability is not related to military service, including to any toxic exposure therein.  Another etiology was identified and explained.  The examiner reviewed the reported history and symptoms in rendering the opinion and provided a rationale for the conclusion reached.  

The Board recognizes that a VA medical opinion was not obtained addressing the matter of direct service connection other than as related to a TERA.  VA must provide a medical examination and medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006).

Based on the applicable evidentiary record, the Board finds no indication, other than in the general lay assertions, of an association between the current hypertension and service.  The Veteran, however, does not have the requisite medical knowledge, training, or experience to be able to render a competent medical opinion regarding the cause of such a medically complex disability as hypertension.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011).  His statements alone are thus insufficient to warrant a medical examination as this would, contrary to the intent of Congress, result in medical examinations being "routinely and virtually automatically" provided to all veterans claiming service connection.  See, e.g., Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  Consequently, VA was under no duty to obtain a medical opinion in this regard at the time of the rating decision on appeal, and no pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred. 

For all of the above reasons, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  Accordingly, service connection is denied.  In reaching this decision, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt, however, the doctrine is not for application.

2. Service connection for a bilateral eye disability is denied.

The Veteran has current bilateral dry eye syndrome and chronic bilateral allergic conjunctivitis, documented on VA examination in March 2024.  See also April 2024 Rating Decision (favorable findings).  He reports his disability was caused by exposure to dust and sand blowing in the air throughout combat service.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The VA Regional Office has accepted, as a favorable finding, documentation of vision complaints in July 2005.  Moreover, as the Veteran reports that his bilateral eye disabilities are related to the circumstances of combat service, the Board accepts the in-service incurrence of his eye injuries.  

As for the etiology of the disability, the record contains the opinions of the March 2024 VA examiner.  The examiner reviewed the claims file, examined the Veteran, and opined that his bilateral eye disabilities were less likely than not incurred in or caused by service, including his toxic exposure risk activities considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effects of all TERAs.  The examiner noted the July 2005 service treatment record, but observed that the Veteran did not require treatment or corrective lenses.  Additionally, with citation to and reliance on four medical research studies, the examiner explained that there is no medical or scientific evidence providing any indication of a relationship between the development of the Veteran's particular eye disabilities and his TERAs.  

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the governing legal authority, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against claim.  Accepting the fact that the Veteran sustained combat-related injuries his eyes from dust and sand, the Board finds that the probative evidence does not show that his current disabilities are related to his active military service, including combat or any exposures therein.  Rather, the onset of the current bilateral eye disabilities was in 2024, years after his 2005 discharge.  

Further, the fact that the Veteran sought treatment for other conditions after in and service, but not the bilateral eye disabilities, weighs against the credibility of any assertion that the current disabilities were present in and persisted since discharge.  See AZ v. Shinseki, 731 F.3d 1303, 1315 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The claims file contains post-service treatment records dating back to 2006 documenting other medical complaints and treatment, without mention of the eye disabilities.  Because he described other complaints and provided overall assessments of is health and functioning to his general practitioners, without mention of these conditions, it is reasonable to conclude that the disabilities were not present.  Id.

The medical opinion is also persuasive.  The VA examiner addressed the Veteran's toxic exposures, including those sustained during combat, but opined that the Veteran's current disability is not related to military service.  The examiner reviewed the reported history and symptoms in rendering the opinions and provided a rationale for the conclusions reached.  

The only evidence to the contrary of the VA examiner's opinion is the lay evidence.  The Veteran, however, does not have the requisite medical knowledge, training, or experience to be able to render a competent medical opinion regarding the cause of such medically complex disabilities as bilateral dry eye syndrome and chronic bilateral allergic conjunctivitis.  See, e.g., Kahana, 24 Vet. App. at 435.  

For all of the above reasons, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  Accordingly, service connection is denied.  In reaching this decision, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt; however, the doctrine is not for application.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The matters below must be remanded for the correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors and/or to satisfy other statutory and regulatory duties to aid in substantiating the Veteran's claims.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran may be currently incarcerated.  See February 7, 2025, Bureau of Prisons Match.  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that VA must tailor its assistance to the peculiar circumstances of obtaining examination of an incarcerated claimant.  Bolton v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 185 (1995).  The Court indicated that alternative means to obtain examination of an incarcerated claimant include: (1) attempting to arrange transportation of the claimant to a VA facility for examination; (2) contacting the correctional facility and having their personnel conduct an examination according to VA examination worksheets; or (3) sending a VA examiner to the correctional facility to conduct the examination.  While the duty to furnish a medical examination to an incarcerated Veteran is not absolute, when VA is unable to obtain an examination in such circumstances, the Board must outline the efforts that were made to provide that examination.  

1. Service connection for a gastrointestinal disability is remanded.

Current VA treatment records document gastrointestinal symptoms, including constipation.  See November 2019 VA treatment records.  He reports that his symptoms began during military service and are related to the food he consumed.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Service treatment records document gastrointestinal complaints and treatment in November 2003 and September 2005.

On August 10, 2022, the Honoring our PACT Act of 2022 was enacted.  Section 303 of this law provides that if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also 38 U.S.C. §§ 1710(e)(4), 1119; 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.  As December 2022 and December 2023 VA Memoranda indicate that the Veteran participated in a TERA during military service, an examination addressing this matter, in addition to the Veteran's Gulf service, must be afforded.  

2. Service connection for a sinus disability is remanded.

Initially, effective August 5, 2021, 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 provides that for veterans with qualifying service in the "Southwest Asia theater of operations" during the Persian Gulf War, service connection may be presumed for certain listed chronic diseases associated with exposure to fine, particulate matter, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of military service.  The list of diseases includes asthma, rhinitis, and sinusitis (to include rhinosinusitis), among others. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(2).  This provision applies to all applications for service connection for asthma, rhinitis, and sinusitis based on Southwest Asia service that were pending before VA on or after August 5, 2021, as here.  Service connection for the listed diseases may be presumed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, if the listed disease becomes manifest to any degree (including noncompensable) within 10 years from the date of the veteran's separation from military service.  Id.

Current VA treatment records document ongoing nasal congestion.  See, e.g.,  February 2019 VA treatment records.  The Veteran reports the disability was caused by his exposure to dust and sand blowing in the air throughout combat service.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Service treatment records document respiratory complaints and treatment in July 2002.

A VA examination has not been afforded to the Veteran.  One must be provided in order to ascertain whether the Veteran has current sinusitis pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.  Additionally, the examiner must address his TERA participation, combat service, and Gulf service.  

?

3. Service connection for a headache disability is remanded.

The Veteran has a current headache disability, documented on VA examination in March 2024.  He reports that his symptoms are related to combat service, including environmental exposures and loud noise.  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

On VA examination in March 2024, the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, considering the Veteran's participation in a TERA.  The opinion, however, is conclusory, and confusing to the extent the examiner cited "environmental factors" as a cause of tension headaches while simultaneously rendering the negative opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination, it must ensure that the examination is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  A further examination addressing this matter, in addition to the Veteran's Gulf service, is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. If the Veteran is currently incarcerated, take all appropriate action to schedule him for the below VA examinations, consistent with VA policies regarding incarcerated veterans.  All efforts to schedule an examination or obtain medical opinions (such as conferring with prison authorities to determine whether the Veteran could be escorted to a VA medical facility for examination by VA personnel or examined at the prison by VA personnel, prison medical providers at VA expense, or fee-basis providers contracted by VA), must be documented for the record.

2. Gastrointestinal Examination - Afford the Veteran a VA examination to obtain evidence addressing the etiology of his current gastrointestinal disability.  A rationale must be provided for all conclusions reached.  The examiner is asked to consider the Veteran's lay reports and may state whether they are medically-consistent or medically-inconsistent with other evidence of record.

(A.) The examiner is requested to first clearly identify all current gastrointestinal disabilities.  

(B.) Opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher)  that the any current gastrointestinal disability constitutes an "undiagnosed illness" or a "medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness (MUCMI)."  

The examiner is advised that an illness can be a MUCMI where either the etiology or the pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive. 

"	The examiner is advised that "medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illnesses" include functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases).  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).

For reference, functional gastrointestinal disorders are defined as a group of conditions characterized by chronic or recurrent symptoms that are unexplained by any structural, endoscopic, laboratory, or other objective signs of injury or disease and may be related to any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Specific functional gastrointestinal disorders include, but are not limited to, irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, functional vomiting, functional constipation, functional bloating, functional abdominal pain syndrome, and functional dysphagia. These disorders are commonly characterized by symptoms including abdominal pain, substernal burning or pain, nausea, vomiting, altered bowel habits (including diarrhea, constipation), indigestion, bloating, postprandial fullness, and painful or difficult swallowing. Diagnosis of specific functional gastrointestinal disorders is made in accordance with established medical principles, which generally require symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis and the presence of symptoms sufficient to diagnose the specific disorder at least 3 months prior to diagnosis.)

(C.) Opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current gastrointestinal disability began during active service or is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to particularly include the Veteran's combat service and/or his exposure to fine particulate matter or other toxic risk exposure activity during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  Why or why not? 

The examiner must presume that the Veteran was exposed to fine, fine particulate matter from burn pits due to his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations and consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

"	Service treatment records document gastrointestinal complaints and treatment in November 2003 and September 2005. 

2. Sinus Examination - Afford the Veteran a VA examination to obtain evidence addressing the etiology of his current sinus disability.  A rationale must be provided for all conclusions reached.  The examiner is asked to consider the Veteran's lay reports and may state whether they are medically-consistent or medically-inconsistent with other evidence of record.

(A.) The examiner is requested to first clearly state whether the Veteran has sinusitis, to include rhinosinusitis.  

(B.) Opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current sinus disability began during active service or is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to particularly include the Veteran's combat service and/or his exposure to fine particulate matter or other toxic risk exposure activity during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  Why or why not. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the following: 

"	The examiner is advised that the Veteran has been awarded the Combat Action Ribbon and reports that his sinus symptoms are related to combat service.  As such, the examiner is directed to accept the in-service incurrence of the Veteran's combat-related injuries and thus, must accept as fact that these "injuries" occurred in service.  

"	The examiner must presume that the Veteran was exposed to fine, particulate matter from burn pits due to his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations and consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

"	Service treatment records documenting respiratory complaints and treatment in July 2002.

(C.) Opine on whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the current sinus disability constitutes an "undiagnosed illness" or a "medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness (MUCMI)."  The examiner is advised that an illness can be a MUCMI where either the etiology or the pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive.

3. Headache Examination - Afford the Veteran a VA examination to obtain evidence addressing the etiology of his current headache disability.  A rationale must be provided for all conclusions reached.  The examiner is asked to consider the Veteran's lay reports and may state whether they are medically-consistent or medically-inconsistent with other evidence of record.

(A.) Opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the current headache disability began during active service or is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to particularly include the Veteran's combat service and/or his exposure to fine particulate matter or other toxic risk exposure activity during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  Why or why not? 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the following: 

"	The examiner is advised that the Veteran has been awarded the Combat Action Ribbon and reports that his headache symptoms are related to combat service.  As such, the examiner is directed to accept the in-service incurrence of the Veteran's combat-related injuries and thus, must accept as fact that these "injuries" occurred in service.  

"	The examiner must presume that the Veteran was exposed to fine, particulate matter from burn pits due to his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations and consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

(C.) Opine on whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the current headache disability constitutes an "undiagnosed illness" or a "medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness (MUCMI)."  The examiner is advised that an illness can be a MUCMI where either the etiology or the pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.