Citation Nr: A25031638
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-465850
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not cause the need for regular aid and attendance of another person.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350, 3.352(a)

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 1970 to November 1977.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2024 rating decision.  In July 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2024 rating decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and identified the March 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to SMC based on aid and attendance because he needs help of another person with several activities of daily living (ADLs) due to his service-connected disabilities.  See June and October 2023 VA Form 21-2680s.  The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-2680 on March 17, 2023.  Thus, the review period begins on March 17, 2023, with a one year look-back period.  See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

SMC is payable at the aid and attendance rate when a veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities cause the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot, cause the veteran to be blind in both eyes, or renders the veteran permanently bedridden or with such significant disabilities as to be in need of regular aid and attendance.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

The following factors will be considered in determining whether a veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: inability of claimant to dress or undress himself (herself), or to keep himself (herself) ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of claimant to feed himself (herself) through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  It is not required that all of the disabling conditions noted above be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  Id.

The particular personal functions that the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Being bedridden will be a proper basis for this determination.  "Bedridden" constitutes a condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that an individual remain in bed. The fact that a claimant has voluntarily taken to bed, or that a physician has prescribed bed rest for a lesser or greater portion of the day, will not suffice.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

The Veteran is service-connected for: degenerative arthritis, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) of lumbar spine with spinal stenosis and lumbar fusion (40 percent from September 7, 2021); migraines associated with traumatic brain injury (TBI) residuals (30 percent from January 5, 2018); radiculopathy, bilateral lower extremity (sciatic) (20 percent each from April 7, 2021); radiculopathy, bilateral lower extremity (femoral) (20 percent each from September 7, 2021); status post (s/p) fracture of 2nd and 3rd metacarpals, left wrist (10 percent from September 7, 2021); scar, lower back (0 percent from January 5, 2018); and TBI residuals (0 percent from January 5, 2018).  His combined rating was 90 percent from September 7, 2021.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's March and May 2022 VA treatment records show that he participated in Tai Chi group lessons that included breathing exercises, joint lubricating exercise, and gentle movement exercises.

In an August 2022 VA record, the clinician noted the Veteran was well-developed, well-groomed, and was able to take care of himself.  The clinician noted the Veteran ambulated with a cane.

VA received two incomplete VA Form 21-2680s in March 2023: one on March 17th, and one on March 23rd.  Neither was signed by a clinician, and they appeared to be completed by the Veteran.  The first form only included the Veteran's identification information; the second form noted the limitations in ADLs, but did not provide the complete diagnosis or the list of disabilities that restricted the listed activities/functions.  These forms appear to be the Veteran's claim for entitlement to SMC; they retain no probative value as to whether his service-connected disabilities cause the need for regular aid and attendance of another person.

In a March 2023 VA treatment record, the Veteran reported he currently lives in assisted living and was closing on a home in mid-March.  He stated his daughter is moving into the home with him.  He stated he walks his dog 2-3 times a day.  He stated he goes to the gym every once in a while.  He described his typical day as below:

I get up between 630 and 700 because Max has me on a schedule. I feed him, wash up, brush my teeth. I take Max out for a morning walk. I go to breakfast in the dining room. I go to breakfast, then it's about me and Max, we hang out together. Most the time we stay in the room because the weather and I can't walk that much. Then I don't eat lunch, because when I first got here, I ate three meals and that was a little bit much for me to handle. I gained weight. Then between 4-5 I go to dinner in the cafeteria. By 530 or 600, I'm back in the room. I'm feeding him and then taking him for his evening walk. Then I come back here and we get lazy again. We watch television for a while, for about 5 hours before I take him out for his final walk, which is about 10 pm. Then between 11:00-11:30 pm I fall asleep and it's the same crap next day.

A March 2023 VA functional assessment report, completed to assess his eligibility to participate in the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC), provides detail on the Veteran's level of independence in activities of daily living (ADLs) and whether he required supervision, protection, or instruction.  He was independent in eating.  He stated, "I do the best I can. I try to stay independent."  He required supervision or touching assistance with bathing.  He stated that "I really take my time," and that he has 2 benches in his shower; he stated his caregiver sits outside the door to make sure he does not fall.  He was independent as it pertained to toileting hygiene. He also was independent with oral hygiene.  He stated his caregiver will help him apply adhesive to his dentures when the tube is low, but otherwise, he does it on his own.  He stated he trims his fingernails and goes to a nail salon to get his feet done.  He was independent with dressing and undressing.  He stated, "I do it slowly and sit down to put my pants and socks and shoe on. It takes me awhile, but I don't get frustrated. I just take my time."  He had no problems with slip on or tie up shoes.  He stated that "As long as I'm not rushed I do fine, I just take my time. I find that if you take your time and don't rush you can do most anything."  He was independent with mobility.  He was independent with rolling left and right; sitting to lying; lying to sitting; sitting to standing; and with toilet transfer.  He stated "I swing my legs in and out of the bed. I slide my feet off, steady myself and push off the bed to stand."  He stated he waits in between position changes so he does not get dizzy.  He was independent with walking 150 feet; walking 10 feet on uneven surfaces; walking for 15 minutes; with 12 steps; with picking up objects; and with carrying something in both hands.  He stated he had to rebuild his strength since he had COVID in 2020; he stated he can now walk 1/4 mile before he has to stop and sit, and could do it again.  He stated he lives in a 2-story home with 2 master suites.  His smaller master suite is on the first floor, and he is happy with it.  He holds onto the banister when going up and down the stairs.  He stated, "I do the stairs for exercise."  He stated he walks his old English bulldog twice a day.  He stated he is happy in his new home which has more space to move.  He will occasionally use a cane to ambulate. No help was needed with medication management.

Regarding supervision, protection, or instruction, the Veteran stated that he needs no help or supervision.  He stated he keeps his pills in their bottles, and that "I know the pills I'm supposed to take and I just stay with it. That's how I keep my mind straight. She may ask me in the morning if I've taken my medications, but I don't need reminders. I take them first thing every morning."  He was independent with the judgment and with physical ability to cope, make appropriate decisions, and take action in a changing environment or a potentially harmful situation.  He was not at risk of neglect, abuse, or exploitation by another person.  He could be left alone all day and all night, but someone needs to check in every day.  He did not need help going anywhere.  He had no delusions or hallucinations.  He was easily frustrated, but had no impulsivity.  He could identify his own needs.  He could provide or arrange for his health and safety.  He was able to answer quickly and appropriately to emergency scenarios.  He stated that "I have a smart house and will just press a button."  When questioned further, he stated he would call his daughter or son for help, and that he "would call 911 if I needed to."  He stated he can be home alone for a few days, as long as food has been cooked for him.  He stated his caregiver would call to check on him.  He stated, "I'm a loner anyway, and I have my dog with me."  He stated he still drives and can go anywhere by himself.  He stated that his memory seems pretty good, but his daughter may say otherwise.  He stated that "Since I was an air traffic controller, I make numbers a part of my system. Every morning I make sure I know what day it is, the date and time."  He makes his own appointments and sets up reminders on his phone.  He reported his caregiver does cooking, cleaning, and laundry.  He stated, "She's the queen of my castle."  He stated he is not impulsive and is very well thought out.  He stated, "I have to do everything very slowly."  He was alert and oriented x4; was calm and pleasant with congruent affect; and his speech was clear.

In a VA Form 21-2680 dated June 13, 2023, the clinician indicated the following diagnoses were related to the level of assistance described on the form: lower extremity radiculopathy; arthritis in back, neck, knee, and shoulder; and status post myocardial infarction with pacemaker.  The disabilities that restricted the listed activities/functions were "back and radiculopathy."  He was on low sodium diet, and his gait was antalgic with cane.  The clinician noted the Veteran was confined to bed 8 hours from 9 PM to 9 AM, and for 12 hours from 9 AM to 9 PM.  The Veteran was able to feed himself, but required food to be chopped in smaller pieces due to swallowing difficulties.  He was not able to prepare his own meals, and his daughter prepared his daily meal.  He needed help going to bathroom and get seated, but could bathe afterwards.  He was not legally blind.  He did not require nursing home care.  He required help sorting medication by day and time.  He was "Not able to manage affairs as would the fund to the son and 6 grandchildren."  He was well-groomed and had appropriate mood and affect.  Regarding restrictions of each upper extremity, he was able to dress himself and button clothes.  Regarding restriction of each lower extremity, radiculopathy in both legs restricted his ambulation and ability to climb into tubs and showers and to get out of bed.  Regarding restriction of spine, trunk, and neck, he was unable to fully flex back and neck, and could not lift up newborn grandson in May.  For all other pathology, the clinician noted the Veteran is able to keep and maintain bladder and bowel usually; if soil, he will change undergarment.  Regarding how often per day or week the Veteran is able to leave home or immediate premises, the clinician noted the Veteran has a dog and is able to walk the unit but not any further.  The clinician noted an assistive device or assistance of another person was required for 1 block locomotion; the means of assistance was not specified.

In a VA Form 21-2680 dated June 30, 2023, the clinician did not provide the 'complete diagnosis with most significant symptoms for each condition.'  The clinician noted that the Veteran's congestive heart failure (CHF), coronary artery disease (CAD), and neuropathy were considered permanent and totally disabling.  The description on nutrition and gait was not noted.  She did not indicate that the Veteran was confined to bed.  She did not indicate that the Veteran required assistance with the following: bathing/showring; eating or self-feeding; dressing; ambulating within the home or living area; tending to hygiene needs; transferring in or out of bed/chair; toileting; and medication management.  She indicated the Veteran required assistance with additional activities (housekeeping, laundering, meal preparation, etc.), but did not specify the activities.  The Veteran was not legally blind.  He did not require nursing home care.  He had mental capacity to manage his benefit payments or was able to direct someone to do so.  He ambulated with cane, and he was well-groomed.  Regarding restriction of each upper extremity, the clinician noted that sometimes his left shoulder prohibits ability to dress due to decreased range of motion, but was able to complete all other tasks.  Regarding restriction of each lower extremity, she noted he uses a cane for ambulation; had right-sided weakness after L4-L5 fusion which affects his balance; and had limited ability to stand for long periods or walk long distances.  Regarding restriction of spine, trunk, and neck, the L4-L5 fusion resulted in constant pain, neuropathy, and right-sided lower extremity weakness.  Regarding all other pathology, she noted the Veteran has poor balance as stated previously.  Regarding the question on how often the Veteran left home or immediate premises, she noted the Veteran tries to walk his dog short distances three times per day, and tries to get out to appointments as often as needed.  She noted the Veteran uses an assistive device or requires assistance of another person for locomotion; she marked "Yes" but did not specify the means or the distance.

In an October 2023 VA Form 21-2680, a clinician indicated the following diagnoses were related to the level of assistance described on the form: (1) degenerative arthritis, IVDS of lumbar spine with stenosis and lumbar fusion, and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy - lower extremity weakness, difficulty ambulating, impaired balance; (2) TBI - headaches, impaired balance, dizziness, and depression; and (3) anterior crural nerve paralysis - weakness of the lower extremities.  He noted that TBI and anterior crural nerve paralysis restricted the listed activities/functions.  He noted the Veteran was well-nourished, and that his gait was slow and shuffling.  He did not indicate that the Veteran was confined to bed.  He did not indicate that the Veteran required assistance with the following: bathing/showring; eating or self-feeding; dressing; ambulating within the home or living area; tending to hygiene needs; transferring in or out of bed/chair; toileting; medication management; and additional activities (housekeeping, laundering, meal preparation, etc.).  The Veteran was not legally blind.  He had mental capacity to manage his benefit payments or was able to direct someone to do so; the Veteran's daughter and in-home caregiver managed his current benefit payments.  Regarding the posture and general appearance of the Veteran, the clinician noted kyphosis, and that he was generally well-appearing.  Regarding the restriction of each upper extremity, the clinician noted that the Veteran grips equally bilaterally with 3/5 strength, and that his left arm strength was 3/5 with reduced range of motion.  The clinician noted the Veteran was unable to raise left arm above head or across body without increased pain.  Regarding the restriction of each lower extremity, the clinician noted right lower extremity weakness, inability to stand over 10 minutes without increased pain, impaired balance, and lower extremity weakness.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's dog died 2 months ago, which has led to deterioration in mobility due to lack of motivation to ambulate.  Regarding restriction of spine, trunk, and neck, he had reduced range of motion and increased pain with forward bending and upper body rotation.  The clinician noted the Veteran is unable to bend at waist without increased pain when trying to put on socks and shoes, and that he wears slippers mostly.  Regarding all other pathology, the clinician noted impaired balance, weakness, dizziness, and intermittent cognitive impairment.  For the question on how often per day or week, and under what circumstances the Veteran is able to leave the home or immediate premises, the clinician noted "Daily assistance multiple hours a day. The Veteran describes difficulty with driving greater than 10 minutes due to increased pain and lower extremity weakness, he is unable to cook and clean [due] to physical limitations, currently daughter and paid cleaning service assist with these limitations."  The clinician noted an assistive device or assistance of another person was required for 1 block locomotion; the means of assistance was not specified.

Upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran does not qualify for SMC based on the need for aid and attendance.

The Board initially notes that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have not caused the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot, or blindness in both eyes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  The Board further notes that although the first June 2023 VA Form 21-2680 noted that the Veteran was confined to bed 20 hours a day, it appears to be an inaccurate assessment as the March 2023 VA treatment records including his own description of a typical day, and the second June 2023 Form 21-1680 and the October 2023 Form 21-2680 fail to indicate that the Veteran is confinement to bed.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not require confinement to bed during the appeal period under review.  Id.

The VA Form 21-2680s and treatment records overall indicate that the Veteran is not in need of regular aid and attendance another person due to his service-connected disabilities or otherwise.  The first June 2023 Form 21-2680 noted that the Veteran can feed himself, dress himself, take bath by himself, and walk his dog.  It noted he needs help with getting seated for bathing; however, his own report at the March 2023 VA functional assessment and the other two Form 21-2680s do not indicate as such.  It noted the Veteran required help with sorting medication by day and time, but he adamantly stated at the March 2023 VA functional assessment that he is fully capable of handling his own medication, and the two Form 21-2680s also show that he does not require help with medal management.  The first June 2023 form noted he did not have the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments, but the noted reason of "fund to the son and 6 grandchildren" is unclear.  The rest of the claims file does not discuss about the Veteran supporting his son and grandchildren, and the two other forms noted that the Veteran had the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments or was direct someone else to do so.  He could dress himself, feed himself, and walk his dog.  It was noted he could not lift his grandson, but there is no clear indication whether this was due to his service-connected disability.

The second June 2023 Form 21-2680 and the October 2023 Form 21-2680 noted that the Veteran was generally independent with ADLs.  They noted that the Veteran did not require assistance with bathing/showring; eating or self-feeding; dressing; ambulating within the home or living area; tending to hygiene needs; transferring in or out of bed/chair; toileting; and medication management.  The second June 2023 form noted he had difficulty with upper extremity movement due to his left shoulder condition, and it noted CHF and CAD as the disabilities that restrict the Veteran's ADLs, but he is not service-connected for those disabilities.  The two forms note that the Veteran has limited ability to stand for long periods or walk long distances, and that he has impaired balance and weakness in his lower extremities.  However, they still note that the Veteran can move around the house and immediate premises, walk his dog, and drive independently for short time.  

The Board recognizes that the Veteran may experience difficulty with some ADLs due to his service-connected disabilities, and that his condition has deteriorated to some extent between March 2023 and October 2023.  However, the evidence at the time of the AOJ decision does not demonstrate that he is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance within the meaning of 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  He has been consistently shown to be able to feed himself, dress himself, bathe by himself, use toilet by himself, walk by himself, and drive by himself despite his myriad disabilities, both service-connected and non-service-connected alike. There is no indication in the probative evidence that the Veteran would require the aid and assistance of another with consideration limited to his service-connected disabilities only.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran is competent to report those symptoms which are capable of lay observation and describe his physical limitations.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011).  However, the competent medical evidence at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision does not demonstrate that he is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  The evidence does not show that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, alone, rendered him physically helpless in the performance of the ADLs or in protecting himself from the everyday hazards and dangers incident to his environment.

In sum, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not, on their own or combined, result in the need for regular aid and attendance of another person as contemplated in § 3.352(a).  Thus, entitlement to SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance of another person is not warranted at this time.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Jake Choi, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.