Citation Nr: A25031044
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230626-357310
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

The character of the Appellant's discharge from service does not constitute a bar to the receipt of VA benefits, including VA pension benefits; the appeal is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to VA pension benefits is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

There were compelling circumstances to mitigate the misconduct leading to the Appellant's discharge from service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for establishing status as a veteran for the purpose of receiving VA benefits, including VA pension benefits, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5303; 38 C.F.R. § 3.12.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Appellant served on active duty with the United States Army from December 1972 to May 1974; the character of this service is the subject of this appeal.

The administrative decision and rating decision on appeal were both issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in March 2023.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in June 2023, the Appellant elected the Direct Review option for this appeal.  Therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the March 2023 decisions.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Given the Board's favorable finding below regarding the character of the Appellant's discharge from service, the Board has characterized the claims for service connection for treatment purposes only as claims for service connection.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.360.

Status as a Veteran

When a person is seeking VA benefits, it first must be shown that the service member, upon whose service such benefits are predicated, has attained the status of a 'veteran' for VA purposes.  Holmes v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 38, 40 (1997).  "The term veteran means a person who served in the active military, naval or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  38 U.S.C. § 101(2).  VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim is based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 5303; 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

When a person is seeking VA benefits, it first must be shown that the service member, upon whose service such benefits are predicated, has attained the status of a 'veteran' for VA purposes.  Holmes v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 38, 40 (1997).  "The term veteran means a person who served in the active military, naval or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  38 U.S.C. § 101(2).  VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim is based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 5303; 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

There are ten character of discharge bars establishing entitlement for VA benefits:  (1) six statutory bars found at 38?U.S.C. §?5303(a) and 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c); and (2) four regulatory bars listed in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d).

As to the statutory bars, benefits are not payable where the former service member was discharged or released under one of the following conditions: (1) as a conscientious objector who refused to perform military duty, wear the uniform, or comply with lawful order of competent military authorities; (2) by reason of the sentence of a general court martial; (3) resignation by an officer for the good of the service; (4) as a deserter; (5) as an alien during periods of hostilities, where it is affirmatively shown that the former service member requested his or her release; and (6) by reason of discharge other than honorable conditions issued as a result of an absence without official leave (AWOL) for a continuous period of at least 180 days.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).

A recent amendment to the regulation governing character of discharge updated the regulatory bars enumerated in section 3.12(d).  See Update and Clarify Regulatory Bars to Benefits Based on Character of Discharge, 89 Fed. Reg. 32,361 (April 26, 2024) (codified at 38 C.F.R. pt. 3) (effective June 25, 2024).  Under the amended subsection, a discharge or release because of one of the following offenses is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions:  (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-marital; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude (this includes, generally, conviction of a felony); and (4) willful and persistent misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d).  

The determination as to whether a discharge is based on willful and persistent misconduct is a matter of fact to be determined by the Board.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 445, 447 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.  The term "willful misconduct" means an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n).  It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  Id.

Additionally, for discharges based on willful and persistent misconduct, instances of minor misconduct occurring within two years of each other are defined as persistent; an instance of minor misconduct occurring within two years of more serious misconduct is persistent; and instances of more serious misconduct occurring within five years of each other are persistent.  For purposes of the willful and persistent misconduct bar, minor misconduct is misconduct for which the maximum sentence imposable pursuant to the Manual for Courts-Martial United States would not include a dishonorable discharge or confinement for longer than one year if tried by general court-martial.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii) (effective June 25, 2024). 

The recent amendments to the regulation governing character of discharge allow VA to apply the compelling circumstances exception to cases involving willful and persistent misconduct and offenses involving moral turpitude, formerly only available in cases with AWOLs exceeding 180 continuous days.  See Update, 89 Fed. Reg. 32,361 (amending 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)-(e)). 

The bar to benefits will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the prolonged AWOL or misconduct at issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e) (effective June 25, 2024).  In a compelling circumstances determination, VA will consider the length and character of service exclusive of the misconduct, the reasons for the misconduct, and whether a valid legal defense would have precluded a conviction under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ).

Regarding the length and character of service, it should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful, and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(1).

Factors considered in determining the reasons for the misconduct include:  mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the misconduct; physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication; combat-related or overseas-related hardship; sexual abuse/assault; duress, coercion, or desperation; family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties; and age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2).  The mental or cognitive impairment may include, but is not limited to, clinical diagnosis of, or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of, PTSD, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2)(i).

For purposes of a valid legal defense for the misconduct, the defense must go directly to the substantive issue of absence or misconduct rather than to procedures, technicalities, or formalities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3).

Here, the Appellant enlisted in the Army in December 1972 for a three-year obligation; he was at the age of 18 and having completed one year of high school.  

In March 1973, he received a non-judicial punishment (NJP) for possessing a knife with a blade exceeding 3.5 inches.  

In June 1973, the Appellant reported to a unit in Germany.

In July 1973, he received another NJP for absence from his unit for approximately two days and failing to report to morning formation the following day.

In August 1973, the Appellant's mother and three family friends wrote letters to support an early discharge for the Appellant.  The Appellant's mother reported that she was working but had a lot of bills and three younger sons still in school.  She reported having to take time off from work a lot, as she had back surgery the prior year and often became ill.  She asserted that the Appellant would have a job at the Ford plant to help her support his younger brothers if he were able to leave service before his three-year obligation.  The family friends reported similar observations, that the Appellant's mother was often sick and needed help caring for the three younger children.  One of the family friends indicated the Appellant's mother also worked at the Ford plant.

In September 1973, the Appellant was home on emergency leave to help his mother.  He returned from leave late, and was in AWOL status from September 10 to September 13, 1973, when he surrendered himself to military authorities at Fort Knox.  On September 17, 1973, the Appellant again went into AWOL status, until he was apprehended by civilian authorities on March 31, 1974, and returned to military control on April 1, 1974.

Later in April 1974, the Appellant was charged before a summary court-martial with the September 1973 AWOL and the September 1973-April 1974 AWOL.  

In lieu of trial, the Appellant requested discharge for the good of the service.  He submitted a statement with his request, reporting that he could not continue in the Army way of life.  He reported that being in the Army had worsened his problems, as he joined the Army to make money to help his mother and brothers, but was unable to live off the amount he earned and still send money home.  

The Appellant's request for discharge was approved in May 1974, and he was discharged under other than honorable conditions.

After separating from service, the Appellant submitted applications to the Army Discharge Review Board and the Army Board for the Correction of Military Records to upgrade the character of his discharge in 1974, 1978, 2019, and 2020.  All of these applications were denied.  

In July 2019, the Appellant submitted a written statement, reporting that one of his brothers was also stationed in Germany and was injured in a car accident.  The Appellant reported that, while visiting his brother in the hospital, they spoke about their mother's difficulty supporting their three other brothers back home alone.  The Appellant reported that he was the only one who could do so, as his brother remained in the hospital.  The Appellant reported he spoke with his commanding officer, who authorized the emergency leave.  He reported that the commanding officer also informed him on how to apply for a hardship discharge so he could leave service to help his mother.  The Appellant reported he stayed home instead of returning to Germany.  He also reported that he was told his other than honorable discharge would be upgrade in six months, and that he thought he was making the best decision for his poverty-stricken family since his discharge would be upgraded.

In November 2021, the Appellant's representative submitted a written statement reporting that, when she was in the military during this period, there was a persistent rumor or myth that undesirable discharges would be upgraded automatically after separation.  

In September 2022, the AOJ issued an updated administrative decision, reiterating the August 1974 finding that the Appellant's discharge was based on willful and persistent misconduct.  It also found that the Appellant is entitled to health care benefits under Chapter 17 of Title 38 of the U.S. Code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.360.

After careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that status as a veteran is established in this case.

First, the Board finds that two bars apply in this case.  The misconduct leading to discharge encompasses the September 1973 AWOL and the September 1973-April 1974 AWOL.  As AWOL is known prohibited conduct, this constitutes willful misconduct, and as the instances occurred within two years of each other, it is also persistent.  Therefore, as the AOJ found in August 1974 and September 2022, the bar based on willful and persistent misconduct applies.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii).  Further, the September 1973-April 1974 AWOL was 196 days, which is greater than 180 continuous days.  Therefore, the bar based on a prolonged AWOL also applies in this case.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6).

No other bars apply in this case.  The Appellant was not discharged as a conscientious objector, by reason of a general court-martial sentence, as a deserter, or as an alien during a period of hostilities; the Appellant was not an officer resigning for the good of the service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).  The Appellant was not discharged for the good of the service to avoid trial by a general court-martial, for mutiny or spying, or for an offense involving moral turpitude.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d).

Next, the Board finds that compelling circumstances exist in this case to mitigate the misconduct leading to discharge.  

As for the length and character of the Appellant's service exclusive of the misconduct, this factor is slightly unfavorable in this analysis.  The Appellant had two instances of misconduct, including another absence, in the period prior to the AWOLs that led to his discharge.  The Board further notes the Appellant served approximately nine months prior to going AWOL for approximately four months.

Similarly, there is no legal defense to the two AWOLs in this case; the Appellant knew he was late returning from emergency leave, and then chose to leave again in order to stay with his family.  This is an unfavorable factor in this analysis.

However, the Board finds the reasons for the misconduct to be a strong favorable factor.  In particular, the Appellant was 18 years old at the time he decided to go AWOL, and had completed only one year of high school.  The Board also notes the Appellant's perception that his discharge would be automatically upgraded after six months, which is bolstered by his representative's report that she had also heard this rumor during service.  While ignorance of the laws governing character of discharge is not a reason to make a favorable finding, the Board does find that this reasoning speaks to the Appellant's judgmental maturity.  He rationalized his misconduct by thinking it would help his family and not hurt his access to benefits in the future.  In fact, the record reflects the Appellant did apply for an upgrade within a year from separation, indicating his belief that he was expecting the character of his discharge to be upgraded.

Further, the Appellant reported a strong sense of obligation to his single mother, who was struggling financially, to help support and care for his three younger brothers.  He also reported he was not earning as much money as he expected in service, which was his main motivating factor for joining the Army.  Finally, the Appellant reasoned that his brother was hospitalized at the time and unable to travel home to assist their mother, leaving the responsibility solely to the Appellant. 

The Board finds the reasons for the AWOLs leading to discharge, including the Appellant's age and judgmental maturity and his obligation to his single mother and three younger brothers, to outweigh the unfavorable factor of there being no legal defense and the slightly unfavorable factor of the length and character of the Appellant's service exclusive of the misconduct.  Therefore, the Board finds there are compelling circumstances to mitigate the misconduct and the bars to benefits will not be applied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to VA pension benefits is remanded.

The Appellant's claim for VA pension benefits was denied solely on the character of discharge grounds.  Given the favorable findings made by the Board in this decision regarding the character of the Appellant's discharge, the substantive issue of entitlement to VA pension benefits is remanded to the AOJ for reconsideration on the merits.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (remand is permitted to cure an error in satisfying a regulatory duty).

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

The Board finds a remand is necessary in this case to cure errors in fulfilling VA's duty to assist the claimant.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Appellant filed a claim for service connection for left and right foot pain, with decreased range of motion and flexion.  He also reported that he injured both feet during basic training.  The Appellant was not afforded a VA examination for his left and right foot disability claims, as the AOJ found that his VA treatment records do not show a current diagnosed disability, and that his service treatment records do not include complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis of right or left foot pain.  

As for a current disability, the Appellant is competent as a lay person to report observable symptoms, such as pain and a decrease in the range of motion.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (a layperson is competent to offer an opinion on simple medical conditions).

The AOJ was correct in noting that the service treatment records do not reflect any complaints of foot pain.  However, the service treatment records associated with the claims file contain only the Appellant's enlistment and separation physical examinations and a few progress notes from the period leading to his separation in 1974.  They do not include any treatment records from 1972 or 1973, when the Appellant would have been in basic training.

Based on the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds it was an error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist not to seek further service treatment records prior to making the determination that the Appellant did not complain of foot pain during service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Therefore, a remand is necessary to attempt to obtain a complete set of the Appellant's service treatment records.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Similarly, the AOJ found that the Appellant's service treatment records did not reflect any in-service complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of anxiety or depression, and therefore did not afford the Appellant a VA psychiatric examination.  In addition to the error identified above regarding the service treatment records, the Board finds it was an additional error not to obtain a VA examination prior to issuing the denial for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Appellant submitted several lay statements from people who knew him when he returned home from service and family members who lived with him in the time since separation.  These statements reflect observations of changes in the Appellant's demeanor and behavior from before service to after service.  As the evidence indicates the current psychiatric disorder may be related to service, VA's duty to assist the Appellant included obtaining an examination.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006) (VA is obliged to provide an examination where there is insufficient information to decide the claim and there is an indication the current disability may be associated with service).

Therefore, on remand, a VA psychiatric examination and opinion should be obtained.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disability is remanded.

The Appellant attended a VA examination in conjunction with this claim in December 2022, at which the examiner identified a right leg muscle strain and noted an x-ray the Appellant brought with him showing arthritis.  The examiner opined that the Appellant's service treatment records contain no documentation regarding a right leg injury, and therefore a determination cannot be made.

However, the Appellant's service treatment records do include an April 1974 complaint of a pulled muscle in the right leg.  The December 2022 opinion is not based on an accurate factual premise, and is inadequate.  See Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (a VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise).  Therefore, it was an error to rely on this opinion, and a remand is necessary to obtain a new examination.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Regarding the Appellant's claim for VA pension benefits, perform all required development, including appropriate notice to the Appellant, and adjudicate this claim on its merits.

2. Attempt to obtain from the appropriate repositories any service treatment records that are not already of record, and associate those documents with the claims file.  

All such attempts should be documented in the claims file.  If the records are unavailable, the claims file must be documented clearly to that effect and the Appellant notified in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

3. Then, schedule an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current psychiatric disorder is related to the Appellant's military service.  Please note, if the examiner deems it reasonable, an alternate format such as telehealth interview is acceptable.

Following review of the claims file and, if indicated, examination of the Appellant, the examiner should identify all psychiatric disorders currently present.

For EACH disorder identified, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the psychiatric disorder began in or is otherwise caused by the Appellant's active service.

In providing the opinion, the examiner should address the lay statements submitted by the Appellant in November 2021, as well as any other pertinent evidence of record.

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Appellant's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the Appellant's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The examiner may not dismiss the Appellant's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  

4. Then, schedule an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine whether any current right leg disability is related to the Appellant's military service.  

Following review of the claims file, the examiner should identify all current right leg disabilities present. 

For EACH right leg disability identified, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the disability began in or is otherwise caused by the Appellant's active service.

In providing the opinion, the examiner must address the April 1974 service treatment record regarding a right leg muscle strain.

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Appellant's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the Appellant's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The examiner may not dismiss the Appellant's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.