Citation Nr: A25031718
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230315-330942
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the disability rating from 50 percent to 30 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features, effective August 19, 2022, was not proper; reinstatement of the 50 percent rating, effective August 19, 2022, is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features is denied.  

The reduction of the disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for right knee arthritis, effective February 3, 2021, was not proper; reinstatement of the 20 percent rating, effective February 3, 2021, is granted. 

The reduction of the disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for left knee arthritis, effective February 3, 2021, was not proper; reinstatement of the 20 percent rating, effective February 3, 2021, is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right knee arthritis is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee arthritis is denied.

The reduction of the disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for left knee instability, effective August 17, 2022, was proper; reinstatement of the 20 percent rating, effective August 17, 2022, is denied.

Entitlement to a 10 percent disability rating for left knee instability prior to August 17, 2022, is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for fibromyalgia is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot tenosynovitis is denied.

Entitlement to a 40 percent disability rating for gastroparesis is granted.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of June 24, 2019, for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of June 24, 2019, for the establishment of basic eligibility to Dependents' Education Assistance (DEA) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction of disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder with depressive features from 50 percent to 30 percent, effective August 19, 2022, was not proper because the evidence does not demonstrate material improvement reasonably certain to continue under the ordinary conditions of life.

2. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's depressive disorder with depressive features symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

3. The reduction of disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected right knee arthritis from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective February 3, 2021, was not proper because the evidence does not demonstrate material improvement reasonably certain to continue under the ordinary conditions of life.

4. The reduction of disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthritis from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective February 3, 2021, was not proper because the evidence does not demonstrate material improvement reasonably certain to continue under the ordinary conditions of life.

5. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's right knee flexion was limited to, at worse, 78 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up.

6. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's left knee flexion was limited to, at worse, 59 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up.

7. In the November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ assigned 20 percent disability rating, effective June 2, 2022, for left knee instability on the basis of an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability and use of an assistive device or bracing for ambulation prescribed by a medical provider.

8. Following a request for higher-level review of the rating for left knee instability, the AOJ determined that it had committed clear and unmistakable error in the assignment of 20 percent disability rating and assigned a 10 percent disability rating effective August 17, 2022.

9. The evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran's left knee instability manifests with slight recurrent left knee subluxation and regular use of a cane for ambulation.

10. The Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum available schedular rating for her service-connected fibromyalgia throughout the entire period on appeal.

11. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's right ankle dorsiflexion was limited to, at worse, 30 degrees and plantar flexion was limited to, at worse, 10 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up.

12. The Veteran's right foot tenosynovitis is manifested by no more than moderate symptoms.

13. The Veteran's gastroparesis is manifested by recurrent nausea averaging 10 days or more in duration at least four or more times a year during the period on appeal.  

14. From June 24, 2019, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevented her from securing and maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

15. In light of the award of an earlier effective date of June 24, 2019, for the award of a TDIU herein, an effective date of June 24, 2019, for basic eligibility to DEA is warranted.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction of the disability rating from 50 percent to 30 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features was not proper, and the 50 percent rating is reinstated effective August 19, 2022.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434. 

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

3. The reduction of the disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for right knee arthritis was not proper, and the 20 percent rating is reinstated, effective February 3, 2021.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

4. The reduction of the disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for left knee arthritis was not proper, and the 20 percent rating is reinstated effective February 3, 2021.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

5. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right knee arthritis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

6. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee arthritis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

7. The reduction of the disability rating for left knee instability from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective August 17, 2022, was proper.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

8. The criteria for a 10 percent disability rating for left knee instability have been met for the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

9. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for fibromyalgia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.6, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5025.

10. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271.

11. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot tenosynovitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5024-5284.

12. The criteria for a 40 percent disability rating for gastroparesis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.321, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7304.

13. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU from June 24, 2019, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.16.

14. The criteria for an effective date of June 24, 2019, for basic eligibility to DEA have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 3500; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2004 to October 2004.  

In the March 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Consideration must be given to increased evaluations under other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

The veteran's entire history is reviewed when assigning disability ratings.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If there is disagreement with the initial rating assigned following a grant of service connection, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time, based upon the facts found.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  But where service connection has already been established, and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  The relevant focus for adjudicating an increased rating claim is on the evidence concerning the state of the disability from the time period one year before the claim was filed until VA makes a final decision on the claim.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

Where a disability rating has been in effect for less than five years at the time the reduction is implemented, a rating reduction is warranted where reexamination of the disability discloses improvement of that disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).  In making this determination, VA is required to comply with several regulations applicable to all rating-reduction cases, regardless of the rating level or the length of time that the rating has been in effect.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13; Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 413, 420 (1993).  In this regard, these provisions impose a clear requirement that VA rating reductions be based upon review of the entire history of a veteran's disability.  See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  

A rating reduction is not proper unless the veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000).  Specifically, it is necessary to ascertain, based upon a review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in disability and whether examination reports reflecting change are based upon thorough examinations.  In addition, it must be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred and that such improvement actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420-21; 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

In general, the reduction of a rating must have been supported by the evidence on file at the time of the reduction.  Pertinent post-reduction evidence favorable to restoring the rating, however, also must be considered.  Dofflemeyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 279-80 (1992).  In addressing whether improvement is shown, the comparison point generally is the last examination on which the rating at issue was assigned or continued.  Hohol v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 169 (1992).

1. Propriety of the rating reduction for depressive disorder with depressive features

2. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for depressive disorder with depressive features

The Veteran seeks reinstatement of the 50 percent disability rating assigned for depressive disorder with depressive features, which was reduced to 30 percent effective August 19, 2022.

As a matter of background, these issues stem from a June 2022 supplemental claim of entitlement to an increased rating for depressive disorder with depressive features.  By a November 2022 rating decision, following development to assess the severity of the Veteran's psychiatric disability, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's 50 percent disability rating for her service-connected depressive disorder with depressive features to 30 percent.  Later in November 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for a higher-level review of that rating decision.

In response to the November 2022 request for a higher-level review, the AOJ issued a February 2023 rating decision on appeal which, in pertinent part, continued the 30 percent disability rating assigned for depressive disorder with depressive features.

When reduction is considered warranted by the evidence and would result in reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, certain procedural guidelines must be followed: first, there must be a rating action proposing the reduction; then the Veteran must be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

Here, the Veteran's monthly compensation remained the same following the reduction from 50 percent to 30 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features, effective August 19, 2022; therefore, the due process protections of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply to this reduction.  The Board will now consider the propriety of the rating reduction.  The question of whether a disability has improved involves consideration of the applicable rating criteria.

The Veteran's depressive disorder with depressive features is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

A 30 percent rating is rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 

A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The use of the term "such as" in the general rating formula for mental disorders in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  It is not required to find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms recited for particular ratings. Id.  The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of the symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on his/her social and work situation. Id.

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  It was further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."

Here, the previously assigned 50 percent disability rating was awarded by a June 2021 rating decision, which considered the findings of the November 2020 VA mental disorders examination.  At that time, the examiner determined the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was best summarized as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  At the time of examination, the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood and chronic sleep impairment related to the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability.  

As to recent relevant social, marital, and family history, the Veteran reported communicating with her mother but said that they had conflicts.  She described her relationship with her mother as "a lot better."  She spoke with her brother and had a normal relationship with him.  At the time of examination, she reported being married for ten years.  She had a stepdaughter, who lived with her biological mother.  She indicated she had a good relationship her stepdaughter and step-grandson.  She communicated with peers on social media, and enjoyed walking, going on drives, writing, and playing video games.  She also had a year-old dog.  

As to recent relevant occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported undergoing vocational rehabilitation for two years in department maintenance.  She attempted to work in maintenance but was not hired.  She worked as a security guard for two to three years.  She liked the job and described it as "easy."  She stated that her boss was "accommodating."  She reported quitting in 2007 or 2008.  She had been receiving Social Security disability insurance (SSDI) benefits since 2008 or 2009.  

As to recent relevant mental history, the Veteran reported seeking treatment about three years prior to examination because she had the option available.  She reported struggling with her mood and had "severe issues with tones" people used with her.  She said her grandmother and the drill sergeants had used "tones" with her.  At the time of examination, she denied taking psychiatric medication.  She reported taking medication in the past but indicated it did not help.  She denied any psychiatric hospitalizations or emergency room visits; however, she reported meeting with a provider about three times, which was usually every few months.  

As to recent relevant substance abuse history, the Veteran reported taking edibles and using cannabidiol (CBD) oil daily for her pain since 2007.  She reported drinking one to two socially.  She reported trying a cigarette once, but it made her sick.  She denied using or experimenting with other substances.

At the time of examination, the Veteran was casually and appropriately attired.  She had adequate hygiene.  She ambulated with a walking cane.  She was alert and oriented to time, place, person, and situation.  Her memory, concentration, and attention were intact.  The Veteran's speech was of normal rate, amplitude, and prosody.  Her affect was within normal range and her mood was normal.  She did not endorse delusions nor hallucinations.  Her thought process and association were logical, coherent, and goal directed.  She had poor insight; however, she displayed good judgment.  She denied homicidal or suicidal ideation.  

With regard to the merits of the reduction, the Veteran was provided a VA mental disorders examination in August 2022.  At that time, the examiner determined the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was best summarized as occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  At the time of examination, the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood and mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events related to the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability.  

As to recent relevant social, marital, and family history, the Veteran reported being married for the last twelve years and lived with her father-in-law.  She did not have any children with her spouse.  

As to recent relevant occupational and educational history, the Veteran reported being enrolled in Job Corps for two years where she was trained to do home maintenance.  She then worked for a restaurant as a dishwasher; however, she injured her knee when she stepped on a wet surface.  She then went to live with her mother and worked as a security officer for the next four years.  She was laid off because she declined to work longer hours.  Thereafter, she worked as a daycare worker for one month but quit her job because she was afraid of being hurt by disruptive children.  She reported that she has not worked since 2010.  

As to recent relevant mental history, the Veteran reported that she talked to her instructor while enrolled in Job Corps about her unhappiness, living with chronic pain, and limited mobility.  She remained depressed while she was in school, and her depression has persisted.  She was given medication by a psychiatrist within the two months prior to examination.  She stated that the medication helped her depression.  She stated that she was referred to a therapist in the past and was seen on one occasion because she expressed passive death wishes.  She also would tend to brood about the abuse she sustained from her grandmother.  

The Veteran reported being in a good mood three days a week, during which she wanted to go for walks and have conversations with her husband.  However, she typically spent eight hours on the computer communicating with individuals globally, playing video games and having small talk.  She endorsed short attention span, lack of focus, procrastination, and daydreaming; however, she had not been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).  She reported being told to have testing to rule out a learning disability.  She also endorsed having problems recalling conversations and retaining information.  She reported having a good relationship with her husband and had been able to sleep better for the last four years since she began taking a marijuana cookie at night.

At the time of examination, the Veteran arrived on time.  She was pleasant and cooperative.  Her speech process was relatively intact.  She spoke in a coherent, relevant manner.  Her affect was appropriate.  She was spontaneous and animated.  She denied psychotic symptoms and suicidal thoughts.  She had good insight and good judgment.  The examiner described the Veteran's depression as mild in severity and stated that it did not cause significant impairment to perform physical and sedentary activities.  The Veteran reported that she was unable to work primarily due to her chronic pain and limited mobility. 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence does not establish sustained improvement in the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder with depressive features.  The objective evidence of record does not allow a conclusion that there had been a sustained improvement in the Veteran's depressive disorder with depressive features at the time of the November 2022 reduction.  

The Board is mindful that in reducing the Veteran's rating, the AOJ weighed the results of the Veteran's August 2022 VA mental disorders examination, which indicated that her level of occupational and social impairment was best summarized as occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication, which warrants a 10 percent disability rating.  However, the August 2022 VA examiner does not expressly find that there was actual improvement.  Significantly, this examination report noted symptoms that included depressed mood and mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events.  When comparing this examination to the prior November 2020 VA mental disorders examination, the symptoms are virtually the same.  Notably, the November 2020 examiner found the Veteran did suffer from depressed mood and chronic sleep impairment.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the August 2022 VA examination does not show an actual improvement of the Veteran's condition.

Additionally, the AOJ did not make a specific finding that the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of work and life actually improved.  See November 2022 Rating Decision.  In any rating reduction case, it must be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred with respect to a Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000); Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993).  In this case, no such determination was made by the August 2022 VA examiner or by any other private or VA medical provider, and the subsequent VA treatment notes.

Considering the foregoing, the weight of the evidence of record does not show a sustained improvement in the Veteran's depressive disorder with depressive features at the time of the November 2022 reduction.  As such, the reduction of the 50 percent disability rating to 30 percent, effective August 19, 2022, was not proper.  Therefore, the requirements for reinstatement have been met.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

Although reinstatement of the 50 percent disability rating is warranted, upon review of the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence does not reflect symptoms that would meet the criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for the period on appeal.  There is no evidence of occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The Board notes that the presence or absence of certain symptoms is not necessarily determinative.  These symptoms must also cause the occupational and social impairment in the referenced areas.  See Vazquez-Claudio, supra.

The Board's determination is not based solely on the listed symptoms.  Rather, the treatment records and VA examination reports were not indicative of occupational and social impairment that approximate the criteria for a 70 percent or higher rating.  While the evidence of record demonstrates impairment in occupational and social functioning, it does not show such impairment to warrant an increased rating of 70 percent.  Neither the VA and private treatment records nor VA examination reports are indicative of occupational and social impairment that more closely approximates the criteria for a rating in excess of the currently assigned 50 percent disability rating.  

While the Veteran is occupationally impaired due to her service-connected disabilities, she is not totally socially impaired during the relevant period.  During her November 2020 VA mental disorders examination, she reported improved communication with her mother.  She spoke with her brother and had a normal relationship with him.  She indicated she had a good relationship her stepdaughter and step-grandson.  She also communicated with peers on social media.  At the time of her August 2022 VA examination, she reported having a good relationship with her spouse and lived with her father-in-law.  Moreover, the Veteran reported that she was unable to work primarily due to her chronic pain and limited mobility at the time of her August 2022 VA mental disorders examination.  Here, the totality of the evidence does not reasonably connote total occupational and social impairment due to her psychiatric disability.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay statements, in which she stated that she did not have the motivation to do much, and on occasions in which she did, it was only for short periods of time.  She also stated that she did not have much contact with others and did not like being around other people.  See VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, received June 2, 2022.  However, the Veteran's reported symptoms are not of a similar type, duration, frequency, and nature as those associated with a 70 percent disability rating.  These credible lay statements are consistent with and fully contemplated by the current assigned 50 percent disability rating for her depressive disorder with depressive features.  Without evidence of more serious occupational and social impairment, a higher rating is not warranted.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the claim of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for depressive disorder with depressive features must be denied.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating, that doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (2024); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Propriety of the rating reduction for right knee arthritis

4. Propriety of the rating reduction for left knee arthritis

5. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for right knee arthritis

6. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for left knee arthritis

The Veteran seeks reinstatement of the 20 percent disability ratings assigned for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis, which were reduced to 10 percent effective February 3, 2021.

As a matter of background, the previously assigned 20 percent disability ratings for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with mild lateral femoral condyle stress fracture and left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with joint space narrowing were awarded by an October 2019 rating decision, based on a September 2019 VA knee and lower leg conditions examination.  At that time, right knee range of motion showed flexion ranged from 0 to 30 degrees and extension ranged from 30 to 0 degrees immediately after repetitive use over time and during flare ups.  Further, left knee range of motion showed flexion ranged from 0 to 25 degrees and extension ranged from 25 to 0 degrees immediately after repetitive use over time and during flare ups.  

Thereafter, the Veteran filed a claim of entitlement to a TDIU in November 2020, which was construed as a claim of entitlement to an increased rating for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis.  In June 2021, following development to assess the severity of the Veteran's bilateral knee disability, the AOJ issued a rating decision in which, in pertinent part, reduced the Veteran's 20 percent disability ratings for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis to 10 percent effective February 3, 2021.  

Thereafter in June 2022, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim of entitlement to an increased rating for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis.  In November 2022, the AOJ continued the assigned 10 percent disability ratings.  Later in November 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for a higher-level review of that rating decision.

In response to the November 2022 request for a higher-level review, the AOJ issued a February 2023 rating decision on appeal which, in pertinent part, continued the assigned 10 percent disability ratings.

When reduction is considered warranted by the evidence and would result in reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, certain procedural guidelines must be followed: first, there must be a rating action proposing the reduction; then the Veteran must be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing.  38 C.F.R. §3.105(e).

Here, the Veteran's monthly compensation remained the same following the reduction from 20 percent to 10 percent for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis, effective February 3, 2021; therefore, the due process protections of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply to this reduction.  The Board will now consider the propriety of the rating reduction.  The question of whether a disability has improved involves consideration of the applicable rating criteria.

The Veteran's right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis are rated under DC 5260, applicable to limitation of flexion of the leg.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021.  85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  While portions of the rating schedule addressing the musculoskeletal system were revised effective February 7, 2021, DC 5260 was not changed.

Diagnostic Code 5260 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 45 degrees.  A 20 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 30 degrees.  A 30 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 15 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5260.

Normal range of motion for the knee is from 0 degrees of extension to 140 degrees of flexion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

The Veteran appeared for a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in February 2021.  At the time of examination, the Veteran reported experiencing constant throbbing pain in the lateral and anterior left knee which sometimes disrupted her sleep.  She reported crepitus and occasional swelling in the left knee.  She also stated that her knee sometimes locked up and gave out, causing her to fall.  

The Veteran reported experiencing moderate flare-ups once or twice a day that lasted from one to several hours.  She described the flare-ups as sharp, stabbing pain under the patella bilaterally.  Precipitating factors included staying in one position for too long or prolonged physical activity.  The flare-ups were alleviated by rest, heat, and ice.  Additionally, during a flare-up of symptoms, the Veteran had to walk with crutches for support.  She also reported having functional loss or impairment described in her own word as not being able to hike anymore and not walking much anymore.

The Veteran reported a history of frequent effusion of the bilateral knees.  She stated that she would get swelling in the knee after it "pops," which caused pain for several hours.

Active and passive ranges of motion of the right knee revealed flexion ended at 96 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on flexion during active and passive ranges of motion.  There was also evidence of pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Range of motion itself contributed to a functional loss described as an inability to kneel on the ground to perform floor level work, as she lacked the range of motion.  There was objective evidence of crepitus and mild localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the anterior medial right knee.  

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions; however, pain caused additional loss of function or range of motion.  Range of motion testing after three repetitions revealed right knee flexion ended at 78 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  

Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the right knee after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed flexion ended at 78 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.

Active and passive ranges of motion of the left knee revealed flexion ended at 69 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on flexion during active and passive ranges of motion.  There was also evidence of pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Range of motion itself contributed to a functional loss described as an inability to kneel on the ground to perform floor level work, as she lacked the range of motion.  There was objective evidence of crepitus and mild localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the anterior medial left knee.  

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions; however, pain caused additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions.  Range of motion testing after three repetitions revealed left knee flexion ended at 59 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  

Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the left knee after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed flexion ended at 59 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.

The examiner noted additional contributing factors of disability to include less movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, pain on movement, deformity, and interference with sitting, standing, and weight-bearing.  There was no evidence of atrophy nor ankylosis.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran regularly used crutches as a normal mode of locomotion.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence does not establish sustained improvement in the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability.  The Board notes that the Veteran's estimated right knee flexion was limited to, at worse, 78 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up and left knee flexion was limited to, at worse, 59 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up.  These limitations in range of motion do not meet the criteria for a 20 percent disability rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.  However, the Veteran does not bear the responsibility to demonstrate entitlement to retention of the higher evaluation is warranted; rather, it must be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the reduction was warranted.  See Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 418 (1993).

Here, the objective evidence of record does not allow a conclusion that there had been a sustained improvement in the Veteran's right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis at the time of the June 2021 reductions.  The rating decision did not discuss a review of the entire history of the Veteran's disability nor discuss the findings that reflected an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991); see also Faust, 13 Vet. App. at 350.  The rating decision also failed to note a determination that the Veteran's improvement was reasonably certain to be maintained under the ordinary condition of life.

Considering the foregoing, the weight of the evidence of record does not show a sustained improvement in the Veteran's right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis at the time of the June 2021 reductions.  As such, the reduction of the 20 percent disability ratings to 10 percent, effective February 3, 2021, was not proper. Therefore, the requirements for reinstatement have been met.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

Although reinstatement of the 20 percent disability ratings is warranted, upon review of the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that ratings in excess of 20 percent for right and left knee arthritis are not warranted.

The Veteran next appeared for a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in August 2022.  At the time of examination, the Veteran reported experiencing functional loss or impairment described as pain and swelling which made doing things difficult to virtually impossible without either her assistive device or her husband nearby in case of a fall.  She reported experiencing moderate to severe flare-ups that lasted from all day.  Precipitating factors included usage of the bilateral knees.  The flare-ups were alleviated by elevation, heat, and ice, although they did not help all the time.  

The Veteran reported a history of left knee instability and frequent effusion of the bilateral knees.  

Active and passive ranges of motion of the right knee revealed flexion ended at 115 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on flexion and extension during active and passive ranges of motion.  There was also evidence of pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Range of motion itself contributed to a functional loss described as pain when performing motion on weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Specifically, pain affected her ability to walk and stand for long periods of time, perform some postural activities, and run.  There was objective evidence of mild localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the right knee.  

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the right knee after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed flexion ended at 105 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.

Active and passive ranges of motion of the left knee revealed flexion ended at 90 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on flexion and extension during active and passive ranges of motion.  There was also evidence of pain with weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Range of motion itself contributed to a functional loss described as pain when performing motion on weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Specifically, pain affected her ability to walk and stand for long periods of time, perform some postural activities, and run.  There was objective evidence of crepitus and mild localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the left knee.  

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the right knee after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed flexion ended at 80 degrees and extension ended at 0 degrees.

There was no evidence of atrophy nor ankylosis.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran regularly used a cane as a normal mode of locomotion.

In considering the evidence of record, the medical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran's right or left knee flexion was limited to 15 degrees to warrant an increased ratings based on limitation of flexion, at any time during the period on appeal.  As indicated above, the Veteran's estimated right knee flexion has been limited to, at worse, 78 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up and left knee flexion has been limited to, at worse, 59 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up throughout the period on appeal.  

There is no indication that the Veteran has functional loss greater than that contemplated by the 20 percent rating assigned with repeated use over time, during a flare-up, or due to pain.  The degree of limitation of motion is contemplated in the currently assigned rating.  Therefore, the Board finds that the holding in DeLuca and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 do not provide a basis for a higher rating.  Without evidence of greater limitation of motion, a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for limitation of flexion must be denied.

Although the Board finds the Veteran's assertions as to the nature and severity of her symptoms to be credible, these reports alone do not warrant the assignment of increased disability ratings.  Without objective evidence of greater limitation of motion, the Board cannot grant increased disability ratings.

Thus, disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis for the entire period on appeal is denied.  In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claims of entitlement to increased ratings, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

7. Propriety of the rating reduction for left knee instability

The Veteran seeks reinstatement of a 20 percent disability rating assigned for left knee instability, which was reduced to 10 percent effective August 17, 2022, based on an AOJ finding of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the November 2022 rating decision.

By operation of law, a previous rating decision by an agency of original jurisdiction is binding and will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(a), 3.105(a).  Generally, the issue of CUE arises when claimants allege that there is CUE in a prior, final rating decision.  However, an RO can also seek to reverse or revise a prior rating decision on the grounds of CUE.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2600(e).

Where evidence establishes CUE, the prior decision will be reversed or amended.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).  For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision.  Id.

CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error."  It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error.  Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993).  The error must be of a type that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision.  See Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 235-36 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999).  Notably, a mere disagreement as to how an adjudicator weighed and evaluated the evidence then before it can never rise to the stringent definition of clear and unmistakable error.  See Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 5 (1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 246 (1994).

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely "a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated;" and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was rendered.  Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel, 6 Vet. App. at 245; Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).

In cases where the AOJ finds CUE in its own decision, the focus is on the evidence of record at the time of the original decision and whether the rating originally assigned was clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

As a matter of background, these issues stem from a November 2020 claim of entitlement to a TDIU, which was construed as a claim of entitlement to an increased rating for left knee instability.  In June 2021, following development to assess the severity of the Veteran's left knee disability, the AOJ issued a rating decision in which, in pertinent part, denied a compensable disability rating for left knee instability.  

Thereafter, in June 2022, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim of entitlement to an increased rating for left knee instability.  In November 2022, the AOJ issued a rating decision in which, in pertinent part, awarded a 20 percent disability rating for left knee instability, effective June 2, 2022.  Later in November 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for a higher-level review of that rating decision.

In response to the November 2022 request for a higher-level review, the AOJ issued a February 2023 rating decision which, in pertinent part, reduced the Veteran's 20 percent disability rating for her service-connected left knee instability to 10 percent due to clear and unmistakable error.  In the February 2023 rating decision, the AOJ explained that the August 2022 VA knee and lower leg conditions examination used to support the assignment of a 20 percent disability rating failed to provide evidence of patellar instability, although the examination showed that the Veteran experienced persistent instability and a medical provider allegedly prescribed a cane for ambulation.  The AOJ also found that there was no objective evidence of a ligament sprain or tear, and there was no objective evidence of the prescription for the cane in the evidentiary record.  As a result, the AOJ determined that an increased 20 percent disability rating was not warranted and assigned 10 percent disability from August 17, 2022.

Therefore, the case before the Board considers two legal questions: whether the assignment of a 20 percent disability rating for left knee instability in the November 2022 rating decision constitutes CUE and if so, whether the proper procedures regarding a rating reduction were observed prior to the February 2023 rating decision.  If CUE was not present in the November 2022 rating decision, there is no basis for the reduction and restoration of the 20 percent disability rating is warranted.

The Board will first discuss whether there was CUE in the November 2022 rating decision's assignment of a 20 percent disability rating for left knee instability. 

The Veteran's left knee instability is rated under DC 5257, applicable to other impairment of the knee.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.

For recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or (b) Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.

For patellar instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker.

The Board finds that the assignment of the 20 percent disability rating for left knee instability in the November 2022 rating decision was based on CUE.  

The August 2022 VA knee and lower leg conditions examiner found that the Veteran had slight recurrent left knee subluxation and required regular use of a cane for ambulation; however, she did not have a complete nor incomplete/partial ligament tear nor had she undergone surgical repair of a ligament tear.  Here, the evidence clearly did not establish the Veteran's left knee instability was due to a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair of a complete ligament tear.  The evidence also did not establish the Veteran's left knee instability was due to a surgical repair which resulted in a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex.  

Moreover, the records of evidence at the time of the November 2022 rating decision, including the Veteran's VA and private treatment records, are against a finding that the Veteran had a complete or incomplete/partial ligament tear nor had undergone surgical repair of a ligament tear during the appeal period.  Notably, a June 2021 left knee MRI report revealed the cruciate and medial collateral ligaments, lateral collateral complex, popliteus tendon, patellar retinacula, and extensor mechanism of the left knee were intact.  See CAPRI, dated July 8, 2022, pp. 132-133.  Further, while the Veteran's treatment records reveal she was fitted for Loftstrand crutches due to her service-connected fibromyalgia, the treatment records do not indicate the Veteran was prescribed the use of a cane for left knee disability.  See CAPRI, dated August 15, 2022, pp. 165-166.

Considering the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 rating decision, the evidence shows that the Veteran did not have a complete nor incomplete/partial ligament tear and she had not undergone surgical repair of a ligament tear.  It was a clear and unmistakable error to find that the Veteran's left knee instability was due to an unrepaired or failed repair of a complete ligament tear causing persistent instability.  It was clear and unmistakable error to find that the Veteran's hallux valgus, unilateral was operated with resection of metatarsal head or severe, equivalent to amputation of great toe.

After a review of the evidence, the Board concludes that the AOJ's finding of CUE in the November 2022 rating decision was correct.  The statutory or regulatory provisions extant at that time, specifically the applicable Diagnostic Code, were incorrectly applied to the medical facts that existed at the time of the adjudication, and the error was undebatable and manifestly changed the outcome.  The Board must therefore determine whether the proper procedures for implementing a rating reduction were followed.

Once the AOJ determined that there was CUE in the November 2022 rating decision, it issued the March 2023 rating decision which reduced the rating assigned for the Veteran's left knee instability.  Here, the Veteran's monthly compensation remained the same following the reduction from 20 percent to 10 percent for left knee instability, effective August 17, 2022; therefore, the due process protections of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply to this reduction.  

In sum, the Board finds that the reduction of the rating for left knee instability from 20 percent to 10 percent based on CUE, effective August 17, 2022, was proper and reinstatement of the 20 percent rating is not warranted.

8. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for left knee instability

The Veteran is currently in receipt of staged ratings for her service-connected left knee instability.  Specifically, she is currently assigned a noncompensable disability rating prior to August 17, 2022, and a 10 percent disability rating thereafter.  She contends that higher ratings are warranted.

As indicated above, the Veteran's left knee instability is rated under DC 5257, applicable to other impairment of the knee.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021.  85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select DCs "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities." Id.

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(g).  If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change.  If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change.  38 U.S.C. § 5110.  Therefore, the Board will consider the veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to February 7, 2021, and both the old and new rating criteria from February 7, 2021.  The criteria that is more favorable to the veteran will be applied.

Prior to the regulatory change, DC 5257 rated recurrent subluxation or lateral instability of the knee.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for slight recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.  The criteria did not define what constituted slight, moderate, or severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.

The amended criteria for DC 5257 have been outlined above.

The Veteran appeared for a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in February 2021.  The Veteran reported that her knee will give out and cause her fall.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not report nor have a history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee.  There was no recurrent subluxation, persistent instability, nor recurrent patellar instability.  There was no history of a ligament tear (sprain), ligament tear repair, nor surgical repair of the knee for patellar instability.  

The Veteran appeared for a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in August 2022.  The examiner diagnosed left knee instability.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had slight recurrent left knee subluxation and required regular use of a prescribed cane for ambulation; however, she did not have a complete nor incomplete/partial ligament tear nor had she undergone surgical repair of a ligament tear.  

Here, the VA examination reports of record establish the Veteran's left knee instability was not due to a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair of a complete ligament tear.  The medical evidence also establishes that the Veteran's left knee instability was not due to a surgical repair which resulted in a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex.  

Moreover, the Veteran's VA and private treatment records fail to support a finding that the Veteran had a complete or incomplete/partial ligament tear or had undergone surgical repair of a ligament tear during the appeal period.  Notably, a June 2021 left knee MRI report revealed the cruciate and medial collateral ligaments, lateral collateral complex, popliteus tendon, patellar retinacula, and extensor mechanism of the left knee were intact.  See CAPRI, dated July 8, 2022, pp. 132-133.  Further, while the Veteran's treatment records reveal she was fitted for Loftstrand crutches due to her service-connected fibromyalgia, the treatment records do not indicate the Veteran was prescribed the use of a cane for left knee disability.  See CAPRI, dated August 15, 2022, pp. 165-166.

However, under the prior version of DC 5257, objective evidence of instability is not required.  See English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347, 352-53 (2018).  The Veteran's February 2021 examination report of record describes giving way of the left knee.  Thereafter, her August 2022 examination report of record describes reports of instability or recurrent subluxation.  She is competent to report symptoms of a general feeling of instability in her left knee, as this is within the realm of her personal perception.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469.  Given that the lay reports indicate subjective instability during the period on appeal prior to August 17, 2022, the Board will resolve any doubt in the Veteran's favor and find that a uniform rating of 10 percent is warranted for the entire period on appeal.  

Although a 10 percent disability rating is warranted throughout the entire period on appeal, the evidence of record does not reflect symptoms that would meet the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability.  There is no evidence is of record showing more than slight instability of the knee.  Without evidence of greater instability, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent must be denied.

In reaching the above-stated conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating, beyond that assigned herein, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

9. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for fibromyalgia

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 40 percent disability for her service-fibromyalgia.  She contends that a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's fibromyalgia is rated under DC 5025, applicable to fibromyalgia (fibrositis, primary fibromyalgia syndrome).  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.

Diagnostic Code 5025 provides that a maximum 40 percent rating is warranted for fibromyalgia with widespread musculoskeletal pain and tenderness points, with or without associated fatigue, sleep disturbance, stiffness, paresthesias, headache, irritable bowel syndrome, depression, anxiety, or Raynaud's-like symptoms that are constant, or nearly so, and refractory to therapy.  A Note to DC 5025 provides that widespread pain means pain in both the left and right sides of the body, that is both above and below the waist, and that affects both the axial skeleton (i.e., cervical spine, anterior chest, thoracic spine, or low back) and the extremities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5025.

Here, the Board finds a rating in excess of 40 percent is not available for the Veteran's fibromyalgia.  As noted, the 40 percent rating assigned is the maximum allowed under Diagnostic Code 5025.  Moreover, as fibromyalgia is specifically listed in the rating schedule, rating by analogy under another Diagnostic Code is not appropriate.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015).  The Veteran has not reported any symptoms not covered by the rating criteria for fibromyalgia; thus, a disability rating in excess of 40 percent is not warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5025.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the claim of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for fibromyalgia must be denied.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

10. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 10 percent disability for her service-connected right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.  She contends that a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is rated under DC 5271, applicable to limited motion of the ankle.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 8 5 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities."  Id.  

Diagnostic Code 5271 assigned a 10 percent rating for moderate limitation of motion of the ankle.  A 20 percent rating is assigned for marked limitation of motion of the ankle.  The regulatory change amended the diagnostic code to define "moderate" limitation of motion as less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion, and "marked" limitation of motion as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion.  85 Fed. Reg. 76453 (Nov. 30, 2020).

The Veteran appeared for a VA ankle conditions examination in February 2021.  She reported medial right ankle pain, crepitus in the ankle joint, and swelling.  She reported experiencing moderate flare-ups that lasted from all day.  She characterized the flare-ups as piercing pain in the ankle joint that reduces to a throbbing ache.  Precipitating factors included walking and standing.  The flare-ups were alleviated by rest and ice.  Additionally, during a flare-up of symptoms, the Veteran was not able walk well.  She also reported having functional loss or impairment described in her own word as having to use her crutches to get around and not walking much anymore.  She further reported a history of instability described as frequently twisting her ankle due to it curving in.  She would then lose her balance and fall.  

Active and passive right ankle range of motion showed plantar flexion ended at 41 degrees and dorsiflexion ended at 12 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on plantar flexion and dorsiflexion.  Pain was exhibited on active and passive ranges of motion, as well as with weight-bearing.  Range of motion itself contributed to a functional loss described as trouble going up stairs and ladders due to lose of range of motion in dorsiflexion.  There was objective evidence of crepitus and mild localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the medial ankle and dorsal foot.

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions; however, pain caused additional loss of function or range of motion.  Range of motion testing after three repetitions revealed plantar flexion ended at 35 degrees and dorsiflexion ended at 18 degrees.  

Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the right knee after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed plantar flexion ended at 35 degrees and dorsiflexion ended at 18 degrees.

The examiner noted additional contributing factors of disability to include interference with standing and disturbance of locomotion.  There was no evidence of atrophy nor ankylosis.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran constantly used crutches as a normal mode of locomotion.

The Veteran next appeared for a VA ankle conditions examination in August 2022.  At the time of examination, the Veteran reported experiencing functional loss or impairment described as pain, swelling, and tenderness which made doing things difficult to virtually impossible without either her assistive device or her husband nearby in case of a fall.  She reported experiencing severe flare-ups that lasted from all day and night.  Precipitating factors included usage of the extremity.  The flare-ups were alleviated by elevation, heat, and ice.  

The Veteran reported having any functional loss or functional impairment described as loss of ability to do anything.  She also reported a history of right ankle instability which made standing and walking very difficult without assistance.  She stated that she was always afraid of falling when did things without the aid of her spouse.  

Active and passive right ankle range of motion showed plantar flexion ended at 40 degrees and dorsiflexion ended at 20 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on plantar flexion and dorsiflexion during active and passive ranges of motion.  Pain affected her ability to walk or stand for long periods of time, as well as perform lifting and carrying activities.  

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  Though the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, procured evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups.  Based on information procured from relevant sources including the lay statements of the Veteran, estimated range of motion in degrees for the right ankle after repeated use over time and during a flare-up revealed plantar flexion ended at 30 degrees and dorsiflexion ended at 10 degrees.

There was no evidence of atrophy nor ankylosis.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran regularly used a cane as a normal mode of locomotion.

In considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is not warranted.  Here, the medical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran's right ankle dorsiflexion was limited to less than 5 degrees or plantar flexion was limited to less than 10 degrees to warrant an increased rating based on limited motion of the ankle at any time during the period on appeal.  As indicated above, the Veteran's estimated right ankle plantar flexion has been limited to, at worse, 30 degrees and dorsiflexion has been limited to, at worse, 10 degrees after repeated use over time and during a flare-up throughout the period on appeal.  

There is no indication that the Veteran has functional loss greater than that contemplated by the10 percent rating assigned with repeated use over time, during a flare-up, or due to pain.  The degree of limitation of motion is contemplated in the currently assigned rating.  Therefore, the Board finds that the holding in DeLuca and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 do not provide a basis for a higher rating.  Without evidence of greater limitation of motion, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for limited motion must be denied.

Although the Board finds the Veteran's assertions as to the nature and severity of her symptoms to be credible, these reports alone do not warrant the assignment of increased disability ratings.  Without objective evidence of greater limitation of motion, the Board cannot grant an increased disability rating.

Thus, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is denied.  In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

11. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for right foot tenosynovitis

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 10 percent disability for her service-connected right foot tenosynovitis.  She contends that a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's right foot tenosynovitis is rated under DC 5024-5284, applicable to tenosynovitis, tendinitis, tendinosis or tendinopathy and other foot injuries.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 8 5 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities."  Id.  

Prior to the regulatory change, DC 5024 included a note that directed the diseases under DCs 5013 through 5024 will be rated on limitation of motion of affected parts, as arthritis, degenerative, except gout which will be rated under diagnostic code 5002.  Under the amended regulations, the note indicates the rater to evaluate the diseases under diagnostic codes 5013 through 5024 as degenerative arthritis, based on limitation of motion of affected parts.

Diagnostic Code 5284 was not changed.  Diagnostic Code 5284 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate foot symptoms, a 20 percent rating for moderately severe foot symptoms, and a 30 percent rating for severe foot symptoms.  With actual loss of the foot, a maximum 40 percent rating is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284.

Words such as "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, VA must evaluate all evidence, to the end that decisions will be "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  Although the use of similar terminology by medical professionals should be considered, it is not dispositive of an issue.  Instead, all evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding a request for an increased disability rating.  38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

In the absence of an express definition, words are given their ordinary meaning.  Prokarym v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 307, 310 (2015) (citing Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1382-83 (Fed. Cir. 2003)).  The ordinary meaning of "moderate" is "not violent, severe, or intense," or "limited in scope or effect."  Moderate, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate, Definitions 3 and 5 (last visited January 15, 2025).  The ordinary meaning of "severe" is "causing discomfort or hardship;" "very painful or harmful;" "of a great degree."  Severe, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe, Definitions 6a, 6b, and 8 (last visited January 15, 2025).  The Board defines the terms "moderate" and "severe" and as used in DC 5284, in accordance with the above definitions.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 10 percent disability for her service-connected right foot tenosynovitis.  She contends that a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's right foot tenosynovitis is rated under DC 5024-5284, applicable to tenosynovitis, tendinitis, tendinosis or tendinopathy and other foot injuries.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended effective February 7, 2021. 8 5 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities."  Id.  

Prior to the regulatory change, DC 5024 included a note that directed the diseases under DCs 5013 through 5024 will be rated on limitation of motion of affected parts, as arthritis, degenerative, except gout which will be rated under diagnostic code 5002.  Under the amended regulations, the note indicates the rater to evaluate the diseases under diagnostic codes 5013 through 5024 as degenerative arthritis, based on limitation of motion of affected parts.

Diagnostic Code 5284 was not changed.  Diagnostic Code 5284 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate foot symptoms, a 20 percent rating for moderately severe foot symptoms, and a 30 percent rating for severe foot symptoms.  With actual loss of the foot, a maximum 40 percent rating is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284.

The Veteran appeared for a VA foot conditions examination in April 2021.  She reported sharp pain along the top of the foot into the top of the foot that worsened with use.  She reported functional loss or impairment described as pain with standing for long periods.  The examiner diagnosed right foot tenosynovitis and mild tenderness to palpation.  The Veteran reported pain with use which occasionally limited her ability to stand for long periods.  

The Veteran next appeared for a VA foot conditions examination in August 2022.  She reported pain, swelling, and pressure in the right foot.  She reported functional loss or impairment described as pain with standing for long periods.  The examiner diagnosed right foot tenosynovitis and mild tenderness to palpation.  The Veteran reported pain with use which occasionally limited her ability to stand for long periods.  The examiner diagnosed right foot tenosynovitis and documented the Veteran's reports of constant pain, swelling, and tenderness in the right anterior lateral foot.  The severity of the condition was described as moderate and chronically compromised weight-bearing.  Contributing factors of disability included pain, fatigue, weakness, and lack of endurance.  

Procured evidence suggested pain significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time described as pain in the right anterior lateral foot when performing motion on weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  Pain also affected her ability to walk and stand for long periods of time and caused swelling after weight-bearing.  There was pain on passive motion, active motion, and weight-bearing evidenced by facial expression/wincing upon movement.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran regularly used a brace as a normal mode of locomotion and while on weight bearing.  

In considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot tenosynovitis is not warranted.  Here, the medical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran's right foot disability was manifested by moderately severe disability to warrant an increased rating based on a foot injury at any time during the period on appeal.  As indicated above, the Veteran's right foot tenosynovitis has been characterized as, at worse, moderate throughout the period on appeal.  

Although the Board finds the Veteran's assertions as to the nature and severity of her symptoms to be credible, these reports alone do not warrant the assignment of increased disability ratings.  Without objective evidence of greater limitation of motion, the Board cannot grant an increased disability rating.

Thus, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot tenosynovitis is denied.  In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to increased rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

12. Entitlement to an increased rating for gastroparesis

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a noncompensable rating for her service-connected gastroparesis.  She contends that a higher rating is warranted.

The Veteran's gastroparesis is rated under DC 7399-7308.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.27 provide that unlisted disabilities requiring rating by analogy will be coded with the first two numbers of the schedule provisions for the most closely related body part and 99.  Here, the hyphenated diagnostic code indicates that the Veteran's gastroparesis is rated as analogous to a gastrointestinal disability (Diagnostic Code 7399) under the criteria for postgastrectomy syndromes (Diagnostic Code 7308).  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The Board notes that the assignment of a particular diagnostic code is dependent on the facts of the case.  See Butts v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 532, 538 (1993).  One diagnostic code may be more appropriate than another based on such factors as an individual's relevant medical history, the current diagnosis, and demonstrated symptomatology.  In reviewing the claim for a higher rating, the Board must consider which code or codes are most appropriate for application in the veteran's case and provide an explanation for the conclusion.  See Tedeschi v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 411, 414 (1995).

Here, based on a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's gastroparesis is more appropriately rated under DC 7304, applicable to gastric ulcer, throughout the appeal period, based on the nature, history, and symptomatology of the disability.

The Board acknowledges here that VA recently amended the Rating Schedule for evaluating digestive system disabilities effective May 19, 2024.  See 89 Fed. Reg. 19375.  The revised rating criteria apply to all claims received by VA, or that are pending before the AOJ, on or after May 19, 2024.  This claim, however, was pending prior to May 19, 2024.  The Federal Circuit has held that the Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise.  See Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327, 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  As the amended criteria became effective after the period on appeal in this case, the new regulations are not applicable.  

Diagnostic Code 7304 provides a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild symptoms with recurring symptoms once or twice yearly.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate symptoms with recurring episodes of severe symptoms two or three times a year averaging 10 days in duration; or with continuous moderate manifestations.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe symptoms that are less than severe but with impairment of health manifested by anemia and weight loss; or recurrent incapacitating episodes averaging 10 days or more in duration at least four or more times a year.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for severe symptoms with pain only partially relieved by standard ulcer therapy, periodic vomiting, recurrent hematemesis, or melena, with manifestations of anemia and weight loss productive of definite impairment of health.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7304.

The Veteran appeared for a VA stomach and duodenal conditions examination in March 2022.  The examiner diagnosed gastroparesis and noted symptoms that included recurrent nausea four or more times per year.  Each episode of nausea lasted ten or more days.  The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a postgastrectomy syndrome.  

The Veteran next appeared for a VA stomach and duodenal conditions examination in August 2022.  The examiner diagnosed gastroparesis and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).  The Veteran did not have a treatment plan for gastroparesis.  The examiner noted symptoms that included periodic abdominal pain, as well as recurrent nausea four or more times per year.  Each episode of nausea lasted ten or more days.  The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a postgastrectomy syndrome.

In considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that a 40 percent disability rating for gastroparesis is warranted.  Here, the evidence of record more nearly approximates recurrent incapacitating episodes averaging 10 days or more in duration at least four or more times a year under Diagnostic Code 7304.  

Although a 40 percent disability rating is warranted, the evidence of record does not reflect symptoms that would meet the criteria for a higher rating at any time during the pendency of the claim.  There are no findings to indicate the Veteran's gastroparesis has been manifested by severe symptoms with pain only partially relieved by standard ulcer therapy, periodic vomiting, recurrent hematemesis, or melena, with manifestations of anemia and weight loss productive of definite impairment of health.  Without such evidence, an evaluation in excess of 40 percent cannot be granted.

Additionally, there is no indication in the medical evidence of record that the Veteran's symptomatology warranted other than the currently assigned 40 percent disability rating throughout the appeal period.  Assignment of staged ratings is not warranted.  See Fenderson, supra.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the above rating is appropriate for gastroparesis throughout the period on appeal.  In reaching the above-stated conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of the rating granted herein, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

?

Earlier Effective Date

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 20, 2020, for the award of a TDIU

The Veteran is in receipt of a TDIU from August 20, 2020, and seeks an earlier effective date.

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall be no earlier than the date of receipt of the application thereof.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).  The statutory provision is implemented by regulation which provides that the effective date for an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

In determining an effective date for an award of a TDIU, VA must make two essential determinations. It must determine (1) when a claim for TDIU was received, and (2) when a factually ascertainable increase in disability occurred so as to warrant entitlement to TDIU.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2).

In Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009), the Court held that a request for a TDIU, whether expressly raised by a veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate claim for benefits, but rather involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability or disabilities which is part of a pending claim for increased compensation benefits.  As such, then, the effective date for a TDIU could be as early as the date of claim for the underlying increased rating.  See id.

Total disability ratings for compensation based on individual unemployability may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall be no earlier than the date of receipt of the application thereof.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).  The statutory provision is implemented by regulation which provides that the effective date for an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

In determining an effective date for an award of a TDIU, VA must make two essential determinations. It must determine (1) when a claim for TDIU was received, and (2) when a factually ascertainable increase in disability occurred so as to warrant entitlement to TDIU.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2).

Total disability ratings for compensation based on individual unemployability may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident, (3) disabilities affecting a single body system; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The central inquiry is, "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  Consideration may be given to the veteran's education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to her age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

In order for a veteran to prevail in her claim for TDIU, the record must reflect circumstances, apart from nonservice-connected conditions, that place her in a different position than other veterans who meet the basic schedular criteria.  The sole fact that a veteran is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough.  A high rating in itself is recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain or keep employment.  The ultimate question is whether the veteran, in light of his service-connected disorders, is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he can find employment.  See Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 361.

A TDIU claim is a claim for an increased evaluation.  Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1999).  The effective date of a TDIU is no earlier than the date of receipt of the claim unless there is a factually ascertainable increase in disability that rendered the Veteran unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment within one year prior to receipt of the claim ("look back").  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).  When a veteran files a claim for increased evaluation, they are afforded a lookback period of one year.  In a TDIU context, if the evidence shows the veteran became unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment either before or after the one-year lookback period, the effective date of entitlement is the date of the receipt of the claim.  Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983 (2010).  

The Veteran is service connected for fibromyalgia (rated 40 percent disabling from August 20, 2020); depressive disorder with depressive feature associated with right knee arthritis (rated 30 percent disabling from June 24, 2019 and 50 percent disabling from December 17, 2020); right foot tenosynovitis (rated 10 percent disabling from April 26, 2018); right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain (rated 10 percent disabling from April 26, 2018); tinnitus (rated 10 percent disabling from August 20, 2020); left knee arthritis (rated 10 percent disabling from April 26, 2018, and 20 percent disabling from June 24, 2019); right knee arthritis (rated 10 percent disabling from April 26, 2018 and 20 percent disabling from June 24, 2019; left knee instability (rated 30 percent disabling from June 24, 2019; noncompensable from July 1, 2020; and 10 percent disabling from August 17, 2022); and gastroparesis (rated noncompensable from August 20, 2020).  

As indicated above, disabilities resulting from common etiology, or a single accident will be considered as one disability for purposes of meeting the minimal criteria for TDIU.  Given that the Veteran's right knee arthritis and left knee arthritis are of common etiology, the disabilities are combined using the Combined Ratings Table found at 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 and account for one disability ratable at 40 percent, i.e., satisfying the threshold schedular criteria for an award of a TDIU prior to August 20, 2020.

Accordingly, the question becomes whether the evidence supports entitlement to a TDIU during the period of the claim prior to August 20, 2020.

The Veteran filed a claim of entitlement to increased ratings for right knee arthritis, left knee arthritis, and right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain, as well as entitlement to service connection for PTSD on June 24, 2019.  VA received the Veteran's application for a TDIU (VA Form 21-8940) on November 30, 2020.  Because the issue of entitlement to a TDIU was raised during the pendency of the Veteran's increased rating claim, it is part and parcel of that claim, and the Board will consider whether an earlier effective date is warranted for the award of TDIU.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 454 (2009).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran completed high school; however, there is no evidence of additional specialized education or training.  The record reflects that the Veteran was last employed in 2011 as a childcare provider.

During the relevant period, a private treatment record associated with the record in June 2019 reveals the Veteran was at least 60 percent but less than 80 percent impaired and had limited or restricted mobility.  See Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility, received June 24, 2019, p. 2.

In June 2019 private ankle and knee and lower leg conditions disability benefits questionnaires were associated with the record.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's ankle and knee conditions impacted her ability to perform any type of occupational task, described as impaired mobility.  See Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ)-Veteran Provided, received June 24, 2019. 

The Veteran appeared for a VA ankle conditions examination in September 2019.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's lateral collateral ligament sprain impacted her ability to perform any type of occupational task, described as difficulty with standing, walking, and weight bearing activities.   

The Veteran also appeared for a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in September 2019.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions impacted her ability to perform any type of occupational task, described as difficulty with standing, which could be felt or experienced within a few minutes.  She also had difficulty with walking and required the use of crutches. 

Ultimately, the determination of whether a veteran is capable of substantially gainful employment is not a medical one; it is for the adjudicator.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Floore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013).  Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of her service-connected disabilities from June 24, 2019, the date the Veteran filed her claim of entitlement to increased ratings for right knee arthritis, left knee arthritis, and right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain and the date from which the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for TDIU.  

The Veteran's work history of record has consisted of employment as a dishwasher, security guard, and childcare provider.  Even if the Veteran had special training or advanced education, the medical and lay evidence of record documents significant orthopedic symptoms that would impair employment consistent with her education and occupational history.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350 (2013) (held that determination of whether a Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to service-connected disabilities is a factual rather than a medical question and that it is an adjudicative determination properly made by the Board or the RO).

Moreover, the Board finds that it is factually ascertainable that the Veteran was unemployable due to her service-connected disabilities for more than one year prior to the date of claim.  Notably, in her November 2020 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran's last period of gainful employment ended in 2011.  Because the Board has found that it is factually ascertainable that entitlement to a TDIU arose more than one year prior to the June 24, 2019, claim, an earlier effective date cannot be assigned using the one-year lookback period prior to the June 24, 2019, claim under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).  See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (2010). 

Significantly, there were no other pending increased rating claims or TDIU applications filed prior to the Veteran's June 24, 2019, claim that could form the basis for an earlier effective date.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that entitlement to an effective date of June 24, 2019, and no earlier, for the award of a TDIU is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 3.400(o)(2), 4.16.

2. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 20, 2020, for the establishment of basic eligibility to DEA

The Veteran is in also in receipt of DEA benefits, effective August 20, 2020, the effective date of the award of a TDIU prior to the award of an earlier effective date for a TDIU granted herein.

For the purposes of Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. chapter 35, the child, spouse or surviving spouse of a veteran or service person will have basic eligibility if the veteran: (1) was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in service; and (2) has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the date of the veteran's death; or (4) died as a result of a service-connected disability; or (if a serviceperson) (5) is on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces and (i) now is, and, for a period of more than 90 days, has been listed by the Secretary concerned as missing in action, captured in line of duty by a hostile force, or forcibly detained or interned in line of duty by a foreign Government or power; or (ii) has been determined by VA to have a total disability permanent in nature incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during active military, naval, or air service; is hospitalized or receiving outpatient medical care, services, or treatment for such disability; is likely to be discharged or released from such service for such disability; and the pursuit of a course of education by such individual's spouse or child for which benefits under 38 U.S.C. chapter 35 are sought occurred after December 22, 2006.

In this case, the award of DEA benefits is based on a permanent total service-connected disability.  Because the grant of TDIU provides this level of disability, the effective date of the Veteran's eligibility for DEA is contingent on the effective date for a TDIU.  Accordingly, in light of the award of an earlier effective date of June 24, 2019, for the award of a TDIU herein, an effective date of June 24, 2019, for DEA is also warranted.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tracy O. Joseph, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.