Citation Nr: A25031906
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 241113-491454
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have rendered him unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16, 4.18.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from June 1965 to May 1968.

In the November 13, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on February 27, 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

TDIU

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. A finding of total disability is appropriate "when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation." See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340(a)(1), 4.15.

TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of either (1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, the following will be considered as one disability: (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

If a sufficient rating is present, then it must be approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of that disease. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). The central inquiry is, "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). The issue is not whether the Veteran can find employment generally, but whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 363.

1. Entitlement to a TDIU.

The Veteran is currently service connected for degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, evaluated at 20 percent; right lower extremity (RLE) radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve associated with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, evaluated at 20 percent; left lower extremity (LLE) radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve associated with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, evaluated at 20 percent; RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve associated with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, evaluated at 10 percent (previously 20 percent); LLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve associated with degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine, evaluated at 10 percent (previously 20 percent); bilateral hearing loss, evaluated at 10 percent; and tinnitus, evaluated at 10 percent, for combined ratings of 60 and 70 percent. As the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine and radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities have all resulted from a common etiology, the 60 percent threshold for one disability has been met.

Turning to the second requirement, the Veteran first filed an application for a TDIU in May 2023, wherein he claimed that his degenerative arthritis and radiculopathy prevent him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. He listed his last day of full-time work as May 10, 2023, and noted he previously worked at H.D. in the floor department. The Veteran reported a high school education and no additional education or training. He also provided an employment information form wherein it was noted that while working he needed help with lifting over 10 pounds, and retired due to his disabilities because he could no longer perform his duties. 

In July 2023, the Veteran was given a VA examination for his thoracolumbar spine. Here, the examiner diagnosed degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease (DDD) other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), IVDS, and radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities of the sciatic nerves. With regard to functional impact, the examiner provided that the Veteran would have difficulty with tasks requiring prolonged standing and walking and would have difficulty with lifting and carrying items exceeding 15 pounds. However, the examiner opined that the Veteran would have no limitation with respect to performing sedentary tasks within an occupational setting, as he had no limitations with sitting. Based on this opinion, the AOJ issued a September 2023 rating decision denying a TDIU, but listing favorable findings that the Veteran was not currently working, and his service-connected disabilities met the schedular criteria for a TDIU.

In September 2023, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for a TDIU along with a statement that he has only performed manual labor and has no experience with sedentary work. In October 2023, the Veteran provided a letter from his chiropractor who described that the Veteran has long suffered from mild to moderate low back and leg pain. In October 2023, the Veteran also provided a statement from a co-worker who explained that the Veteran's back pain has increased over the years causing him to be unable to lift a reasonable amount and an inability to walk and perform his full-time job duties.

The Veteran was given another VA examination for his thoracolumbar spine in March 2024. Here, the examiner diagnosed degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine and noted regular use of a cane. With regard to functional impact, the examiner reported that the Veteran retired on May 10, 2023 because he could not work anymore.

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted another supplemental claim requesting a TDIU. In support of his claim, he provided a June 2024 letter from his primary care nurse practitioner who opined that his chronic back pain and spinal stenosis causes "severe discomfort, limits their range of motion, and hinders their ability to stand or sit for prolonged periods. Despite conservative treatments, including physical therapy and medication, their pain persists and further limits their functional capacity." The Veteran's nurse practitioner further opined that the Veteran is unable to maintain substantial gainful activity as his ability to "perform basic work activities such as lifting, standing, walking, and even sitting for extended periods is severely compromised." The Board notes that the Veteran's nurse practitioner included nonservice-connected disabilities and their associated symptoms in her opinion. However, the functional limitations noted solely due to the Veteran's back conditions have been considered.

In an updated TDIU application submitted in September 2024, the Veteran listed his spinal conditions, radiculopathy, hearing loss, and tinnitus as preventing him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. He continued to list his last day of full-time work as May 10, 2023, again noting only a high school education.

In October 2024, the Veteran was given a VA examination for his hearing loss and tinnitus. Here, the examiner noted that the Veteran reports difficulty understanding everyday conversational speech, especially in the presence of background noise. The Veteran was also given a VA examination for peripheral nerve conditions in October 2024, wherein the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with moderate incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic and femoral nerves. With regard to functional impact, the examiner opined that the Veteran should "avoid prolonged sitting, standing, walking, allow for frequent rest periods and use of cane, avoid strenuous exercise and lifting more than 10 pounds." Similar functional limitations were noted at the Veteran's October 2024 thoracolumbar spine examination. Finally, the examiner opined that the Veteran was unable to perform sedentary work.

Despite these opinions, the AOJ issued an October 2024 rating decision continuing to deny a TDIU, this time finding that the Veteran did not meet the schedular requirement for the assignment of such. The instant appeal ensued, wherein the Veteran requested a Board hearing.

The Veteran was given a hearing with the undersigned in February 2025. Here, he testified that he had not worked since May 2023 when he left his job at H.D. due to his service-connected back, nerve, and hearing conditions. The Veteran further testified that his back and leg conditions cause him to lose his balance, he is unable to lift anything, and struggles to hear as no hearing aid he has tried has worked. The Board notes that the Veteran's representative argued that he meets the schedular requirements for a TDIU due to his back and leg conditions resulting from a common etiology. As discussed above, the Board agrees. With regard to the second requirement, the October 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran was unable to perform even sedentary work due to his service-connected disabilities.  The Board finds this opinion to be consistent with the record and assigns it probative weight. Accordingly, entitlement to a TDIU is granted.

 

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Ruiz, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.