Citation Nr: A25031475
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-457212
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea to include as secondary to cervical strain, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and right wrist service-connected disabilities is remanded.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS 

The Veteran had active naval services from August 1982 to August 1986.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.2400(a)(1). Here, a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) to include as secondary to cervical strain, right upper radiculopathy, right wrist service-connected disabilities. The March 2024 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the AMA applies. The Veteran appealed that decision by submitting a July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)). The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As a result, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REAONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea to include as secondary to include cervical strain, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and right wrist service-connected disabilities is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his claimed sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected disabilities to include cervical strain, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and right wrist. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination based upon record review in March 2023. The March 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected disabilities. Further, the March VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of sleep apnea. The examination based did not reveal a clinical diagnosis of sleep apnea. See March 2024 CAPRI, March 2023 C&P Exam.

The Veteran reports continuing complaints of pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, frequent awakenings, headaches and daytime fatigue. See March 2023 VA21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. Further, the evidence showed that based upon subjective screening, the Veteran appears to have sleep apnea. See March 2023 Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility. The Veteran participated in a home sleep study to determine the etiology of his sleep related symptoms. There was an impression of mild sleep apnea, but no clinical diagnosis was rendered. 

The Board has identified a pre-decisional duty to assist error prior to the March 2024 rating decision. The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination, to include scheduling him for a sleep study, in order to adequately address the outstanding questions of diagnosis and nexus. Further, the March 2023 VA examiner failed to adequately address secondary service connection which includes proximate cause and/or aggravation along with obesity/weight gain related issues. See March 2024 Third Party Correspondence. The evidence of record is insufficient to adjudicate the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. The failure of the AOJ to obtain an adequate examination constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand to correct.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by a physician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed to include the administration of a sleep study.

Based on the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea had its onset during his active service, or that is otherwise etiologically related to service. 

The VA examiner must address the Veteran's lay report that showed his continuing complaints of pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, frequent awakenings, headaches and daytime fatigue. See March 2023 VA21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

In forming the opinions, the examiner is advised that to be adequate, medical literature is not a substitute for medical rationale based on medical principles and facts. The Veteran's specific medical condition must be discussed in arriving at the conclusions.

All opinions must be supported by a sufficient rationale and not just conclusions. A negative opinion cannot be solely based on the absence of medical evidence. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without resort to speculation, the examiner should explain his/her inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

The examiner must address and fully explain whether obesity potentially related to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities served as an intermediate step to the development of the claimed obstructive sleep apnea.

Based on the record, provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to include cervical strain, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and right wrist caused the Veteran to become obese. Specifically addressing whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's sleep apnea and whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected disabilities.

Based on the record, provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to include cervical strain, right upper extremity radiculopathy, and right wrist aggravated the Veteran's obesity. Specifically addressing whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in aggravating the Veteran's sleep apnea and whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity aggravated by the service-connected disabilities.

In forming the opinions, the examiner is advised that to be adequate, a VA opinion must provide separate findings and rationales for both causation and aggravation. The medical literature presented is not a substitute for medical rationale based on medical principles and facts. The Veteran's specific medical conditions must be discussed in arriving at the conclusions. 

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Ivan Franklin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.