Citation Nr: A25031193
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231129-397582
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for gonorrhea (claimed as sexually transmitted disease) is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability, to include cataracts, claimed as loss of vision, is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include congestive heart failure and valvular heart disease (claimed as ischemic heart disease (IHD)), is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, is denied.

5. Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is denied.

6. Entitlement to service connection for resection of rectum is denied.

7. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

8. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

9. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

10. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

11. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current gonorrhea disability or identifiable residuals during the appeal period or proximate thereto, to include symptoms that caused functional impairment that affects earning capacity.

2. The Veteran's left eye disability, which is age-related nuclear cataracts and dry eye syndrome, was not incurred during active duty service and is not otherwise related to service.

3. A heart disability, including congestive heart failure and valvular heart disease, did not have its onset during active duty or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to service.

4. The Veteran's type II diabetes mellitus did not have its onset in service, was not manifested within one year of separation from service, and is not otherwise related to service.

5. The Veteran's diverticulitis did not have its onset during active duty service and is not otherwise related to service.

6. The Veteran's resection of rectum did not have its onset during active duty service and is not otherwise related to service.

7. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction did not have its onset during active duty service and is not otherwise related to service, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

8. Peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity did not have its onset during active duty or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to active duty, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

9. Peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity did not have its onset during active duty or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to active duty, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

10. Peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity did not have its onset during active duty or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to active duty, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

11. Peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity did not have its onset during active duty or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to active duty, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for gonorrhea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability, to include cataracts, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for IHD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for resection of rectum have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to a service connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

9. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

10. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

11. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1981 to March 2002.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The RO denied the service-connection claims as listed above. The AOJ made favorable findings that are discussed further herein by which the Board is bound.

In November 2023, the Veteran timely appealed the October 2023 decision to the Board by submitting VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), and requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In a direct review docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that the Veteran had appealed "multi joint pain (lower back and neck)," which were not adjudicated in the October 2023 rating decision. The Veteran's claims for service connection for the lower back and neck were denied in rating decisions in October 2002 and May 2003, as these were not within one year prior to the November 2023 VA Form 10182, these issues are not properly before the Board. Further, the Veteran had also appealed "sleep apnea (deferred)," which was listed on the October 2023 rating decision, however, as there was no decision made by the AOJ at the time of the rating decision, this issue is also not before the Board at this time. Lastly, the Veteran appealed "Toxic Exposure Risk (TERA)," and several disabilities, which were claimed as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, however, he did not list diabetes mellitus, type II in his VA 10182. The Board will liberally construe this as an appeal for diabetes mellitus, type II, as it is listed on the subsequent January 2024 informal hearing presentation (IHP).

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision here. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Additionally, where a veteran served 90 days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and peripheral neuropathy, which is an organic disease of the nervous system, become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Entitlement to service connection for gonorrhea (claimed as sexually transmitted disease).

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a sexually transmitted disease, here, gonorrhea, is warranted because it was incurred or otherwise caused by service. 

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that evidence showed a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service with his report of cleared gonorrhea on a December 6, 1988, dental health questionnaire and conceded participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The question in this case is whether the Veteran has a current sexually transmitted disease including gonorrhea or has residuals that had its onset in service and/or whether it was caused by or otherwise related to an event in service, to include a TERA. The Board finds the weight of the evidence is against a finding of a current disability during the appeal period, to include symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity, and service connection is not warranted, which is explained below.

The Veteran was afforded a male reproductive organ conditions VA examination in May 2023. The examiner documented a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction and gonorrhea with a diagnosis date of 1982. Related to sexually transmitted disease, the Veteran was noted to have a history of contracting gonorrhea in 1982 from unprotected sexual encounter resulting in discharge and treatment and that there were no residuals of infection. Further, the examiner indicated that regardless of the Veteran's current employment, the conditions listed in the diagnosis section did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.

The Veteran's service treatment records include an April 1983 complaint of dysuria and purulent urethral discharge with a diagnosis of gonococcal urethritis and treatment and the Veteran's July 1988 enlistment Report of Medical History, where he reported a positive history of venereal disease and indicated that he had gonorrhea, which was treated, and was also reported in the February 1991 Report of Medical History. However, the Veteran did not report such fact in subsequent Reports of Medical History, including in November 1995, July 1998, and September 2000. The Veteran reported gonorrhea in the November 2001 Report of Medical History for retirement. In a December 1988 dental health questionnaire, the Veteran answered "yes" when asked if he ever had or had at the time, venereal disease. The summary of pertinent findings documents that it was gonorrhea in 1982 that was treated and cleared. The Veteran denied a history of venereal disease in subsequent dental health questionnaires, including in December 1989, December 1990, June 1991, July 1996, April 1997, March 1998, June 1999, June 2000, and October 2001. As such, while the Veteran had gonorrhea in service, the persuasive weight of the evidence documents that such was treated and cleared in service. Moreover, the available post-service medical records do not include a notation for current gonorrhea or residual symptoms, to include within the May 2023 VA examination report, where the examiner documented that it was treated, and there was no residual of infection.

In July 2023 and August 2023, two VA examiners also provided the opinions that the Veteran's claimed gonorrhea is not associated with toxic exposure but due to sexual encounter while in service. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was diagnosed with gonorrhea during service; however, as there is no current disability, to include residuals of a disability from in-service gonorrhea, service connection cannot be established.

The Board is mindful of the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), in which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that where symptoms alone result in functional impairment that affects earning capacity, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability for VA purposes. However, here, the Veteran has not contended that he has experienced symptoms or functional impairment affecting his earning capacity related to his claimed in-service sexually transmitted disease, and the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had a functional impairment related to a sexually transmitted disease during the appeal period or in close proximity to the appeal period.

There is no diagnosed current gonorrhea disability or residuals during the appeal period or proximate thereto, as mentioned above. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had a gonorrhea disability at any time during the period on appeal, to include symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity. As the record does not reflect a current disability or other sexually transmitted disease, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted. The Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements for determining whether service connection is warranted is necessary. See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) ("A determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or a disease incurred in service."); see also Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left eye disability that he asserts was due to exposure to hazardous materials. See July 2022 claim.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability of age-related nuclear cataracts, bilateral and dry eye syndrome, bilateral and that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

VA regulations provide that refractive error does not constitute a "disease" or "injury" for in the meaning of applicable legislation for VA compensation purposes. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c), 4.9; Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2003). Therefore, service connection may not be allowed for refractive error of the eyes. See VAOPGCPREC 82-90 (July 18, 1990). Service connection could be granted for superimposed disease or injury.

The question in this case is whether the Veteran's current left eye disability had its onset in service and/or whether it was caused by or otherwise related to an event in service, to include a TERA. After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability. The reasons follow.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the claimed left eye disability in July 2023. The examiner provided the above diagnoses and noted that the onset of age-related nuclear cataracts was not noted upon record review and in regard to dry eye syndrome, the Veteran noted symptoms started in 1997. The examiner noted that the onset was gradual as to both eye disabilities, and there was no trauma, incident, or event that led to the conditions. diagnosis of strabismic amblyopia of only the right eye and not the claimed left eye on appeal.

The examiner provided the opinion that the claimed left eye disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner indicated that he considered resources including Public Health on a VA website and a website from the Military Health System. The examiner explained that the Veteran's condition of vision loss is not a presumptive illness per the PACT act and had not been found to currently be linked to hazardous exposure while in the military. He indicated that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the conditions at issue and the TERA. He concluded that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claim during service.

In August 2023, the examiner provided an addendum opinion, providing the rationale that in regard to the claimed loss of vision, left eye, there is no diagnosis noted on the last Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) examination consistent with loss of vision of the left eye, as the Veteran was best-corrected to 20/20 in that eye, and there is no diagnosis warranted for the claimed loss of vision in the left eye. In the May 2023 VA examination report, the examiner made specific remarks that the Veteran expressed symptoms of blurred vision without glasses on and the symptom is consistent with refractive error, which is considered a developmental error in refraction and not an ocular disease/diagnosis/condition, thus no diagnosis is warranted for symptoms of blurred vision without glasses on.

In September 2023, another VA examiner provided an opinion that the dry eye syndrome, loss of vision, and cataracts are less likely than not related to toxic exposure activities as there were no in service complaints, nor was there documented any exposure (other than asbestos, which does not affect vision); and explained that these were age related changes.

The Veteran has asserted that his left eye disability is related to service; however, he has not offered probative and competent evidence establishing a nexus between the current disability and service. The above-described evidence shows that his eye disability was age related, which does not lend to a finding that it is related to service. Further, while the Veteran was seen for vision complaints in service, it was due to refractive error. This includes an October 1995 eye consultation where the Veteran complained of vision at a distance and it was noted that he never had glasses and in August 1998 the Veteran was seen for new glasses. 

In the September 2000 and November 2001, close to separation, Reports of Medical Examination, the Veteran had a normal clinical evaluation of "eyes - general;" "ophthalmoscopic;" "pupils;" and "ocular motility." In the accompanying September 2000 Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported a history of wearing corrective lenses and "don't know" to "lack of vision in either eye," however, the medical professional indicated that his vision was corrected to 20/20 in both eyes. In the November 2001 Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported a history of "eye disorder or trouble;" "loss of vision;" and "worn contact lenses or glasses," which was noted that he "splashed paint remover in eyes" and started wearing glasses in 1995. As such, close to separation from service, the Veteran had a normal clinical examination of categories related to the eyes and had corrected 20/20 vision bilaterally, which supports a finding that the Veteran did not have loss of vision which incurred in service other than from refractive error and a refractive error had not been subject to a superimposed disease or injury in service

Lay evidence may be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. See Davidson v. Shinseki,581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, "VA must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to." See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010) (concluding that a Veteran's lay belief that his schizophrenia had aggravated his diabetes and hypertension was not of sufficient weight to trigger VA's duty to seek a medical opinion on the issue). See Colantonio v. Shinseki, 606 F.3d 1378, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (recognizing that in some cases lay testimony "falls short" in proving an issue that requires expert medical knowledge). Diagnoses of an eye disability requires specialized training for determinations as to diagnosis and causation, and is therefore, not susceptible to lay opinions on etiology. Therefore, the Board finds that the lay assertions proffered by the Veteran lack probative value.

The Board finds of most probative value the VA medical opinions. The examination report and medical opinions provide competent and probative evidence that weighs against the Veteran's claims because the examiners collectively reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, performed a physical examination, and provided medical opinions supported by well-reasoned rationale, which was based upon the facts of the case and medical principles and considered the Veteran's contentions, including TERA. Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-106 (2012).

Absent competent, credible, and probative evidence of a nexus between the diagnoses of his left eye disability and service, the Board finds that the disability was not incurred in-service and are not otherwise related to active service as the Veteran has not offered competent medical evidence in support of his claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(a) ("A claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits."); Skoczen v. Shinseki,564 F.3d 1319, 1323-29 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (interpreting section 5107(a) to obligate a claimant to provide an evidentiary basis for his or her benefits claim, consistent with VA's duty to assist, and recognizing that "whether submitted by the claimant or VA... the evidence must rise to the requisite level set forth in section 5107(b)," requiring an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination); Fagan v. Shinseki,573 F.3d 1282, 1286 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Accordingly, service connection for a left eye disability is not warranted.

For all the reasons discussed above, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's left eye disability its onset during service or is etiologically related to the Veteran's active duty military service, to include a TERA. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claim for service connection is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

3. Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability.

4. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II.

The Veteran seeks service connection for IHD and diabetes mellitus, type II, that he asserts was due to exposure to hazardous materials. See July 2022 claim.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus in 2007 and heart disabilities of congestive heart failure in 2020 and valvular heart disease progression in May 2023. Further, participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The questions in this case are whether the Veteran's current heart disabilities and diabetes mellitus, type II, had their onset in service or within one year of separation, and/or whether they were caused by or otherwise related to an event in service, to include a TERA. After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the service-connection claims. The reasons follow.

The Veteran's confirmed TERA is based on his military occupational specialty (MOS) of hydraulics operator and maintenance technician with exposure to asbestos, petroleum, oils, fumes, lubricant and other chemicals as documented in VA TERA memorandums dated April 2023, August 2023, and September 2023. The Veteran has not asserted and the evidence does not support any exposure to herbicides or Agent Orange. See also January 2023 Veteran's statement.

Following VA examinations for the claimed diabetes mellitus and heart disabilities in May 2023, the examiner provided medical opinions that the claimed conditions were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximate balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Specifically, as to diabetes mellitus, type II, the examiner explained that the disability was due to a metabolic disorder, with the Veteran's obesity and hypertension contributing to his conditions. He indicated that there is no associated of diabetes mellitus, type II, with any toxin exposure. As to IHD, the examiner explained that it was more than likely than not due to the toxic effects of hyperglycemia on the coronary arteries and the chronic shear forces associated with hypertension which caused the Veteran's cardiac dysfunction.

In August 2023, a second VA TERA opinion was provided that the claimed conditions were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximate balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Similar to the May 2023 VA examiner's opinion, the examiner indicated that diabetes mellitus, type II, is a metabolic disorder more likely related to obesity and/or hypertension and unlikely caused by toxic exposure and IHD is a condition that is more likely caused by obesity, hyperglycemia, and/or hypertension and less likely due to toxic exposure. The examiner indicated that she considered resources including Public Health on a VA website and a website from the Military Health System, and that the Veteran's conditions including type II diabetes and IHD are not resumptive illnesses per the PACT act and had not been found to currently be linked to hazardous exposure while in the military. She concluded that the claimed conditions are less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claim during service.

In September 2023, a VA examiner added that IHD is less likely than not related to toxic exposure as the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetes in 2007, as well as having hypertension, which are contributors to heart disease. She stated that there were no in-service complaints about heart issues as the Veteran was diagnosed in 2020, decades after separating from the military.

The May 2023, August 2023, and September 2023 VA examiner's opinions are supported by private medical records, including in April 2023 which provides that the Veteran's body mass index (BMI) was considered obese (30 or more) and that the higher the BMI, the greater risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, stroke, gallstones, arthritis, sleep apnea, and certain cancers.

The Board finds of most probative value the VA medical opinions. The examination reports and opinions provide competent and probative evidence that weigh against the Veteran's claims because the examiners collectively reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, performed physical examinations, and provided medical opinions supported by well-reasoned rationale, which was based upon the facts of the case and medical principles and considered the Veteran's contentions, specifically his toxic exposures. Monzingo, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-106. The Veteran has not otherwise provided competent medical evidence that the respective disabilities are related to or incurred in service, to include a TERA.

Absent competent, credible, and probative evidence of a nexus between the diagnoses of diabetes mellitus, type II, and heart disabilities, and service, the Board finds that the disabilities were not incurred in-service and is not otherwise related to active service as the Veteran has not offered competent medical evidence in support of his claims. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(a); Skoczen, 564 F.3d 1323-29; Fagan, 573 F.3d 1286.

The evidence shows that diabetes mellitus, type II, was diagnosed in approximately 2007 with progressively elevated blood sugar and issues with increased urination and polydipsia and was started on metformin in 2007. IHD was first diagnosed in approximately 2020 with congestive heart failure and valvular heart disease progression in May 2023. This shows that none of these diagnoses manifested within one year following service discharge in March 2002. Accordingly, service connection for a heart disability and diabetes mellitus, type II, is not warranted, to include based on a chronic disease.

For all the reasons discussed above, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claims for service connection for a heart disability and diabetes mellitus, type II, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claims are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

5. Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis.

6. Entitlement to service connection for resection of rectum.

The Veteran seeks service connection for diverticulitis and resection of rectum, which he asserts was incurred in or otherwise related to service, to include exposure to hazardous materials. See July 2022 claim.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with disabilities of diverticulitis and in 2001 and rectal cancer and had a colectomy performed in 2021. Further, participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The questions in this case are whether the Veteran's current diverticulitis and resection of rectum had their onset in service and/or whether they were caused by or otherwise related to an event in service, to include a TERA. After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the service-connection claims. The reasons follow.

As to in-service events related to the gastrointestinal system, VA examiners have noted and considered several events, in addition to a TERA, including in November 1981 an evaluation for gastroenteritis; January 1982 complaint of abdominal pain with an assessment of gastroenteritis; a June 1982 complaint of nausea, vomiting with blood, diarrhea, and pain in the mid abdomen with an assessment of viral syndrome; December 2000 evaluation for blood in stool; and noted complaints of intestinal pain and rectal bleeding in a November 2001 Report of Medical History. Thus, the second element of a service-connection claim has been met as to both disabilities.

The Board finds, however, that the evidence persuasively weighs against a nexus between the current disabilities and service. There are numerous post-service medical records reflecting complaints and treatment for diverticulitis and resection of rectum. However, these records do not provide a positive nexus regarding the onset, etiology, or relationship of the current diverticulitis and resection of rectum, to military service. Rather multiple VA examiners have provided opinions that the claimed disabilities were not incurred in or otherwise related to service, to include consideration of the in-service events detailed above and TERA.

The Veteran was provided VA examinations for intestinal conditions in February 2023 and intestinal surgery in May 2023. The February 2023 examiner noted a history of the claimed disabilities with an onset of 2019 as abdominal pain with rectal bleeding with multiple testing before a diagnosis of diverticulitis was made and later rectal cancer. She indicated that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of diverticulitis while in service but did have abdominal complaints while in service but lacked chronicity of care from 1982 until 2021 that would link the current disability to the in-service diagnosis. She provided the opinion that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. She explained that the Veteran has claimed diverticulitis as being directly related to military service and based on her review of the evidence, it is less likely than not due to service, as there is scant data support a nexus between the current diagnosis of diverticulitis and rectal cancer and military service. She added, without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness or injury is considered a more likely etiology.

In May 2023, a different VA examiner provided a TERA opinion that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner noted the Veteran's complaints of intestinal pain, rectal bleeding, blood in stool, and viral gastroenteritis in service, and stated that the Veteran's colon removal surgery is due to diverticulitis and chronic inflammatory colon symptoms manifesting as gastroenteritis in service and not due to any toxic exposure while in service and not due to any toxic exposure while in service.

Another VA opinion was provided by a separate examiner in August 2023, that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Specifically, for diverticulitis and the intestine condition, she explained that it was more likely caused by/ related to lifestyle choices such as obesity, smoking, and nutrition, and less likely due to toxic exposure. The examiner indicated that she considered resources including Public Health on a VA website and a website from the Military Health System, and that the Veteran's conditions including diverticulitis and intestine condition are not presumptive illnesses per the PACT act and had not been found to currently be linked to hazardous exposure while in the military. She concluded that the claimed conditions are less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claim during service.

In September 2023, a subsequent negative TERA opinion was provided. The examiner explained that although the Veteran had a diagnosis of diverticulitis while in service, records could not establish that this condition was related to toxic exposure activities, jet fuel noting that asbestos causes pulmonary issues not gastrointestinal issues and there was no reported chronicity of care after service until 2021, in which he had a colectomy.

Thus, multiple examiners have concluded that diverticulitis and resection of rectum or intestine condition are not related to a TERA. The May 2023 examiner stated that the Veteran's colon surgery removal is due to diverticulitis and chronic inflammatory colon symptoms manifesting as gastroenteritis in service, however, the examiner did not address the lack of chronicity since service which the February 2023 and September 2023 examiners have. Additionally, the May 2023 examiner did not explain how the examiner determined that the gastroenteritis diagnosed in service was actually diverticulitis. The Board finds that the diagnosis of gastroenteritis in the service treatment records is more probative as to what the Veteran was experiencing at that time, as a medical professional examined the Veteran in person at that time. 

The February 2023 and September 2023 examiners considered the Veteran's complaints in service and found that given the lack of chronicity, there are more likely post-service etiology, including obesity, smoking, and nutrition. This is supported by post service records, including in April 2013, that document the Veteran is at a body mass index (BMI) that is considered obese, had heavy alcohol use, unhealthy life style choices, and was smoking one and a half packs per day with easy access to cigarettes at work, and January 2021 record that indicates the Veteran had a 32 pack year history of smoking, a former user of smokeless tobacco, and had previous alcohol usage of about 28 standard drinks of alcohol per week. Therefore, overall, the February 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners have considered both the in-service complaints related to gastrointestinal issues and TERA in finding that the disabilities are not related to service.

The Board finds of most probative value the VA medical opinions. The examination reports and opinions provide competent and probative evidence that weigh against the Veteran's claims because the examiners collectively reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, performed a physical examination, and provided medical opinions supported by well-reasoned rationale, which was based upon the facts of the case and medical principles and considered the Veteran's in service history and his contentions. Monzingo, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-106. 

The Veteran has not provided competent evidence in support of a nexus between his military service and diverticulitis and resection of rectum. Lay evidence may be competent to establish medical etiology or nexus. However, "VA must consider lay evidence but may give it whatever weight it concludes the evidence is entitled to." The Veteran as a lay individual is competent to report observable symptoms but is not medically trained and are therefore not qualified to competently opine about a diagnosis of gastrointestinal disabilities. Therefore, the Board finds that the lay assertions proffered by the Veteran lack probative value and are not competent evidence of the existence of diverticulitis and resection of rectum during service or the relationship between current diverticulitis and resection of rectum and service.

Moreover, the Board finds that the passage of many years between service separation and medical documentation of a claimed disability is a factor that tends to weigh against a finding that the disability is related to service. The evidence shows that in 2019, the Veteran had abdominal pain with rectal bleeding with multiple testing before a diagnosis of diverticulitis was made and later rectal cancer which is almost two decades after separation from service. The length of time between the onset of the disabilities and service separation does not lend to a finding that diverticulitis and resection of rectum had its onset in service, soon after service, or is otherwise related to service.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis and resection of rectum is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against service connection. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claims are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

7. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction.

8. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity.

9. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity.

10. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity.

11. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity.

The Veteran indicated that he is claiming that his erectile dysfunction and bilateral upper and lower peripheral neuropathy disabilities as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II. See July 2022 claim.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with disabilities of erectile dysfunction, diabetic mellitus neuropathy, left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy with sciatic nerve involvement, and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy with sciatic nerve involvement. Further, participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The questions in this case are whether the Veteran's current erectile dysfunction and peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities had their onset in service, peripheral neuropathy had an onset within one year of separation, whether they were caused by or otherwise related to an event in service, to include a TERA, and/or whether they are secondary to a service-connected disability. After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the service-connection claims. The reasons follow.

The Veteran's claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, has been denied herein, which means that the claimed erectile dysfunction bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy cannot be granted on a secondary basis as diabetes mellitus, type II, is not a service-connected disability. Moreover, VA examiners have provided opinions that the claimed disabilities are not related to any TERA in service, detailed below.

The Veteran was provided VA examinations for diabetic sensory-motor peripheral neuropathy, peripheral nerves conditions, and the male reproductive system in May 2023, the examiner provided the opinions that the claimed conditions were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximate balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Specifically, as to erectile dysfunction, the examiner explained that the disability was more likely than not due to the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II. He explained that erectile dysfunction due to chronic uncontrolled hyperglycemia causes neurological damage to the vasculature of the penis, which causes the inability to dilate and initiate erection. 

As to claimed neuropathies, the examiner wrote that based on review and clinical examination, the Veteran's "radiculopathy cervical strain, and [intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS)] are chronic, and lumbosacral strain IVDS, and claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy are due to injuries while in service" and less likely due to any toxin exposure while in service. However, the Board finds that as to the claimed bilateral upper and lower extremity neuropathies and the suggestion that they were due to injuries in service, there is no explanation from the examiner, thus the Board finds this medical opinion nonprobative. Nonetheless, the Veteran is not in receipt of service connection for a cervical or lumbar spine disability, where these disabilities could be granted on a secondary basis.

Another VA opinion was provided by a different examiner in August 2023 that the claimed erectile dysfunction was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner explained that erectile dysfunction is an illness with clear etiology due to poor vascularization of the blood vessels supplying the circulation of the genitals, more likely due hyperglycemia, chronic cardiovascular illness, and/or psychosomatic condition, and not likely due to toxic exposure. The examiner indicated that she considered resources including Public Health on a VA website and a website from the Military Health System, and that erectile dysfunction had not been found to be linked to hazardous exposure while in the military. She concluded that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claim during service.

In September 2023, a subsequent negative TERA opinion was provided. The examiner explained that peripheral neuropathy in the upper extremities is less likely than not related to toxic exposure, as the neuropathy is related to spinal stenosis, in which an MRI Neck in October 2013 showed osteophytes (osteoarthritis) foraminal narrowing (spinal stenosis) causing radiculopathy (neuropathy) in the extremities (upper), and was unrelated to toxic exposure. Neuropathy is also likely related to Type II diabetes. She also noted that the Veteran was diagnosed in clinic with progressive elevated blood sugar and had issues with increased urination and polydipsia, had eating issues where he was eating a lot more often at that time and on metformin in 2007 and noted the diagnosis in the diabetic sensory-motor peripheral neuropathy DBQ in May 2023 was diabetes mellitus neuropathy. She also explained that erectile dysfunction is less likely than not related to toxic exposure as there was no documented exposure to any toxins that would cause erectile dysfunction and documented that examination from May 2023 notes that claimant believes it was from "stress" from Navy deployments, which indicates that she considered this contention. The Board notes that the Veteran is not service connected for a psychiatric disorder.

Absent competent, credible, and probative evidence of a nexus between the diagnoses of erectile dysfunction and bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and service, the Board finds that the disabilities were not incurred in service and are not otherwise related to active service, to include a TERA or as secondary to a service-connected disability or disabilities, as the Veteran has not offered competent medical evidence in support of his claims. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(a) ("A claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits."); Skoczen, 564 F.3d 1323-29; Fagan, 573 F.3d 1286.

The evidence shows that diabetic peripheral neuropathy was diagnosed in approximately 2010, following his 2007 diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. This shows that none of the peripheral neuropathy diagnoses manifested within one year following service discharge. Accordingly, service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity; peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity; peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity; and peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is not warranted based on a chronic disease.

For all the reasons discussed above, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claims for service connection, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claims for service connection for erectile dysfunction; peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity; peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity; peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity; and peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v, 21 F.4th 776.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Cheng, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.