Citation Nr: A25031896
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240314-423895
DATE:    April 7, 2025

ORDER

From March 31, 2021, entitlement to a disability rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy is granted.

From March 31, 2021, entitlement to a disability rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for a low back disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From March 31, 2021, the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is characterized by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

2. From March 31, 2021, the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is characterized by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. From March 31, 2021, the criteria for entitlement to a 40 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5017; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

2. From March 31, 2021, the criteria for entitlement to a 40 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5017; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1978 to June 1989. He received the Army Achievement Medal, Army Commendation Medal with 1 Oak Leaf Cluster, and Meritorious Service Medal, among other awards and decorations. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 decision of the VA Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The March 2023 decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized appellate review system, known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies.

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) and requested review of a December 2021 decision. In March 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2021 decision.  In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Board notes that in his Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran also attempted to appeal issues regarding service connection for left and right hip conditions and restoration of service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy involving the peroneal nerve; however, these issues are not before the Board as they were neither the subject of the Veteran's August 2021 claim nor adjudicated by the AOJ in either the December 2021 decision or the March 2023 HLR decision on appeal. Therefore, those matters are not addressed in this decision. 

As an appeal from an HLR decision and based on the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to higher disability ratings for his service-connected right and left lower extremity radiculopathy, asserting his symptoms are worse than his currently assigned ratings reflect. 

For the reasons detailed below, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to 40 percent disability ratings, but no higher, for his right and left lower extremity radiculopathy. 

A disability rating is determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See generally 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. VA has a duty to acknowledge and to consider all regulations that are potentially applicable through the assertions and issues raised in the record, and to explain the reasons and bases for its conclusions. See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 592-93 (1991).

In increased rating claims, where a Veteran seeks a higher rating for a previously service-connected disability, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). In such claims, VA considers the level of disability for the period beginning one year prior to the claim for a higher rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). If an increase in severity of disease is discernible during the one-year period prior to the filing date of the claim, the effective date shall be the date the increase in severity is discernible. See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings to apply, VA will assign the higher rating if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, it will assign the lower rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found during the period under review, a practice known as "staged ratings." See Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 509-10.

In this regard, the review period and the evidentiary window are distinct concepts under AMA that are not interchangeable. The review period is the period of time during which the Board may consider the symptoms and manifestations of the Veteran's disabilities. The evidentiary window, on the other hand, refers to the period of time during which the Board may consider any relevant evidence received. Accordingly, if evidence is received during an applicable evidentiary window that relates to the symptoms and manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities during the period of review for the appeal, it will be considered by the Board in an evaluation for an increased rating. 

The review period for this appeal begins one year before the underlying claim was received by VA (or August 28, 2020) and ends at the issuance of the AOJ rating decision underlying the HLR decision on appeal (December 10, 2021). As noted above, because the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket for the March 2023 HLR decision, the Board may only consider relevant evidence received prior to the December 10, 2021 which relates to the review period (from August 28, 2020 to December 10, 2021). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). 

The Veteran's right and left lower extremity radiculopathy are each rated at 20 percent under 38 CFR § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520, for paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124. 

Under DC 8520 criteria, disability ratings for paralysis of the sciatic nerve are warranted at 10 percent for mild incomplete paralysis; 20 percent for moderate incomplete paralysis; 40 percent for moderately severe incomplete paralysis; 60 percent for severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy; and 80 percent, the maximum schedular rating, for complete paralysis, where the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, or flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost. 38 CFR § 4.124a.

The Board notes that subjective terms, including "marked," "mild," "moderate," moderately severe," and "severe," as used in DC 8520 are not defined in the Rating Schedule. In Chavis, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held the Board must define the subjective terms of these regulations, noting that VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual provides benchmarks for these terms for peripheral nerve conditions. See 34 Vet. App. at 36-37; M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.

"Mild" is generally defined as "not being or involving what is extreme" or "not severe." "Moderate" is generally defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension." "Severe" is generally defined as "of a great degree" or "serious." "Marked" is generally defined as "having a distinctive or emphasized character." See generally Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary (last visited Mar. 13, 2025).

Given the foregoing, in the context of DC 8520, the Board finds that "mild" symptoms involve sensory deficits that are lower graded or less peristent and minimal reflex or motor abnormality, typically involving a smaller affected area. "Moderate" symptoms involve near-continuous sensory symptoms, sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a low degree, or weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes graded as medically moderate and typically involving a larger affected area. "Moderately severe" symptoms involve motor and/or reflex impairment at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability. Some atrophy may be present. "Severe" symptoms involve motor and/or reflex impairment reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability with possible trophic changes and "marked" muscular atrophy is expected. Id.; see also M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c. 

Turning to the evidence for the period under review, private treatment records describe the Veteran's radiculopathy symptoms. An April 2021 treatment note shows the Veteran's "walking distance is limited to 200 meters, standing is not possible, feeling of numbness sets on in the right leg after 10 minutes." A June 2021 treatment note indicates the Veteran as having lower lumbar spine pain radiating into his left and right upper legs with occasional feelings of numbness. At an August 2021 neurology appointment, he described having intermittent cramps in his legs.

In an October 2021 treatment record, the provider noted that since January 2021 the Veteran's low back pain radiated into his right thigh and knee with co-occurring numbness. The Veteran reported at that time that his right knee felt weaker. The provider noted no motor deficit with the Veteran's right thigh. The Veteran also reported that since June 2021, he had ongoing numbness in his left thigh and used a walking stick as an assistive support for his leg pain. 

In the November 2021 VA examination, a positive straight leg raising test confirmed the Veteran has sciatic radiculopathy on both sides, indicating pain radiating below both knees. The examiner noted the Veteran had weakened movement; interference with sitting, standing, and locomotion, including abnormal gait and slowed pace; difficulty using stairs; and an inability to walk more than 200-500 meters. The examiner indicated the Veteran did not use an assistive device as a normal mode of locomotion. The Veteran's muscle strength testing was normal, and no muscle atrophy was noted. For both his left and right lower extremities, the examiner noted the Veteran's radiculopathy manifested by severe constant pain, paresthesias/dysesthesias, and numbness due to spinal stenosis involving sciatic nerve root irritation, which the examiner opined caused the Veteran's right leg to limp. The examiner described the right limp as noticeable and observed the Veteran's slow gait with right-sided limp when he made the 15-meter walk to the examiner's office and back to his vehicle, where the examiner also observed the Veteran sitting for a long time before leaving. 

The Board has considered the medical evidence of record, which it finds to be both competent and credible. The VA examiner is a medical professional and is therefore competent to measure the Veteran's physical characteristics and opine as to the severity of his radiculopathy symptoms. Moreover, the examiner provided opinions based upon both the subjective and objective information, including a review of the claims file. Similarly, the Veteran's private medical records contain evidence from treatment providers, all of whom have had the most contact with the Veteran in the context of these disabilities. As such, the Board affords the medical evidence and opinions significant probative value.

The Board also reviewed and carefully considered the Veteran's lay statements regarding his radiculopathy disabilities, including those contained in medical records. The Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms and the limitations they cause, and there is no reason to doubt his credibility as his statements are consistent throughout the record. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995). However, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is not competent to interpret or opine on clinical findings pertaining to lower extremity disorders as this requires specialized medical knowledge and training that he is not shown to possess. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Board assigns great probative value to the Veteran's statements regarding his subjective experience of his symptoms and their effects on his functioning.  

Here, the Board finds that to the extent that the Veteran's symptoms have necessitated the use of a walking stick, limited his walking and use of stairs, and caused a right-sided limp, they are not merely sensory and have produced motor functioning deficits, particularly with his right side. However, although the VA examiner described the Veteran's symptoms as "severe," the evidence indicates the Veteran's muscle strength and reflexes are normal, and no trophic changes or muscle atrophy are shown. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the probative and persuasive evidence indicates the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warranting a 40 percent rating from March 31, 2021. The Board also finds that the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warranting a 40 percent rating from March 31, 2021. Providing the Veteran with the benefit of the doubt, this date is the earliest date in medical evidence indicating his limited walking. See Gaston, 605 F.3d at 984. 

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered all other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes, but there is no evidence showing the Veteran has neurological impairment associated with any other peripheral nerves. Therefore, a separate or higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code is not warranted. However, for the reasons discussed below, the Board will remand these claims for further development regarding whether a rating higher than 40 percent is warranted for the review period.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA framework, the Board can remand a matter only for the correction of duty-to-assist errors that occurred prior to a decision on appeal, and for the AOJ's error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correcting such an error could reasonably aid in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. VA's duty to assist includes providing an adequate medical examination or opinion. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). 

Regrettably, the Veteran's low back and radiculopathy claims must be remanded to correct duty-to-assist errors that occurred when the AOJ provided inadequate VA examinations/opinions prior to the decision on appeal. Id. Because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence in the record that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ upon readjudication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for a low back disability, to include degenerative arthritis, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), and degenerative disc disease (DDD).  

The Veteran seeks a higher disability rating for his service-connected low back disability, to include degenerative arthritis, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), and degenerative disc disease (DDD), which he asserts is more severe than currently rated. 

The Veteran's low back disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5243, for IVDS under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine. 

Relevant to this appeal, under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less, or for favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching." Id. at Note 5. Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id. 

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, may not be reflected on range-of-motion (ROM) testing. 

Entitlement to a rating higher than 40 percent under DC 5243 is predicated on whether the Veteran's spine demonstrates unfavorable ankylosis. Notably, the ankylosis requirement "can be met with evidence of the functional equivalent of ankylosis [i.e., functional immobility of the joint] during a flare." See Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). Additionally, VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors during a flare, and when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination, the elicit the extent of functional impairment of flares from the Veteran's statements or other evidence in the claims file. Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

In the November 2021 VA examination conducted during the period under review, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not have favorable or unfavorable ankylosis or experience flare-ups of his low back symptoms. However, the record shows the Veteran has a history of low back flare-ups and has reported flare-ups on subsequent VA examinations. See generally February 2007, March 2023, and May 2024 VA examinations. This is suggestive of the Veteran experiencing flares during the period under review, and although the examiner noted consideration of the claims file, the examiner did not address this discrepancy. 

Given the record indicates the Veteran experiences flare-ups related to his low back and the precedent set in Chavis, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error occurred when the AOJ did not obtain an adequate VA medical examination and opinion assessing whether the lay and medical evidence demonstrates that Veteran experienced flare-ups during the period under review, and whether he has the functional equivalence of ankylosis based on his flare-ups. As detailed below, further opinion is also needed regarding the Veteran's use of medication. On remand, a VA examination and opinion are required to obtain these details. 

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 40 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy.

During the pendency of these claims, the Court held that, in cases where the applicable rating criteria do not account for the use of medication, VA must discount, or in essence "subtract," the ameliorative effects of any medication taken by the Veteran when evaluating the severity of his disability. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025). 

As detailed in the sections above, the next higher rating of 60 percent under DC 8520 requires the presence of marked muscle atrophy, and the Veteran is not shown as having any muscle atrophy. However, Board acknowledges that the record reflects the Veteran has taken medication during the review period that may be for either his low back or radiculopathy disabilities. See Schön Clinic medical records; University Clinic Erlangen medical records. As the Board lacks the medical expertise required to determine whether, but for the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication, he would have additional symptomatology reflected in the higher rating criteria, such as marked muscle atrophy, the prior opinion is inadequate, and the Board must remand this matter for an addendum medical opinion. 

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of his service-connected low back disability. The examiner should note review of the claims file, including a copy of this Remand, and provide a full description of the disability by reporting all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. 

In doing so, the examiner must determine what, if any, medication the Veteran takes for his low back disability and the ameliorative effects of said medication on the severity of his disability. For example, whether the Veteran's ROM improved with medication use, and, if so, to what extent, and whether flare-up frequency or severity lessened with medication. If the Veteran reports he does not experience flare-ups of his low back symptoms, the examiner should specifically remark that the Veteran reported such during the examination.

The examiner must also specifically opine on whether the medical and lay evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's flare-ups amount to the functional equivalence of ankylosis, either favorable or unfavorable. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his medical history and symptoms, and such reports must be acknowledged and considered in forming an opinion. 

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Additionally, the examiner should determine what, if any, medication the Veteran takes for his radiculopathy disabilities and the ameliorative effects of said medication on the severity of his disabilities, including rationale discussing whether, but for his medication use, the Veteran would have associated muscle atrophy (and to what degree), trophic changes, or any symptomatology consistent with complete paralysis, e.g., the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, or lost or weakened knee flexion.     

 

T. Raymond

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Caldwell, Stephanie L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.