Citation Nr: A25031920
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-451820
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PTSD is manifested by flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 3.326(a), 4.7, 4.14, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1987 to June 1991. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

The Veteran asserts that his PTSD symptoms warrant a rating higher than 50 percent.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. §1155. 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A 50 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood). This may be due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment. This may be due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The list of symptoms in the General Formula is not intended to constitute an exhaustive list but provides examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. ?4.126.

When determining which of two ratings applies under a particular Diagnostic Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. A claimant is to receive the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776,781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In a June 2018 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he worked for the prison system for over twenty years, he worked as a unit manager without any disciplinary infractions. He reported losing his job at the prison due to being accused of "doing something illegal." See June 2018 VA Examination. Since his termination the Veteran has maintained employment; he worked as a school bus driver from 2015 to 2017 and as a truck driver thereafter. Id. He obtained his CDL in 2015. The Veteran reported that in his free time he participates in church activities, enjoys watching basketball, spending time with his daughter, and the rest of his family and he has a few "associates." See June 2018 VA Examination. Additionally, the Veteran stated that his spirituality helps him cope with his mental health symptoms.

The Veteran denied any significant symptoms of anxiety or depression but reported that he "avoids talking about what he experienced in the military because it upsets him." Id. He denied any significant history of mental health treatment, any history of psychiatric hospitalizations, or psychiatric emergency room visits. The examiner noted that the Veteran's "symptoms do not appear to affect his ADLs [activities of daily living] at this time." See June 2018 VA Examination. The Veteran denied any history of suicidal/homicidal ideation. Id. Accordingly, in the June 2018 VA examination the examiner found that the Veteran does not have a mental diagnosis. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in January 2024, the examiner found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of PTSD that conform to the DSM-5 criteria. As previously stated, that the Veteran is currently employed driving trucks and tractor-trailers. See January 2024 VA Examination. The Veteran reported being a loner and dealing with his "issues by praying and going to church."

The Veteran's symptoms consist of flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideations. 

The examiner notes that the Veteran "was difficult to interview because he was often evasive or would talk over the examiner. His thoughts were also tangential. He was tearful when he started talking about his stressors." See January 2024 VA Examination. 

Further, the Veteran's medical treatment records are silent for any treatment for his mental health; this includes psychiatric medication. The January 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. See January 2024 VA Examination. 

After review of the evidence delineated above, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD most closely approximates a 50 percent rating. During this time, the Veteran engaged in social activities such as participating in church, spending time with family and few associates. While the Veteran did report being a "loner" he continued attending church and maintains a good relationship with his daughter. 

The Board finds that a 70 percent rating is not warranted, because the Veteran's symptoms did not result in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas. On the contrary, the Veteran was able to maintain a relationship with his daughter. The records did not reflect suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, intermittently illogical speech, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function, impaired impulse control, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, or symptoms of a similar severity. In reaching this determination, the Board acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use." Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025). Here, as previously stated the Veteran does not treat his mental condition with psychiatric medication.

Accordingly, the claim for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent is denied. 

Finally, neither the record nor the Veteran's lay assertions reflect that his PTSD, alone or in tandem with other service-connected disabilities, renders him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation. Accordingly, the Board finds that a total disability rating claim based upon individual unemployability is not part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for a higher rating. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 452-53 (2009). Moreover, the Veteran has not raised any other issues (e.g., separate or extraschedular ratings), nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Osborne, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.