Citation Nr: A25031403
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-463347
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating higher than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder to include alcohol use (PTSD), is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the symptoms and impairment caused by the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximates total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased rating higher than 70 percent PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2002 to November 2007.  

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a December 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, the Previously, the AOJ issued a December 2023 rating decision that continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD after the Veteran filed a July 2023 VA 21-526EZ seeking an increased rating for PTSD.  In April 2024, the AOJ on higher level review, continued the 70 percent evaluation for PTSD after the Veteran filed a December 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket, identifying the December 2023 decision as the one being appealed.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In addition, more than one year has elapsed since mailing of notification of the December 2023 rating decision and more than 60 days have elapsed since the August 2024 NOD.  Consequently, the time for a docket switch has elapsed.  Cf. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305, 307 (2024) ("because [38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2)] gives a claimant the later of one year from the date that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement (NOD) to change the NOD and select a different lane, the Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up").

Entitlement to an increased rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD is denied.

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology and impairment with the criteria set forth in VA's Rating Schedule.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  Where, as here, entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 510 (2007).  Here, as explained below, the uniform 100 percent rating is proper.

The criteria for rating PTSD are found at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411. PTSD is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Under this formula, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent evaluation requires total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Symptoms listed in the VA's general rating formula for mental disorders serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating and are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-44 (2002). The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has emphasized that the list of symptoms under a given rating is a non-exhaustive list, as indicated by the words "such as" that precede each list of symptoms. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In Vazquez-Claudio, the Federal Circuit held "that a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Id. at 117. Other language in the decision indicates that the phrase "others of similar severity, frequency, and duration," can be thought of as symptoms of like kind to those listed in the regulation for a given disability rating. Id. at 116.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the frequency, severity, duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission must be considered. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). In addition, the evaluation must be based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, not solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id. Further, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the extent of social impairment is considered, but the rating cannot be assigned solely on the basis of social impairment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

The Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating for PTSD on July 14, 2023.  The appeal period therefore begins one year prior to this date, July 14, 2022.  

In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran's friend reported he has known the Veteran for the past 20 years. He reported witnessing symptoms of anxiety, anger, and alcohol abuse. Moreover, he conveyed an incident where the Veteran got drunk and punched a brick wall out of anger, breaking his hand. Further, the Veteran's friend indicated he saw the Veteran lose multiple relationships and take a leave of absence from work when he was not on medication and "spinning out of control".  

In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran's wife reported the Veteran struggles with symptoms to include anxiety and mood swings. She indicated that his medications helped his PTSD and alcohol use symptoms. However, she reported when the Veteran is not taking his medication, he struggles to sustain a stable life for himself and his family, and noted periods of alcohol abuse, extreme weight gain and loss, DUI's, bar fights, and unemployment. 

In an August 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the clinician found occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported that he lives with his wife, watches sports, coaches football and is employed in IT (he teleworks as he is uncomfortable around people). The Veteran takes several medications for PTSD and related symptoms including medication to manage his drinking after DUIs in 2021 and 2019. The clinician noted symptoms to include depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, impaired judgement, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work and a worklike setting, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. 

In a July 2023 lay statement, the Veteran's friend reported he met the Veteran in high school and had been close with the Veteran since. He reported that he has witnessed the Veteran's struggles with symptoms of anxiety, anger, and alcohol abuse. Further, he indicated the Veteran takes multiple pills daily to help manage his symptoms.

In a July 2023 lay statement, the Veteran reported he struggles with his PTSD and symptoms of depression and anxiety daily. He noted that he experienced physical shaking when he goes too long without his medication and must take alcohol deterrence medication or run the risk of getting drunk. Importantly, the Veteran noted homicidal ideation as he fears without his medication, he may cause harm or even kill someone due to the anger he experiences. 

In a July 2023 lay statement, the Veteran's former supervisor reported witnessing the Veteran's struggles with communication with customers, tending to overreact or become extremely angry very quickly over minor issues. Further, he noted the Veteran's inappropriate behavior, having very inappropriate conversations and behaviour as well as being completely unaware of his surroundings. The Veteran's supervisor also commented on the Veteran's use of alcohol, indicating he witness the Veteran coming to work smelling like alcohol either from the night before or from the morning. The Veteran's supervisor reported that the Veteran was suspended from work due to his behavior issues and forced to take a leave of absence due to multiple DUI's.

In a November 2023 DBQ, the clinician found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relationships, judgement, thinking, and/or mood. The Veteran indicated he lives with his wife and son and gets together with friends a couple of times a month. Further, he enjoys going to sporting events. The Veteran reported that he often goes to bars alone. The Veteran reported he teleworks as he is not good "person to person". Further, the Veteran reported he is taking medications but forgets to make appointments for therapy. The clinician noted symptoms to include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, impairment of short and long term memory, for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, impaired judgment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.

In the Veteran's April 2024 HLR Informal Conference the Veteran indicated symptoms including memory loss inappropriate behavior and impaired judgment. Further, the Veteran reported being a persistent danger and potentially hurting others because he is always angry during the day. The Veteran reported he was recently fired from a good job because of his inappropriate behavior. Importantly, the Veteran reported he does not remember many people prior to 2009 to include family members such as grandparents, friends, and former soldiers whom he served with. The veteran also reported symptoms of anxiety, sleep impairment, impaired judgment, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful situations including at work.

For the following reasons entitlement to an increased rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted. 

Initially, there is no heightened requirement for a 100 percent rating under the general rating formula for mental disorders; the standard of 38 C.F.R. § 4.7, that the symptoms and impairment more nearly approximate the total occupational and social impairment for this rating, applies.  See Del Valle v. Gober, No. 96-1116, 1997 U.S. Vet. App. LEXIS 960 (Oct. 1, 1997) (mem dec) (Holdaway, J.) (citing Giusti-Bravo v. United States Veterans Administration, 853 F. Supp. 34 (D.P.R. 1993) (discussing VA's San Juan Memorandum 82-3 which incorrectly advised rating board specialists to use heightened requirements for veterans seeking 100 percent disability ratings for psychiatric disorders).  See also Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

The above evidence shows that the Veteran has had symptoms listed in both the 70 and 100 percent criteria, but the overall impairment has not more nearly approximated the total occupational and social impairment required for a 100 percent rating.

While the Veteran has had symptoms to include grossly inappropriate behavior and persistent danger of hurting self or others, anger that he feels will cause him to harm or kill someone, and memory loss for names of grandparents, friends, and soldiers with whom he served, he has been working throughout the appeal period and has engaged in social activities such as getting together with friends a couple of times a month and going to sporting events.  It therefore cannot be said that the impairment caused by the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more nearly approximates total occupational and social impairment.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an increased rating higher than 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.D. Strain, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.