Citation Nr: A25031801
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-462103
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Throughout the entire period on appeal (i.e., from December 3, 2021), entitlement to an initial 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the entire period on appeal (i.e., from December 3, 2021), the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress has been manifested by no more than occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity; occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood has not been demonstrated.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Throughout the entire period on appeal (i.e., from December 3, 2021), the criteria for an initial 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1986 to August 1989.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The decision was issued on August 18, 2023.

In response to the August 2023 rating decision, in August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) where she selected the Direct Review docket.  Under that docket, the Board considers the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the August 2023 rating decision.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress is granted.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Other applicable general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating many accurately reflect the elements of disability; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant; where there is a questions as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability pictures more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10; see also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). 

A claimant may also experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran submitted her original intent to file a claim for compensation on December 3, 2021, followed by a completed claim for service connection for severe posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) due to military sexual trauma on January [REDACTED] 2022.  Service connection for PTSD (also claimed as sexual trauma) was originally denied in an August 2022 rating decision.  Thereafter, the Veteran continuously pursued her claim by submitting her supplemental claim for service connection for PTSD in August 2022.  Service connection for unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress was ultimately granted in a January 2023 rating decision and a 30 percent disability rating was assigned, effective from December 3, 2021 (date VA received the Veteran's intent to file).  Thereafter, the Veteran continuously pursued her claim by submitting her supplemental claim for an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for her service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress in March 2023.  Pursuant to the August 2023 rating decision, which is the subject of this appeal, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) continued the initial 30 percent disability rating for the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress.  

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran has successfully preserved her December 3, 2021 date of claim by continuous pursuit.  In this regard, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a claim can be continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued.  For purposes of determining the effective date of an award, the date of application shall be considered the date of the filing of the initial application for a benefit if the claim is continuously pursued by filing, as relevant here, a supplemental claim within one year in which the AOJ issues a decision and followed by her notice of disagreement within one year in which the AOJ issues a decision.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2)(A)-(C).  

If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(h).  As such, the Veteran's initial December 3, 2021 date of claim for which she originally sought service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is preserved and the issue becomes whether she is entitled to an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for her unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress throughout the entire period on appeal (i.e., from December 3, 2021 to August 18, 2023 (date of issuance of the August 2023 rating decision).

The Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders and is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435. 

When evaluating the level of disability of a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation based solely on the basis of social impairment.  The focus of the rating process is on industrial impairment from the service-connected psychiatric disorder, and social impairment is significant only insofar as it affects earning capacity.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.126, 4.130. 

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  

Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment from unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms in Diagnostic Code 9435.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the DSM-5 [American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed. 2013)]. 

Under Diagnostic Code 9435, a 30 percent disability rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435. 

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A (maximum) 100 percent rating is warranted for: total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self and others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

VA treatment records throughout the entire period on appeal show the Veteran sought monthly treatment for her mental health condition where she consistently reported ongoing feelings of anxiety and depression.

The Veteran underwent initial VA PTSD examination in May 2022 and reported that she was currently divorced and had three adult children.  The Veteran also reported that she currently worked for a non-profit organization.  She stated she currently takes prescription medication for treatment of depression and anxiety symptoms.  She also reported a history of one arrest for assault post-military.

The examiner reported the Veteran with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  As to behavioral observations, the examiner reported that the Veteran was rational and behaviorally stable during the clinical interview.  The examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress, moderate, recurrent.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's major depressive disorder with anxious distress resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a statement accompanying her claim for service connection.  In this regard, she stated that she was currently prescribed Diazepam and Sertraline to help treat her condition and reported that she attends therapy sessions 12 times per year.  She stated that she finds that she was no longer interested in a lot of the things she was interested in before or during the military.  She stated that she avoids people, social gatherings, restaurants, movies and family.  She stated that about three times per week in the last month she had found herself reliving the things she witnessed in the military through nightmares, flashbacks and distressing memories.  She stated that sometimes the memories come up on their own but sometimes things trigger them.  She stated that most of the time, she gets triggered by the sight of crowds, military movies and veteran stories about how badly they are treated, or the sounds of weapons and fireworks.  She stated that even her body reacts when she has distressing memories and she will start to shake, sweat, panic and her feet start itching extremely.  

In addition, she stated that things easily startle her and make her tense, even things that normally would not startle her.  She stated that she feels like she always has to keep an eye on her surroundings, so things do not get out of control.  She stated that she wants to make sure there is no danger, so she always sits facing the door, keeps her head on a swivel, overthinks every situation, and closely watches people and their every move.  She stated she often feels like someone is going to harm her or those around her.  She stated that she sleeps with a gun most nights and wakes up with a feeling of fear.  She stated she usually wakes up at 3:00 a.m.  She stated that her condition has affected all aspects of her life, and she was currently under the care of a psychiatrist.  She stated that she gets angry and irritated easily, even the littlest things will set her off.  She stated she could describe it as a hair-trigger or a short fuse.  She stated that in the past month, she has found herself overreacting and getting upset nearly every day.   

Further, she stated that after the things she went through in the military, she found herself behaving poorly, including alcohol use every night.  She also reported that she has a hard time getting a good night's sleep.  She stated that she typically only sleeps five hours per night and has a hard time staying asleep.  In turn, she stated that this often leads to her feeling tired, irritable and unable to concentrate the next day, which makes it hard to be productive.  She stated that she had been previously married three times and she believed her mental health condition caused a strain on these relationships and played a part in them coming to an end.  She stated that she does not enjoy sex, and her friendships have even been affected by her mental health.  She stated that she has stopped trying to maintain prior relationships with friends due to a lack of interest.  She stated that she was currently employed as a full-time deputy director of a homeless shelter and has been employed for 20 years; however, she has called out or left early four times in the past month because of her mental health condition.  She stated that she often finds it hard to maintain focus when she is at work.

The Veteran underwent VA PTSD examination in October 2022 and reported that she was divorced and denied currently being in a relationship.  She noted that the last relationship ended two years ago due to the onset of the pandemic.  She reported a good relationship with her two sons and a strained relationship with her daughter.  The Veteran noted interacting with one friend and attending church services regularly.  The Veteran reported being currently employed as an executive director of a homeless shelter.  The Veteran reported taking (as prescribed by her VA doctor) Diazepam and Sertraline, "only when having a bad day."  

The Veteran further reported an experience of military sexual trauma associated with her being coaxed into a sexual relationship with an officer.  After becoming pregnant, she stated she left service and the two married.  She noted feeling manipulated into the union.  The examiner reported that the Veteran reported subthreshold symptoms of anxiety and depression that began two years ago.  The examiner stated that the Veteran reported checking her windows prior to going to bed, despite them being nailed shut and reported hearing phantom knocking at night when alone.  The examiner stated that additional reported symptoms included panic (last time occurred four months ago) and emotional detachment.

Post-military, the Veteran reported consuming two drinks one to two times per week but denied any impairment or drug usage.  The examiner reported the Veteran with symptoms of hypervigilance, depressed mood, and anxiety.  As to behavioral observations, the examiner reported the Veteran's manner of dress was appropriate for her stated age and the conditions of her clothing was good.  Her hygiene appeared to be good.  She was above-average weight and appeared to be her stated age.  The examiner reported she was oriented to person, place, and time.  The Veteran denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  The examiner diagnosed unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement accompanying her supplemental claim for an increased initial disability rating.  In this regard, the Veteran stated that she was currently prescribed Diazepam/Sequel, and she had a bad reaction/on suspension to help treat her condition and attends therapy sessions 12 times per year.  She stated she was currently employed as a part-time Pastor at a homeless veteran shelter and had been employed for more than five years.  She stated she has called out or left early 10 or more times in the past month because of her mental health condition.  She stated she often finds it hard to maintain focus when she is at work, which has led to a decline in her work performance and her ability to complete work efficiently.

In addition, she stated that she had been previously married four times and had one long-term romantic relationship.  She stated she believed her mental health condition caused a strain on these relationships and played a part in them coming to an end.  She stated she has three adult children and reported a good relationship with some of her children.  She stated she believed her mental health symptoms have caused a strain on her relationships with her children and stated that they all do not feel close anymore.  She stated she has experienced sudden bouts of shortness of breath, a tight chest, and an overwhelming sense of anxiety seven times in the last month.  During these times, she stated she often feels scared and confused, and needs to find a safe place until it passes.  She stated she often has a hard time remembering things like names and has to write things down to function through the day, so she does not forget them, like errands.  She stated she often finds herself withdrawn from others and reported she never makes plans to interact with other and just sticks to her daily routine.

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical evaluation completed by Dr. C.M.B., who referenced the January 2023 rating decision which granted service connection for unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress and the Veteran's March 2023 statement.  Dr. C.M.B. stated that based upon the Veteran's credible lay statement, her current symptomology includes depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events), impairment of short and long term memory (for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks), disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting), inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, decreased participation in physical/social activities, social withdrawal, memory and cognitive impairment, and relationship problems.  Dr. C.M.B. stated that the Veteran's current diagnosed mental health disability most closely approximates the criteria for a 70 percent disability evaluation based upon the Veteran's reported symptomology and the level of her documented occupational and social impairment, with functional losses in various domains.  Dr. C.M.B. concluded that the Veteran's credible lay statement clearly documents a more severe level of occupational and social impairment as well as accompanying symptomology consistent with a 70 percent disability rating, which is the rating that most accurately reflects her current disability severity and the associated functional impairment. 

The Veteran underwent VA mental disorders examination in March 2023, and at that time, she reported living by herself.  She stated that her mother recently passed away and her older brother took it hard, so she had to take care of everything.  She reported having a strained relationship with her daughter and a good relationship with her two sons.  She reported being very active in her church and was a licensed ordained minister.  The Veteran reported being employed as the executive director of a veteran homeless shelter and stated she was very enthused with it and very much committed to her faith and belief, which led her to helping people.  She stated she received counseling at the VA once per month and is prescribed 10 milligrams of Diazepam three times per day.

The Veteran also reported that post-military, she was seeing a guy and had asked him to leave, and he would not leave.  She stated her son had to get involved and the guy took her son's hand and shoved him, so she pulled her firearm.  She stated that charges were dropped because he was asked to leave and would not leave based on "Stand Your Ground" law.  The Veteran reported a non-problematic pattern of alcohol use, and no substance use was reported.

The examiner reported symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.  As to behavioral observations, the examiner reported the Veteran to be casually dressed, with good hygiene and cooperative.  The examiner reported good eye contact and unremarkable motor activity.  The Veteran's mood was reported as her stating "I am not excited . . . just . . . like floating."  The Veteran's affect was low.  The examiner reported the Veteran was oriented to person, place, time and event and memory/recall was 3/3.  Her long-term memory and attention/concentration were intact.  She denied any current suicidal/homicidal ideations and plans.  The examiner reported no evidence of paranoias, delusions, phobias, obsessions/compulsions, and/or hallucinations.  The examiner reported the Veteran's flow of thought was intact, her speech was unremarkable, and her insight/judgment was intact.

The examiner diagnosed unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that a 50 percent disability rating has been more nearly approximated throughout the entire period on appeal, i.e., from December 3, 2021.  In this regard, throughout the entire period on appeal, there is ample evidence showing the Veteran with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

For instance, the medical and lay evidence of record shows that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress symptomology has resulted in isolation, recurrent nightmares, hypervigilance, depressed mood, anxiety, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, sleep impairment, problems with memory, an inability to focus/concentrate, panic attacks more than once per week, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Further, despite the October 2022 and March 2023 VA examiners reporting that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress only resulted in resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication, the May 2022 examiner reported that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress symptomology occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.    Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to symptoms of a frequency, severity, and duration more closely approximating the criteria for a 50 percent rating throughout the entire period on appeal.

However, the Board finds a rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal.  In this regard, the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress has not resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as, work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood.  Despite having some strained family relationships and failed intimate relationships, she has continuously reported good relationships with her two sons and interacting with one friend as reported on the October 2022 VA examination.  Further, although the Veteran may have had some trouble at work and has had to call out or leave early as much as 10 or more times in a month, the fact still remains that she is still employed and has been employed for over 20 years as an executive director of a veteran homeless shelter, a job which she reported she was very enthused with.  

Moreover, the Veteran has continuously denied suicidal/homicidal ideation and there is no evidence of obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities or impaired impulse control.  Also, the medical evidence of record includes behavioral observations that do not indicate any problems with speech or anything other than normal orientation, good hygiene and appropriate appearance.  While the Veteran has reported panic attacks more than once per week, there is no indication that she has near-continuous panic attacks and while her depression may be near-continuous, she is still able to function independently as suggested by the fact that she lives alone, has remained employed for over 20 years, attends church services regularly, and all VA examiners of record have concluded she was able to manage her own finances.

The Board acknowledges the March 2023 private medical evaluation where Dr. C.M.B. concluded that the Veteran's mental health condition more nearly approximated the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating; however, the Board disagrees.  In this regard, Dr. C.M.B. listed several of the Veteran's symptoms which he derived from her March 2023 lay statement that he believed met the criteria for the 70 percent disability rating; however, most of the symptoms reported by Dr. C.M.B. actually fall under the criteria for 30 percent and 50 percent disability ratings and not under the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.  Of the symptoms listed by Dr. C.M.B. only two of the reported symptoms fall under the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating, to include difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting) and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The Board also acknowledges that the May 2022 VA examiner reported the Veteran with an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  However, as discussed above, the majority of the Veteran's symptomology falls within the criteria for 30 percent and 50 percent disability ratings and thus, the Board finds that throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's total disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating, not a rating in excess of 50 percent.  

Accordingly, as the evidence fails to show the Veteran with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as, work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress does not meet the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.

In sum, the Board finds that throughout the entire period on appeal, a 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress.

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medina, Sara

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.