Citation Nr: A25031858
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 250103-503002
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected cold injury residuals of the right ear is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected cold injury residuals of the left ear is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1954 to December 1956. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (hereinafter Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ)) in the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the January 2025 VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected cold injury residuals of the right and left ear, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As discussed further below, to benefit the Veteran, the Board has changed the diagnostic code for the Veteran's service-connected ears from Diagnostic Code 7800 (Scars/Disfigurement of the head, face, or neck) to Diagnostic Code 7122 (Cold Injury Residuals).

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.902 (c).

1. Entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected cold injury residuals of the right ear

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected cold injury residuals of the left ear 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his service-connected ears, which are externally calcified after suffering severe frostbite in service and which cause him to experience pain in the course of daily activities. See Veteran's February 2025 statement.   

Unfortunately, the Board finds that before the issues in this case can be adjudicated a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not obtain a VA examination that adequately assessed the Veteran's cold injury residuals.

Despite the Veteran stating in his December 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, that his disability was an acquired anomaly of the external part of his ears resulting from the severe frostbite he suffered in December 1955 while standing guard duty in sub-freezing temperatures, VA obtained a Scars/Disfigurement examination rather than a Cold Injury Residuals examination. The February 2024 VA examiner found during the Scars/Disfigurement examination that the Veteran had no visible scars and noted that the Veteran's painful bilateral calcified pinnae was a disfigurement involving an area of approximately 9 square centimeters. Based on that February 2024 VA Scars/Disfigurement examination, the Veteran's ears were then assigned a non-compensable rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7800, for scars/disfigurement of the head, face, or neck. Based on Note (1) of DC 7800, disfigurement does not apply to the Veteran's ear symptomatology since "disfigurement" is associated with having a scar with various characteristics, hypo- or hyperpigmented skin, abnormal skin texture, missing soft tissue, or skin in an area exceeding 39 square centimeters that is indurated and inflexible.      

Disability evaluations (ratings) are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. § Part 4. The assignment of a particular diagnostic code is "completely dependent on the facts of a particular case." Butts v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 532, 538 (1993). One diagnostic code may be more appropriate than another based on such factors as an individual's relevant medical history, diagnosis, and demonstrated symptomatology. Any change in Diagnostic Code must be specifically explained. See Pernorio v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 625, 629 (1992). 

As applicable to this case, there is a particular diagnostic code for rating cold injury residuals, DC 7122. Under DC 7122, a 10 percent rating is warranted for arthralgia or other pain, numbness, or cold sensitivity in affected parts. 

A 20 percent rating is warranted for affected parts with arthralgia or other pain, numbness, or cold sensitivity plus one of the following: Tissue loss, nail abnormalities, color changes, locally impaired sensation, hyperhidrosis, anhydrosis, X-ray abnormalities (osteoporosis, subarticular punched-out lesions, or osteoarthritis), atrophy or fibrosis of the affected musculature, flexion or extension deformity of distal joints, volar fat pad loss in fingers or toes, avascular necrosis of bone, chronic ulceration, carpal or tarsal tunnel syndrome. 

A 30 percent rating is warranted for affected parts with arthralgia or other pain, numbness, or cold sensitivity plus two or more of the following: Tissue loss, nail abnormalities, color changes, locally impaired sensation, hyperhidrosis, anhydrosis, X-ray abnormalities (osteoporosis, subarticular punched-out lesions, or osteoarthritis), atrophy or fibrosis of the affected musculature, flexion or extension deformity of distal joints, volar fat pad loss in fingers or toes, avascular necrosis of bone, chronic ulceration, carpal or tarsal tunnel syndrome.

The Notes to DC 7122 instruct the rater to: (1) Separately evaluate amputations of fingers or toes, and complications such as squamous cell carcinoma at the site of a cold injury scar or peripheral neuropathy, under other diagnostic codes. Separately evaluate other disabilities diagnosed as the residual effects of cold injury, such as Raynaud's syndrome (which is otherwise known as secondary Raynaud's phenomenon), muscle atrophy, etc., unless they are used to support an evaluation under diagnostic code 7122; and (2) Evaluate each affected part (e.g., hand, foot, ear, nose) separately and combine the ratings in accordance with §§ 4.25 and 4.26.

The Board finds that rating the Veteran's ear symptomatology under DC 7122 will benefit the Veteran because it could result in a higher, compensable rating. Because the Veteran was not afforded a Cold Injury Residuals VA examination, however, the Board is unable to properly evaluate the Veteran's ears under DC 7122's rating criteria. Therefore, a remand is required for VA to obtain a Cold Injury Residuals examination for the Veteran's service-connected ears so that his cold injury residuals of the right and left ear can be properly rated under DC 7122. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination (such as a Cold Injury Residuals examination, as well as a peripheral neuropathy examination, if indicated) to determine the current severity of his service-connected cold injury residuals of the right and left ears. The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review, and all indicated testing should be performed. If possible, arrange to conduct the examination(s) via video telehealth if that would best accommodate this 90-year-old Korean War Veteran.  

2. The examination(s) should specifically address the criteria needed to evaluate the Veteran's cold injury residuals under Diagnostic Code 7122.

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eisenstatt, Rachel A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.