Citation Nr: A25031779
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240509-439077
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 2000 to January 2002.

The case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), requesting Direct Review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Under this appeal lane, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the May 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for a TBI.

The Veteran was afforded a May 2024 VA examination. 

During the examination, the Veteran described headaches occurring a couple times per week, lasting until he takes over-the-counter medication. He noted not being treated for headaches and not knowing his diagnoses.  Despite this evidence, under "subjective symptoms" the examiner checked the box denoting "no subjective symptoms" rather than a choice describing mild or occasional headaches. The Veteran also described experiencing ongoing symptoms demonstrating anxiety, which were not discussed by the examiner.  

Thus, although the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, the medical opinion provided is inadequate. The May 2024 medical opinion relied on a lack of medical evidence in order to conclude that there was no nexus between the Veteran's condition and service. See Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (a medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the record is inadequate, and a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not consider the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination). Moreover, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's lay statements describing ongoing symptoms since service.

The Board finds the AOJ's reliance on this inadequate opinion constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); see also Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate VA examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his asserted TBI. The entire claims file should be reviewed.

After an in-person examination and a review of the entire record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's TBI and/or headaches are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. If the TBI and/or headaches are determined to be unrelated to the Veteran's service, the examiner should identify the other, more likely cause of the disability.

In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record, to include the Veteran's lay statements regarding continuity of symptomatology.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion expressed. (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested).

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Becton, Sidonie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.