Citation Nr: A25031850
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231206-398680
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased initial disability rating for atopic dermatitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army from October 1969 to May 1972 and in the United States Navy from January 1980 to December 1981.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The Veteran initially elected the Hearing docket when he submitted the December 2023 VA Form 10182.  However, he timely requested to switch the appeal docket from Hearing to the Direct Review docket on August 26, 2024.  The docket switch request was granted by the Board in December 2024.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an increased disability rating for atopic dermatitis, entitlement to service connection for COPD, and entitlement to service connection for right knee strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an increased initial disability rating for atopic dermatitis is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that due to his military service he has consistently experienced symptoms of a skin condition which affects his entire body, and that his skin condition is more severe than reflected by his currently assigned disability rating.

The Veteran is service connected for atopic dermatitis and has been assigned a noncompensable disability rating effective December 2, 2013. 

The Veteran was most recently afforded VA examinations for his skin condition in June 2023.  In a June 2023 skin diseases VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB).  The Veteran was noted to have been treated in the past 12 months for itching and redness due to PFB.  Regarding approximate total body area and approximate total exposed body area affected by visible characteristic lesions due to the diagnosed skin conditions, the VA examiner provided no answer for the Veteran's service-connected atopic dermatitis.  For psoriasis, the VA examiner indicated that less than five percent of total body area and less than five percent of exposed body area was affected. For PFB, the VA examiner indicated that none of the total body area and less than five percent of exposed body area was affected.  

As the June 2023 VA examiner did not provide an estimate of the percentage of body area affected by the Veteran's service-connected atopic dermatitis, a remand is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

Further, VA has a duty to maximize benefits. See generally Morgan v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 162, 164 (2019) (providing VA's duty to maximize benefits includes consideration of schedular rating concepts, including secondary service connection); Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 198-203 (2021) (38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) requires VA to recognize, develop, and adjudicate secondary service connection when reasonably raised in increased rating claims). In this case, the Board notes that the Veteran was diagnosed with PFB in a July 1981 service treatment record.  The Veteran was noted to have a history of bumps in his beard area after shaving and was given an indefinite no shaving chit.  In a February 1983 post-service private treatment note, the Veteran's history of beard infections was noted and he was treated for folliculitis due to acne-like facial bumps.  The Veteran was diagnosed with PFB at the June 2023 VA examination, which noted treatment for the condition in the past year.  As such, a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)  is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his currently diagnosed COPD is related to his military service due to exposure to mustard gas.

Favorable findings from the November 2023 rating decision include that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, that the Veteran has been diagnosed with COPD, and that the Veteran was exposed to solvents and glues during military service.

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted.  Section 303 of this law provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall provide the veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  

38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

In a September 2023 VA memorandum, VA found that the Veteran participated in a TERA, as the record contained evidence of non-deployment related exposure which is consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service.  Specifically, the Veteran had potential exposures to chemicals, solvents, and glues due to his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of medical dental specialist.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023.  In the TERA opinion, the VA examiner opined that while it was possible that the Veteran had live mustard agent applied onto one of his forearms during basic combat training, the objective evidence of record does not establish that the Veteran had full body exposure to mustard gas during active service.  The VA examiner noted a lack of medical literature and scientific evidence indicating a relationship of development of COPD due to exposure of mustard gas on the skin.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's COPD was "less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity (ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran."

The November 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate, as it does not address the TERA of exposures to chemicals, solvents, and glues found in the September 2023 VA memorandum.  A remand is necessary for correction of this duty to assist error. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his currently diagnosed right knee sprain is caused or aggravated by his service-connected left knee disability.  

At a prior August 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he injured his right knee while playing basketball during his active duty service in the Army.  The Veteran's representative asserted that the Veteran injured his knees playing basketball and football during military service.  A May 1983 post-service medical record indicates that the Veteran injured his right knee while playing basketball and was diagnosed with a right knee sprain.

At the November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported injuring both knees playing football in service.  He reported that he tore his left knee ligament, that he overcompensated on the right side, and that he has been struggling with right knee pain since.  The Veteran was diagnosed with right knee strain.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee condition is related to his military service.  However, the rationale provided is inconsistent with the opinion that the right knee condition is related to military service, as the VA examiner stated that the Veteran has no history of previous issues with the right knee.  Further, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran reported injuring the right knee while working on the gangplank during military service.  However, at the August 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he tore his left knee ligament while going up a gangplank.  Regarding secondary service connection, the VA examiner opined that while right knee strain was noted on a December 2018 VA examination report, "[t]here is no other medical record to establish the chronicity of the right knee condition.  There is lack of medical literature that indicate the development of right knee pain due to left knee condition."  The VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee condition is proximately due to or the result of his service-connected left knee condition.  The Board finds this opinion to be inadequate as no real rationale was provided.  Moreover, no opinion regarding aggravation was obtained.  These are both pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right knee condition.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB).  The examiner must provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) PFB had its onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered.  A detailed rationale must be provided for any opinion rendered.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current level of severity of any service-connected skin condition.  The record must be made available to the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies must be accomplished and the examiner must provide all information required for rating purposes.

The examiner should provide estimated measurements regarding the total area affected by the Veteran's service-connected skin condition.  If an estimation cannot be provided, the examiner must provide an explanation as to why.

3. Obtain a medical opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's COPD. 

The examiner must address the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's COPD is related to his service, including TERA (exposure to chemicals, solvents, and glues due to his MOS of medical dental specialist, and mustard gas).

In answering this question, the examiner must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A detailed rationale must be provided for any opinion rendered.

4. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right knee condition.  A copy of the entire claims file should be provided to the examiner and a note that such was reviewed should be included in his or her report.  The examiner should answer the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current right knee sprain had its onset in service?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right knee condition was caused OR aggravated by his service-connected left knee meniscal tear?

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered.  A detailed rationale must be provided for any opinion rendered.

					(continued on next page)

 

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bynum, Tamara L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.