Citation Nr: A25031489
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473110
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities and resulting obesity, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not due to or aggravated by current service-connected disabilities and resulting obesity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to a current service-connected disability and resulting obesity are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from September 1983 to July 1987, October 2001 to May 2002, and from January 2003 to December 2004.  

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities and resulting obesity

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is shown to be proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Id; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc) (additional disability resulting from aggravation of a nonservice-connected disorder by a service-connected disorder is also compensable under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310).

Additionally, VA's Office of General Counsel has held that a claim for secondary service connection may rest on obesity as an intermediary between the claimed secondary disability and the service-connected primary disability.  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.

In evaluating the evidence in an appeal, it is the responsibility of the Board to weigh the evidence and decide where to give credit and where to withhold same and, in doing so, accept certain medical opinions over others.  Schoolman v. West, 12 Vet. App. 307 (1999).  In this regard, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess the credibility and weight given to the evidence.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (2007).  Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that his sleep apnea is due to his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities and resulting obesity.  

As an initial matter, in the January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  Additionally, the AOJ found that the Veteran's claimed primary disabilities, right knee (flexion) arthritis, right wrist osteoarthritis, and triangular fibrocartilaginous complex (TFCC) injury, are service connected.  The Board will accept these findings as favorable to the Veteran in the absence of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.

As the favorable findings, recounted above, satisfy the first two elements necessary to establish secondary service connection, the crux of the Veteran's appealed issue is whether his service-connected disabilities, and any resulting obesity, caused or aggravated his sleep apnea. 

Concerning evidence of a medical nexus, the AOJ obtained an examination in June 2023, and a medical opinion in October 2023.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected disabilities.  The examiner noted that the chronology of events supports the provided rationale.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had been diagnosed with right knee osteoarthritis and right wrist osteoarthritis in 2017, with documented weight issues preceding the musculoskeletal disability diagnoses.  The Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for his right knee and right wrist osteoarthritis effective in 2017, however, his medical records indicate that these disabilities began many years before the initial date of service connection.  Specifically, the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability is associated with a 2004 injury, and his service-connected right wrist disability is due to a 1997 injury.  The examiner did not address the onset of the Veteran's weight gain occurring around the time of both injuries, nor did the examiner discuss whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities could have aggravated his weight and obstructive sleep apnea.  As the examiner only considered the impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on weight gain and obesity from the date of service connection, the Board finds this opinion to be of little probative evidence.  

The Veteran provided the medical opinion of a private examiner in June 2023.  The private provider concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity is due to his service-connected disabilities, and that the Veteran's obesity led to, caused, and/or aggravated, his current obstructive sleep apnea.  In providing this opinion the private provider noted that all available pertinent medical records were reviewed, including lay statements.  The provider also went on to address that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are known to lead to, and cause, pain, painful motion, sleep disturbance, diminished motivation, and "comfort" overeating, which can lead to diminished activity with less calorie expenditure, which leads to weight gain and obesity.  Further, it was noted that obesity is known to predispose and direct cause obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner then described how the pathophysiologic pathways of obstructive sleep are associated with obesity. 

The Board therefore concludes, based on the detailed rationale provided by the June 2023 private provider, that the evidence of record supports that the Veteran's obesity was cause and/or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, and that his obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the Veteran's substantial weight gain.  As such, the Board finds that the nexus requirement between service-connected disability and resulting obesity, and the Veteran's sleep apnea has been demonstrated, and that entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's sleep apnea is therefore warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. W. Morgan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.