Citation Nr: A25031651
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-436500
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance/housebound is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 1974 to October 1978.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to SMC, most recently addressed in a March 2024 rating decision. In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound is remanded.

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a privately-completed VA Form 21-2680 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance. The examiner indicated that the Veteran needs assistance with bathing/showering, dressing, medication management and additional activities. The examiner indicated several diagnoses that were disabling to the Veteran, but only one, degenerative disc disease, is service-connected. The Board notes that no medical determination was made regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities required him to need aid and attendance.

This represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error. On remand, the Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine if his service-connected disabilities combine such to require him the need of aid and attendance.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from a clinician with appropriate expertise regarding whether the Veteran's service connected disabilities cause the Veteran to require aid and attendance. The claims file should be sent to and reviewed by the reviewing clinician.

The clinician should provide a response to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected disorders, in and of themselves only, are so severe as to require a need for regular aid and attendance of another? In providing a response, the examiner should consider the extent to which service-connected disabilities render the Veteran unable to perform the following activities: dress, undress, keep ordinarily clean and presentable, bathe, feed oneself, attend to the wants and needs of nature, and protect himself against the hazards and dangers incident in his daily environment.

A detailed rationale must be provided.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.Z., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.