Citation Nr: A25031672
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-458504
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service in the United States Army from March 1968 to October 1969. He was awarded the Vietnam Service Medal and Vietnam Campaign Medal, among other decorations, for this service. The Appellant is the Veteran's caregiver and co-applicant for PCAFC benefits.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a determination issued in April 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On November 26, 2024, the Veteran provided testimony before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge and a transcript of the hearing has been associated with the record.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ determination on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Appellant, Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As explained below, within this Remand, the Board is making a favorable finding for one step in the PCAFC eligibility process. Specifically, the Board concludes there is sufficient evidence to find that the Veteran is in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months because of an inability to perform one or more activities of daily living (ADLs) pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(2)(C)(i).

The Board then remands the claim and instructs the AOJ to continue the PCAFC evaluation process, including appropriate consideration of whether participation in the program is in the Veteran's best interest according to 38 C.F.R. § 71.20.

Entitlement to PCAFC eligibility is remanded.

The Appellant contends that PCAFC benefits are warranted for the care provided to the Veteran.  After review of the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran is in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months because of an inability to perform one or more ADLs and then remands the claim for further development by the AOJ.

As an initial matter, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran meets both the service and level of disability requirements for participation in the PCAFC set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(2).  Specifically, a January 2024 review by the VHA Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) indicated "yes" under both the service and disability requirements.  Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ are binding on the Board unless there is clear and convincing evidence to the contrary. 38 C.F.R. §3.104(c). As the Board finds the evidence fully supports the favorable finding, the Board will proceed to the next steps for eligibility.

Eligibility under the PCAFC program requires a finding that an eligible veteran is in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months from an eligible caregiver because of (1) an inability to perform one or more ADLs; (2) a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or (3), a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired. 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 71.20(a).

"In need of personal care services" means that the eligible veteran has moderate to severe needs and requires in-person personal care services from another person, and without such personal care services, alternative in-person caregiving arrangements (including respite care or assistance of an alternative caregiver) would be required to support the eligible veteran's safety. 38 C.F.R. § 71.15.

The term "an inability to perform an ADL" means the individual requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following:

(1) Dressing or undressing oneself;

(2) Bathing;

(3) Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable;

(4) Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);

(5) Toileting or attending to toileting;

(6) Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or

(7) Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.). Id.

Regarding the "need for supervision, protection, or instruction" element of PCAFC eligibility, the Board will follow the definition of "need for supervision, protection, or instruction" as cited to in 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(2)(C) and as explained in Veteran Warriors, Inc. v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 29 F.4th 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2022).

Here, a January 2024 VHA decision determined that the Appellant was ineligible for benefits under the PCAFC.  Specifically, the CEAT found that the Veteran was not in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months based on an inability to perform an ADL and/or a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.

As a general matter, a decision by VA affecting the furnishing of assistance or support under the Caregiver Program shall be considered a medical determination. 38 U.S.C. § 1720G. The issue turns on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the basic medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC.

However, decisions as to eligibility under a Caregiver Program have been held to be subject to Board review. See Beaudette v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 95, 105 (2021). To this end, it is within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review the adequacy of all medical opinions upon which eligibility decisions are made. See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992). This includes the CEAT's medical determination upon which the instant eligibility decision was based.

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion." See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).  In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions. A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Here, the January 2024 CEAT determination is inadequate because it lacks sufficient rationale for its findings. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). The CEAT concluded that the level of care required by the Veteran did not meet the clinical threshold required for enrollment in the PCAFC. The Board notes that the CEAT opinion incorporates a letter that provides some rationale for why the CEAT found the Veteran did not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an ADL and/or a need for supervision or protection. However, the Board further notes the CEAT itself provided no reasoning, rationale, or justification for this decision. Nevertheless, the Board has reviewed the CEAT decision with the incorporated letter and finds that while it generally references the Veteran's Functional Assessment Instrument and other evidence, it does not meaningfully consider the favorable evidence of record.

Turning to the evidence, in a May 2025 Caregiver Assessment and at the November 2024 Board hearing, the Appellant-Caregiver indicated that she had continuously provided care for the Veteran since 2012. The Board finds no evidence to the contrary and, as such, finds that the six continuous month requirement for PCAFC benefits has been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1720G.

Next, a December 2023 PCAFC Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument addressed the Veteran's required level of care in the performance of ADLs. Specifically, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran required hands-on assistance from the Appellant for self-feeding each time it was performed due to bilateral upper extremity weakness. Similarly, the Functional Assessment found that the Veteran required assistance with grooming each time oral hygiene is performed. "They report that the Caregiver uses an electric toothbrush to brush the Veteran's teeth each time."  See December 2023 Functional Assessment. Next, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran required assistance with upper and lower body washing each time it was performed.  Finally, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran required assistance with mobility and specifically added that he required hands-on assistance each time he transfers into and out of the bed, as well as transfers for toileting.  In summary, the December 2023 Functional Assessment indicated that the Veteran required personal care services each time he completed: (1) dressing and undressing; (2) bathing; (3) grooming in order to keep himself clean and presentable; (4) toileting; (5) feeding himself; and (6) mobility.

In November 2024, the Veteran and Appellant-Caregiver provided testimony in support of the claim.  The Appellant again reported that she assists the Veteran with toileting "[i]n every aspect..." See November 2024 Board Hearing at 5. Similarly, the Veteran's Caregiver stated that when the Veteran brushes his teeth, she applies the toothpaste and pushes the toothbrush for him because he lacks the strength to perform this ADL. id. at 9. In a summary of the testimony, it was determined that the Veteran required personal assistance each time he completed dressing and undressing, bathing, grooming, toileting, feeding himself, and mobility activities. Id. at 18.

Finally, the record contains a November 2024 submission that further supports the findings of both the December 2023 Functional Assessment and November 2024 Board testimony.  See November 2024 Submission.  Specifically, the document reinforces that the Veteran requires assistance each time that he performs eating, grooming, bathing, dressing and undressing, toileting, and mobility activities.

The Board observes that the Veteran and the Appellant-Caregiver are competent to report his ability or inability to perform ADLs and the level of assistance provided by the Caregiver, unless the record contains evidence undermining the credibility of the Veteran's statements. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Further, under certain circumstances, lay evidence may be sufficient to establish a medical diagnosis or nexus. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). When considering evidence and determining its probative value, VA considers both the competency and the credibility of the witness. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469 (providing that "competency" is a "legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier or fact" and that "credibility" is a "factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted").  Here, the Board finds that the lay testimony regarding the Veteran's inability to perform ADLs is supported by the medical evidence of record and is therefore competent, credible, and persuasive.

After review of the record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran requires personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months because of an inability to perform more than one ADL. 38 U.S.C. § 1720G(a)(2)(C)(i). Both the lay and medical evidence support this finding as evidenced by the Veteran's inability to perform dressing and undressing, bathing, grooming, toileting, feeding himself, and mobility tasks, without assistance from his caregiver each time they are performed.

Accordingly, the weight of the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran requires personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months because of an inability to perform one or more ADLs. The Board notes that this is a favorable finding which is binding on all subsequent AOJ determinations, unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.104(c).

Unfortunately, the determination that the Veteran is in need is only one of several steps in deciding whether there is eligibility for PCAFC benefits. As a result of the favorable finding herein, CEAT now must make the clinical determination as to whether participation in the PCAFC is in the Veteran's best interest pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 71.15, 71.20.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 71.15, a best interest determination requires consideration, by a clinician, of (1) whether the program significantly enhances the Veteran's ability to live safely in the home; (2) supports the Veteran's potential progress in rehabilitation; (3) increases the Veteran's potential independence; and (4) creates an environment that supports the health and well-being of the Veteran.

In this case, the January 2024 CEAT did not fully evaluate whether participation in PCAFC was in the Veteran's best interest.  Specifically, the CEAT indicated "Not fully evaluated" under the question of best interest and the evaluation is, therefore, inadequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The failure to obtain an adequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Notably, providing both a determination and explanation for best interest is a required clinical determination that must be made in the first instance by the AOJ before a final determination on PCAFC eligibility may be issued.  While being respectful of the legal requirement for a clinical determination, the Board wants to clearly state herein that it believes the Veteran's participation in the PCAFC would be in his best interest.  Nevertheless, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an adequate clinical determination as to whether participation in the PCAFC is in the Veteran's best interest. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from the CEAT as to whether it is in the Veteran's best interest to participate in the PCAFC.

The CEAT should note that the Board has already determined that the Veteran is in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months because of an inability to perform one or more ADLs and believes participation in the PCAFC would be in the Veteran's best interest.

Any opinion offered must address:

1)	 The November 2024 Board testimony.  The CEAT's attention is directed to page 16 of the hearing transcript where the Appellant-Caregiver indicated the goal of her providing care is to keep the Veteran in his home and out of a care facility.

2)	The November 2024 Submission documenting the Veteran's required level of care.

The AOJ is advised that once a claim is returned by Board appeal, the evidentiary record reopens, and "any evidence previously submitted to the [AOJ] or associated with the claims file while the record was closed will become part of the evidentiary record to be considered upon readjudication." 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). In making a decision, VA must "consider all lay and medical evidence of record." 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2).

In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning any conclusion must be articulated. That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Teague, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.