Citation Nr: A25031178
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240607-447311
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The?Veteran?served on active duty in the United States Air Force from October 2000 to July 2002.  

The case is on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

By way of background, VA issued a rating decision denying the Veteran's claim on November 7, 2023.  That same month, the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim Application (VA Form 20-0995).  The AOJ again denied the Veteran's claim on January 8, 2024. In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (HLR) (VA Form 20-0996) and requested a review of the decision. In May 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2024 rating decision.

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and elected the Direct Review docket. Based on the Veteran's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran submitted a duplicate VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal in August 2024 which contained additional evidence.  However, this evidence was not new, as it had been considered in the decision on appeal.  As the evidence was not new, there was no ambiguity created by submitting the evidence with a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal that requested the direct review docket.  

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

The Veteran provided an examination and letter from a private psychologist, J.T.W.  The Board does not find the examination and letter from J.T.W. to be probative.  The examiner noted he interviewed the Veteran and reviewed a newspaper article of the stressor incident. However, in describing the stressor incident, the examiner stated the incident occurred in 2002.  Evidence provided by the Veteran showed the stressor incident occurred in November 2001.  As the examiner made basic factual errors, the Board is unable to provide the examination and opinion any probative value.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023.  At that time the VA examiner noted the Veteran's claims that she was prescribed antidepressants by her primary care practitioner while enlisted.  However, the examiner failed to consider that the Veteran was diagnosed with an adjustment disorder with depression and anxiety while on active duty.  As such, the December 2023 VA examination is not adequate.  

As the only examinations of record are either inadequate or unreliable, remand is necessary to afford the Veteran with an examination.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed psychiatric disability.  The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is the claimed psychiatric disability at least as likely as not related to service, including witnessing a traumatic accident?  

Provide a rationale to support the opinion.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

In addressing the above, the examiner is asked to discuss the Veteran's in service diagnosis of adjustment disorder with depression and anxiety and explain if any currently diagnosed psychiatric disability is related to the in-service diagnosis. 

 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Uller, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.