Citation Nr: A25031802
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240318-430690
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to nonservice-connected burial benefits in the form of a burial allowance is granted.

Entitlement to nonservice-connected burial benefits in the form of a plot/interment allowance is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran died in January 2024.  At the time of his death, he was in receipt of VA compensation benefits, and he was also in receipt of special monthly compensation pension benefits.  

2.  The Veteran's death was not caused by or otherwise etiologically related to a disorder incurred in service, and his death is not otherwise etiologically related to service.

3.  At the time of his death, the Veteran was not admitted to a VA or state veterans' hospital, nursing home, or domiciliary care facility.

4.  The Veteran passed away at his residence and his remains were cremated.  There is no information in the file indicating that the cremains have been interred in a private cemetery.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for nonservice-connected burial benefits in the form of a burial allowance have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2302, 2303; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1700-3.1713.

2. The criteria for a nonservice-connected burial benefits in the form of a plot/interment allowance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2302, 2303; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1700-3.1713.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1968 to April 1970.  He died in January 2024.  The appellant is Veteran's spouse and is the party who bore the costs of the Veteran's funeral and last expenses.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 letter decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) [agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)].

This claim has been processed pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Here, the appellant selected the direct review docket, meaning that the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a), 302(a).  If additional evidence was submitted after the rating decision on appeal, the Board may not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The appellant has come before the VA asking that she be awarded burial benefits following the death of her husband, the Veteran.  More specifically, the appellant has asked that she be compensated for the monies she paid for the costs incurred following the Veteran's death and more specifically, the preparation of his remains to include cremation.  At the time of his death, he was in receipt of VA compensation benefits but there was no additional application for any type of benefits in-processing.  As indicated, the appellant bore the expenses of the Veteran's funeral and burial.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000.  

Following the Veteran's death and the preparation of his remains, the appellant submitted an application for burial benefits along with a copy of the expenses she paid for the funeral of the Veteran.  VA provides the following types of burial benefits, which are discussed in 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1700 through 3.1712: (1) burial allowance based on service-connected death; (2) burial allowance based on non-service-connected death; (3) burial allowance for a veteran who died while hospitalized by VA; (4) burial plot or interment allowance; and (5) reimbursement for transportation of remains.  At the time of the Veteran's death, service connection was in effect for a generalized anxiety disorder, the residuals of a left shoulder repair, and a surgical scar on the left shoulder.  Additionally, the Veteran was receiving a special monthly pension based on the need for aid and attendance.  Nevertheless, evidence was not submitted that showed that the Veteran's death was due to or the result of his shoulder disabilities or his psychiatric disorder.  Moreover, the application for benefits did not show that the Veteran's cremains were interred at a national cemetery or at a state veterans cemetery.  As such, 38 C.F.R. § 3.1704 (burial allowance based on service-connected death) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.1709 (reimbursement for transportation of remains) are not for application. 

The claim is therefore considered pursuant to the regulations regarding nonservice-connected burial benefits as set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.1705.  A burial allowance is payable for a veteran who, on the date of death:  (1) was receiving VA pension or disability compensation; (2) would have been receiving disability compensation but for the receipt of military retired pay; or (3) had a pending claim for benefits, a claim to reopen a previously denied claim, or a claim involving substitution, any of which if processed to completion would result in a grant of benefits.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1705(b).  In addition, the governing regulations provide that a burial allowance may be paid if a veteran died from nonservice-connected causes while properly admitted to a VA facility for hospital, nursing home, or domiciliary care; or while admitted or traveling to a non-VA facility with prior authorization and at VA expense for the purpose of examination, treatment, or care.  See 38 U.S.C. § 2303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1706(b), (d).

At the time of death, the Veteran was in receipt of VA compensation benefits along with pension benefits.  The appellant has presented evidence showing that she incurred expenses related to the Veteran's cremation.  The appellant is the Veteran's spouse and is eligible to receive monies for the Veteran's funeral pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.1702(b)(v).  Thus, based on VA compensation benefits established prior to his death, entitlement to a nonservice-connected burial allowance on behalf of the Veteran is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1705.

The next question is may the appellant be awarded a plot/interment allowance?  Regarding a plot or interment allowance, for the purposes of this determination, the term "plot" or burial plot means the final disposal site of the deceased's bodily remains, whether it is a grave, mausoleum vault, columbarium niche, or other similar place.  Plot or internment expenses are those expenses associated with the final disposition of the remains and are not confined to the acts done within the burial grounds but may include the removal of remains for burial or internment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1707(d).

Where a veteran's death is not service connected, as is the case here, a plot allowance to cover the cost of the final site of interment of the Veteran's remains may be payable, but only under certain circumstances.  38 U.S.C. § 2303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1707.  Unless VA has evidence on the date it receives notice of the veteran's death that the expenses incurred were less, VA will pay the maximum plot or interment allowance specified in 38 U.S.C. § 2303(b)(2) to a claimant who incurred plot or interment expenses relating to the purchase of a burial plot for a deceased veteran if the veteran is buried in a cemetery other than a State veterans cemetery or a national cemetery, and the veteran is eligible for a burial allowance under § 3.1705 (burial allowance based on non-service-connected death); the veteran is eligible for a burial allowance under § 3.1706 (burial allowance for a veteran who died while hospitalized by VA); the veteran was discharged from active service for a disability incurred or aggravated in line of duty; or the veteran, at the time of discharge from active service, had a disability, shown by official service records, which in medical judgment would have justified a discharge for disability.  

In this case, the record is silent as to where the Veteran's cremains have been interred.  There is no indication in the record that the cremains have been placed at a national cemetery or other cemetery controlled by the United States or at a state veterans cemetery.  Additionally, it is unknown as to whether the cremains have been interred in a private local cemetery.  Furthermore, the Veteran did not die while admitted to a VA facility, nor was he discharged from the active military, naval, or air service for a disability incurred or aggravated in the line of duty, or for a service-connected death. In this instance, the above criteria have not been met.  As such, a plot/interment allowance is precluded by the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.1707.  

While the Board is sympathetic to the fact that the appellant may have incurred expenses associated with the Veteran's burial and interment, federal laws authorizing monetary benefits are enacted by Congress.  Unless an individual meets all of the requirements of a particular law, that individual is not entitled to the benefit.  The benefit cannot be awarded, notwithstanding incomplete or even erroneous information provided, and regardless of the circumstances or claims of fairness.  Davenport v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 522 (2002).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to nonservice-connected burial allowance is warranted, but entitlement to a plot/interment allowance is not warranted.  The Board acknowledges and appreciates the Veteran's long and dedicated service and is sympathetic to the loss his friends and any family has suffered.  However, the payment of burial benefits, including interment expenses or any other funeral expenses, is strictly based on specific statutory and regulatory guidelines, which have not been met in this case.  

The Board finds that the evidence supports, in part, the appellant's claim but does not support the additional requirements needed for the award of additional burial benefits.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1700 et seq.  See also Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).  

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Patrick J. Costello

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.