Citation Nr: A25031077
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231102-390217
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

A rating in excess of 20 percent for dislocation, left shoulder (minor), is remanded.

A rating in excess of 30 percent for dislocation, right shoulder (major), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2000 to January 2001.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in November 2023. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and cited the May 2023 rating decision on appeal. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301.

1. A rating in excess of 20 percent for dislocation, left shoulder (minor).

2. A rating in excess of 30 percent for dislocation, right shoulder (major).

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher evaluation for his bilateral shoulder disabilities because it has gotten worse and now, he has developed arthritis. See Veteran's November2023 NOD. Based on the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his service-connected bilateral shoulder disorders. The examiner reported that the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral glenohumeral joint dislocation/recurrent dislocation in 2000. Further, the examiner noted the Veteran's active range of motion on flexion, abduction and internal and external rotation ended at 90 degrees which was the same for passive range motion and repetitive testing. The examiner noted there was no objective evidence of pain, flareups, ankylosis, instability, dislocation nor labral pathology on the current exam. 

However, the examination report did not address the Veteran's and his wife's lay statement that he has current symptoms of intermittent dislocations, and numbness from his shoulders towards his elbows and at times, his hands. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (addressing a veteran's lay reports of symptomatology is required when considering their prior medical history). Further, when responding to the inquiry as to whether the Veteran used any treatment, medications or surgery for the diagnosed condition, the examiner noted acute reductions, but no explanation was provided. As such, it is unclear whether the Veteran is on medication, had surgery, or using other treatment forms such as steroids to reduce the effect of his symptoms. In addition, the examiner noted that the record indicates that the Veteran has previously had magnetic resonance imaging (MRIs) of his shoulders which were not available for their review. The examiner also failed to confirm whether a goniometer was used to measure range of motion endpoints for the Veteran's shoulders. For the above reasons, the Board finds that the medical examination is inadequate for evaluative purposes. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

The Board further notes that it is unclear as to whether all of the Veteran's treatment records have been obtained. In particular, in the September 2012 VA examination the Veteran reported he was seeing a private orthopedist. While an August 2012 statement from the orthopedist is of record, it is not clear if the Veteran has any additional, outstanding medical reports from that doctor and/or facility. No follow up action is noted in the claims file. Also, in an April 2023 letter, Dr. D.W stated that the Veteran has extensive arthritis of bilateral shoulders and has been under the care of their office since July 2016. Those reports are not of record. A remand is required to correct a predecisional duty to assist error, as those records should have been obtained prior to the determination on appeal.

Accordingly, the Board finds a remand is necessary to obtain Veteran's private treatment records and MRIs and/or imaging of his shoulders, and to obtain a new medical examination to assess the severity of his bilateral shoulder disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After securing any necessary authorization(s), obtain the Veteran's outstanding private treatment records, to include medical reports from Doctors D.W. and P.S., and MRIs and/or imaging for the Veteran's bilateral shoulders (see April 2023 VA examination report). 

2. After completing the above, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to assess the severity of his bilateral shoulder disabilities. 

The claims file should be made available to the examiner in conjunction with the Veteran's private treatment records, MRIs and/or imaging, and examination reports. All findings should be reported in detail. Also, to the extent possible, the examiner should address the Veteran's findings after discounting the ameliorative effects of medication, if any. The examiner should address the Veteran's complaints of intermittent dislocations and his wife's statement of the Veteran experiencing pain, dislocations, difficulty with lifting, and numbness from his shoulders towards his elbows and at times, hands. 

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wright, Kadia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.