Citation Nr: A25031535
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-438695
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lung nodules - right lobe (lung nodules), to include COPD, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from December 1968 to April 1990.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2400(a)(1). The AMA applies to all initial decisions issued after February 19, 2019.

The present matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by VA Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Accordingly, this decision is subject to the AMA.??

The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board in a May 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. Based on the Veteran's selection of the evidence submission docket, the Board can only consider evidence received up to the date of the rating decision on appeal and evidence received within 90 days of receipt of the VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. §?20.802(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

For the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.?? 

1. Entitlement to service connection for lung nodules - right lobe (lung nodules), to include COPD

The Board finds that further development is necessary before the Veteran's claim for service connection for lung nodules - right lobe (lung nodules), to include COPD, can be adjudicated.? 

Service treatment records (STRs) indicate lung nodules on the January 1977 Report of Medical Examination, which was conducted for extension of the Veteran's service. See September 2023 STR. Conversely, the December 1968 Report of Medical Examination at entrance to service notes no lung nodules at that time. See November 2016 STR. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023. The examiner provided a diagnosis of a benign neoplasms (lung nodules) and stated that their etiology is uncertain and also noted that the Veteran had yet to be provided a PFT examination, so the examination was incomplete. 

The December 2023 TERA opinion provided a positive nexus between the Veteran's lung nodules and herbicides since herbicides have been associated with lung cancer. However, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with lung cancer. As such, this opinion is inadequate because it rests on an inaccurate factual premise, and it also did not address the Veteran's conceded exposure to asbestos. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 548 (1993); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Subsequently, the AOJ obtained an addendum VA opinion in March 2024 after a February 2024 PFT was performed to correct identified insufficiencies in the December 2023 VA examination and December 2023 TERA opinion. The examiner opined that the Veteran's pulmonary nodules were less likely than not incurred in or caused by asbestos or TERA exposure. The examiner stated that the medical records and TERA documents were reviewed. As rationale, the examiner expressed that common causes of pulmonary nodules are infection, vascular, and inflammation and that medical research has not shown a causal link between asbestos or herbicide exposure and pulmonary nodules. Nevertheless, the Board notes that it is apparent from the record evidence that the Veteran's lung nodules presented in service and were not noted upon entrance to service which appears to indicate that the lung nodules were incurred in service. Thus, the addendum opinion is inadequate because it rests on an inaccurate factual premise, and it also does not address the Veteran's report of shortness of breath and the diagnosis of COPD from the March 2024 PFT. Id.

The Board notes that direct service connection as a theory of entitlement has been raised by the record, and no opinion for direct service connection was obtained by the AOJ. 

As the record contains no adequate nexus opinion and no nexus opinion on the theory of entitlement raised by the record, the Board finds this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is necessary to obtain a VA addendum medical opinion. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 311 (2007). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from a qualified clinician concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lung nodules, to include COPD.?If a new VA examination is required in order for the clinician to render the opinion, please schedule one. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner should address the following.?A thorough rationale is required for all conclusions:? 

(a)	Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's lung nodules, to include COPD, manifested in service, within one year of separation from service, or are otherwise related to service. Explain why or why not. The opinion must address all pertinent evidence of record including lay evidence.?

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether the claimed condition is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) caused by the TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Explain why or why not. The opinion must address all pertinent evidence of record including lay evidence.?

For all opinions provided, the examiner must consider and address (1) the January 1977 Report of Medical Examination, which was conducted for extension of the Veteran's service noting the presence of the lung nodules, (2) the December 1968 Report of Medical Examination at entrance to service noting no lung nodules at that time, and (3) the February 2024 diagnosis of COPD at the PFT examination and whether that diagnosis is caused by or results from the lung nodules noted in service.

A clear explanation for all opinions based on specific facts for the case as well as relevant medical principles is needed. The examiner is also reminded that a lack of treatment alone is not sufficient basis to support a negative opinion. Additionally, the Veteran is competent to attest to observable events and symptomatology and such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so. 

2. After ensuring that the opinions comply with the terms of this remand, the AOJ should re-adjudicate the claim.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeffreys, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.