Citation Nr: A25031798
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-444616
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left hand condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand dorsal and palm scars is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for nerve damage on finger of left hand is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force from January 2017 to January 2024.

The Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2024 under The Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) review system.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

The Board acknowledges that the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202 (c)(2) has not yet elapsed.  However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) is not necessary because the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence to be considered on remand and this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the remand.  Id.

Left Hand Condition

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

With respect to the Veteran's claim for a left-hand condition, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error occurred, in that the April 2024 VA examiner, while finding no current diagnosis associated with the Veteran's left hand, did not consider whether the Veteran's left-hand pain causes functional impairment to warrant a disability for VA purposes.  See April 2024 VA Hand and Fingers Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  

In the April 2024 VA Hand and Fingers DBQ, the VA examiner noted there was no formal diagnosis of a left-hand condition.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had surgery on his left hand during his service, during which a foreign object was removed.  During the April 2024 examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms of pain have worsened in his left hand.  The examiner noted that there is an impact on the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task as a field technician, in which the Veteran lost 0-1 week work time in the last 12 months.  In this regard, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported that his left-hand pain is really sharp, and he has reduced reaction time and reduced speed in his hand.  Id. 

Therefore, although the Board notes that the record does not contain a formal diagnosis of a left-hand disability, where pain causes functional impairment, a disability for VA compensation purposes exists, even if there is no underlying diagnosis. "The VA's regulation on 'functional impairment' explains that '[t]he basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.' "See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Given such, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to ascertain whether the Veteran's left-hand pain causes functional impairment to warrant a disability for VA compensation purposes.  

Left Hand Dorsal and Palm Scars and Nerve Damage of the Finger of Left Hand

Additionally, as to the Veteran's claim for left hand dorsal and palm scars and for nerve damage of the finger of the left hand, the Board finds that these claims are inextricably intertwined with the Veteran's claim for a left-hand condition.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that these claims are secondary to his left-hand condition.  As such, the Board will defer adjudication of the Veteran's claim for the Veteran's left hand dorsal and palm scars and for nerve damage of the finger of the left hand until the development directed on the other claim has been completed.  The appropriate remedy where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with a claim currently on appeal is to remand the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request a VA medical opinion from a qualified medical professional with respect to the Veteran's claim for left hand condition.  While there is no current formal diagnosis of a left-hand condition, the VA examiner is asked to determine whether the Veteran's left-hand pain causes functional impairment.

In determining whether the Veteran's left-hand pain causes functional impairment, the VA examiner must address whether the Veteran is able to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, due to his left hand pain, to include during flare-ups.

The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's lay statements of left-hand pain, to include his statements that the pain is really sharp, and he has reduced reaction time and reduced speed in his hand, losing 0-1 week of work time in the last 12 months.

Any opinion expressed by the VA examiner must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Abdelbary, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.