Citation Nr: A25031371
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240802-461217
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2002 to October 2003.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. The issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for tinnitus, which she asserts is due to exposure to loud noise from the firing range and doing inspections at the helicopter landing zones and tarmacs during service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-4138. In addition, she asserts that the ringing has increased from the medication she takes for her service-connected bipolar disorder. Id.

In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination during which she reported recurrent tinnitus described as periodic ringing, one to three times per day, lasting for a few seconds, with onset of five to six years. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The examiner reasoned that there was not a significant in-service threshold shift, and, in the absence of an objectively verifiable noise injury, the association between the claimed tinnitus and noise exposure cannot be assumed to exist.

In the December 2023, the AOJ found that because the Veteran raised the issue of service connection for tinnitus as secondary to her service-connected bipolar disorder and/or medication taken for her bipolar disorder, a secondary service connection opinion was needed. In addition, the AOJ found that the opinion regarding direct service connection was not sufficient for adjudication purposes because the rationale was not clear and thus, a new direct service connection opinion was requested.

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded a new VA examination. She reported recurrent tinnitus which she described as constant. She reported that her tinnitus started 20 years ago, just before she left active service. She stated that she had to go out to the flight line to do inspections, but the provided ear plugs did not fit her ears, so she went without ear plugs. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not a symptom associated with her hearing loss. As rationale, the examiner stated, "[t]here is no diagnosis of clinical hearing loss present on the day of the exam, therefore a nexus cannot be established between hearing loss and tinnitus." Additionally, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure because in 2019, the Veteran reported tinnitus onset of 10 plus years, which was post-active duty, her military occupational specialty (MOS) had a low probability of hazardous noise exposure, her DD214 does not support noise exposure outside of her MOS, and there are no tinnitus complaints in her file prior to 2019, which the examiner noted was 16 years post-service. Based on the lack of noise exposure from her MOS, the examiner found no nexus to link her current reports of tinnitus to military service.

However, the VA examiner also opined that a medical opinion could not be provided regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation. The examiner explained that "[t]aking into consideration the Veteran's medical history, clinical findings, onset and duration of tinnitus, I am unable to determine the etiology of tinnitus without resorting to mere speculation."

The Board finds the February 2024 medical opinion is inadequate as it is internally inconsistent. Specifically, the VA examiner indicated that an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus could not be provided "without resorting to speculation," but also provided an opinion indicating that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure. 

In addition, the examiner based one of the etiology opinions on the lack of noise exposure from her MOS and lack of complaints in her file prior to 2019. However, it's not clear if the examiner considered the Veteran's reports of noise exposure from the firing range and/or from doing inspections at the helicopter landing zones and tarmacs as part of her MOS. A medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the service treatment records or that fails to take into account lay statements is inadequate. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (VA examiner's opinion inadequate that relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence). 

Further, the examiner failed to provide an opinion regarding secondary service connection. As the failure to obtain an adequate opinion constitutes a predecisional duty to assist error, the Board finds remand is required in order to obtain a new VA opinion and, if necessary, examination.

The Board acknowledges, the August 2023 private medical opinion submitted by the Veteran in support of her claim. The clinician opined that it is more like[ly] than not that the Veteran's continuous exposure to high decibel sounds on the firing range, and conduction health inspections at helicopter landing zones and tarmacs, combined with the long-term use of psychiatric medications, contributed to the onset of tinnitus. The clinician referenced a blog post from a company that sells hearing aids and stated that "the medical literature provides a nexus." However, the blog post wasn't included in the evidence, and absent an additional discussion, this evidence is insufficient to establish service connection. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning"). A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value. Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998). Therefore, as the opinion was conclusory, the Board finds that it is inadequate and cannot serve as the basis for a grant of service connection. 

In remanding this issue, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service. 

The examiner is reminded that the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the service treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that her reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. However, if there is a medical reason to doubt its veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's statements or recollection are inconsistent with the evidence in this case, medical principles relating to the onset and progress of the disease, the specific findings in the record, and/or your professional judgment.

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

(b.) Whether tinnitus was (A) caused or (B) aggravated beyond its normal progression by the service-connected bipolar disorder, to include the medication taken to treat her bipolar disorder.  

Aggravation means an increase in disability - any additional impairment of earning capacity - of the nonservice-connected disability. Aggravation also includes situations where the claimed disability would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected disability because the service-connected disability results in the inability to treat the claimed disability.  

If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the service-connected disability.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.