Citation Nr: A25031786
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240326-425825
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for right knee disability, diagnosed as right knee strain, is granted.

Service connection for left knee disability, diagnosed as left knee strain, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding whether the Veteran's right knee condition is etiologically related to his active-duty service.

2. The evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding whether the Veteran's left knee condition is etiologically related to his active-duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for right knee disability, diagnosed as right knee strain, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for left knee disability, diagnosed as left knee strain, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1994 to August 1998.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In March 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the above-noted rating decision and filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)).  The Veteran selected the Direct Review Lane by submitting notice of disagreement under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Accordingly, based on the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review option, the Board is limited to review of the evidence in the record up and until the date of notification of the rating decision for the issues on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the above claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the July 2023 rating decision on appeal found that new and relevant evidence had been received regarding the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for left knee and right knee conditions and reopened them on appeal.  This is a favorable finding for the Veteran, and the Board will not readjudicate the issue of whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted.

Service Connection-Legal Criteria

Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.  

To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Bilateral Knees-Analysis 

At the outset, the Board notes the essential facts of the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for left and right knee conditions are essentially identical.  In addition, the resolution of these claims involves the application of identical law to similar facts.  As such, in the interest of judicial economy these issues will be addressed together.

The Veteran seeks service connection for the above claimed conditions which he contends are etiologically related to his active-duty service.  The medical evidence confirms the Veteran has current diagnoses of bilateral knee strain and bilateral knee tendinopathy.  See March 2023 and June 2023 VA Knee Condition examinations.  Therefore, the central issues to be resolved are whether the Veteran's current disabilities originated in service or are otherwise etiologically related to service.  

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not contain any complaints of, treatment for, or diagnoses of any bilateral knee conditions.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran's post-service treatment records document complaints of chronic, recurrent, bilateral knee pain since his active service.  See e.g., October 2008 VA Primary Care Note.  Further, the Veteran has provided lay statements throughout the record indicating his knee pain onset during service.

In December 2022 and March 2023 the Veteran submitted lay statements regarding his claimed knee conditions.  Therein, the Veteran noted that he injured both his knees in service during his time serving abroad a small ship.  The Veteran noted that the ship would shake and rock that caused him to fall frequently onto his knees.  The Veteran further noted that he has continued to have pain in his knees from service to present day and that he has used over the counter medications such as Advil, Tylenol, Aleve, and Ibuprofen to treat his pain. 

The Veteran was provided with a March 2023 VA Knee Condition examination to address the etiology of his claimed knee conditions.  During the examination the Veteran reported that his bilateral knee condition began in 1995 while performing his duties on a ship.  The Veteran explained that his knees would hit ladders and machinery, and that he would fall when the ship took a roll.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee condition was at least as likely as not etiologically related to his active-duty service.  The rationale provided was that the Veteran was diagnosed with left knee pain and treated while on active duty.  However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed right knee condition was less likely than not etiologically related to his active-duty service.  The rationale provided was that there were no medical records showing a diagnosis or treatment for a right knee condition while the Veteran was still in active service.

In June 2023 the Veteran's mother submitted a lay buddy statement in support of the Veteran's knee condition claims.  In this statement, the Veteran's mother reported that the Veteran would complain about pain in his knees while he served on the ship.  She noted that the Veteran wears knee braces and uses a cane when his knees get really painful.  Further, the Veteran's mother noted that she first noticed his knee pain around 1995, when the Veteran came home for Christmas.

The Veteran was then provided with a June 2023 VA Knee Condition examination.  During the examination the Veteran reported experiencing knee pain that began in service after hitting his knees.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral tendinopathy.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions were less likely than not etiologically related to the Veteran's conceded toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  

In support of this assessment, the examiner explained that the Veteran's knee conditions were caused by activities that place repetitive stress on the patellar tendon (such as walking, bending, squatting, etc.) and that there is no medical literature to support a nexus between patellar tendonitis and toxin exposures.

In this case, the Board must determine the value of all evidence submitted, including lay and medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  The evaluation of evidence generally involves a 3-step inquiry.  First, the Board must determine whether the evidence comes from a "competent" source.  The Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (Observing that once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible).  The third step of this inquiry requires the Board to weigh the probative value of the proffered evidence in light of the entirety of the record.  The Board also notes that under certain circumstances, lay evidence may be sufficient to establish a nexus.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  

The Board has considered the medical evidence of record.  As noted above, the Veteran's STRs do not contain complaints of, or treatment for, bilateral knee pain.  However, the Veteran's post-service treatment records document chronic knee pain from service to present day.  

Further, the Board notes that the March 2023 VA examiner provided a negative etiological opinion regarding the Veteran's right knee.  However, the VA examiner's opinion was based on a lack of treatment records reflecting a chronic diagnosis in service.  The Board further notes that pain alone, even without an underlying pathology or diagnosis, can constitute a disability under VA law where such pain results in functional impairment.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  As such, the VA medical opinion that discounted the Veteran's reports of pain during and since service is of little probative value.  

Further, while the June 2023 VA examiner provided negative etiological opinions, these opinions were solely based on whether the Veteran's knee conditions were etiologically related to his TERA.  Further, in the negative etiological opinions, the examiner noted that the Veteran's knee conditions were likely caused by activities that placed repetitive stress on the Veteran's knees.  This conclusion ultimately supports the Veteran's contentions of pain in his bilateral knees since service due to injuries onboard a ship.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements, and the lay buddy statement submitted by his mother, in support of his claim.  The Veteran is competent to report symptoms, such as pain because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  Further, the Veteran's mother is competent to report what she directly witnessed.  Id.  However, they are not competent to offer an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's current disorders due to the medical complexity of the matters involved.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462.  

In light of the foregoing, because of the credible evidence of bilateral knee impairment during and since service, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for left and right knee conditions are warranted because the onset of these conditions was coincident with the Veteran's active-duty service.  See Flynn v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 500, 503 (1994) (noting that "the element of cause and effect has been totally by-passed in favor of a simple temporal relationship between the incurrence of the disability and the period of active duty"); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (Service connection connotes many factors but, basically, it means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces).  

As such, service connection for right knee disability and for left knee disability is warranted.

 

 

STEVEN D. REISS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gresham, Trevor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.