Citation Nr: A25031194
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 210629-519123
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include chronic anxiety disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1978 to January 1982.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2021 higher level review of a February 2021 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2021, VA received the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement (NOD) electing the Board's Direct Review docket. Because the Veteran sent additional evidence with the NOD, the Board mailed the Veteran a November 2024 letter requesting clarification whether he intended to elect the Direct Review docket or the Evidence Submission docket. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202(f), 20.202(g); see generally Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). The Veteran responded that he intended to elect the Evidence Submission docket. See November 14, 2024, Letter. In March 2025, the Board notified the Veteran that his NOD had been accepted as electing the Evidence Submission docket.  The Veteran's representative submitted a newly prepared informal hearing presentation in light of the updated docket election. See March 2025 Appellate Brief. 

Given the Veteran's election of the Evidence Submission docket, in this decision the Board has only considered the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of the February 2021 decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with the June 2021 NOD or within 90 days after filing the NOD. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 20.303. 

For any evidence associated with the claims file during a period of time for which the Board cannot review the evidence, the Board has not considered that evidence in this decision, but the evidence will be considered by the AOJ when it readjudicates the matter following this decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(c).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include chronic anxiety disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his diagnosed anxiety disorder is due to service, to include episodes of mistreatment by drill instructors (being yelled at and stomped on during training), hazing (carrying out superiors' instructions to beat and kick other servicemembers), and an incident when during a training skirmish he got lost in the field at night. Detailed descriptions of these stressors were given in February 2020 correspondence and VA Form 21-0781.  

An etiology opinion was obtained in August 2020, wherein the examiner opined anxiety disorder was not due to service because the Veteran denied any psychiatric history citing a single February 2020 mental health treatment note as the basis for the opinion. The AOJ sought an addendum opinion having found the August 2020 opinion was not supported by valid rationale.  In the January 2021 addendum, the VA examiner simply stated that there was no indication in the available medical records of the Veteran having emotional problems in service other than his self-report and statement in support of claim or having sought/received psychiatric care during service.  The examiner further noted the Veteran had no psychiatric treatment since discharge, other than for anxiety and PTSD symptoms in January and February 2020. 

The Board finds the addendum opinion is still not adequate.  Notably, the opinion relies on the absence of documentation in the record to the exclusion of the Veteran's own statements about his symptoms, experiences, and treatment history, which he is competent to report.  See, e.g., Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39, 40 (2007). Consequently, the claim will be remanded to provide the Veteran an adequately reasoned medical opinion. 

2. Service connection for a bilateral foot disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his bilateral foot disorders, which include diagnosed pes planus, hammertoes, and acquired pes cavus, are related to problems with his military-issued boots during service. In a statement submitted with his application for compensation, the Veteran related that during bootcamp his boots were too tight, but he was told "to suck it up," as well as that during a long march his feet became visibly bloody and blistered, with his feet sweating and freezing at night. See February 2020, VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. 

A VA examination was provided in October 2020. The Veteran told the examiner that he had begun experiencing foot pain during boot camp when his feet felt tight in his boots, that he complained to the drill instructor about the boots, and that his feet had become bloody and blistered during a long march. He added that he had pain in his feet for the rest of his adult life and had been treated for 30 years at a variety of places, most recently at Gentle Foot Care for two to three years before transferring to VA's care in 2020. An etiology opinion was not requested at the time.

In a November 2020 opinion, the examiner opined the bilateral foot condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service.  The examiner reasoned that aside from a June 1979 service treatment note that diagnosed a right foot contusion, the Veteran's medical record, including separation examination, was silent for further evaluation or treatment for foot pain until 2020.  Thus, the examiner concluded that continuity of the foot condition could not be established. 

However, the Board also finds this opinion inadequate as it too relied on the absence of documentation in the record to the exclusion of the Veteran's lay statements.  See Dalton, supra.  Notably, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's statements to the October 2020 VA examiner that he had sought medical care for his feet for 30 years and that his feet had bothered him his entire adult life since leaving service. Moreover, the opinion was based on an inaccurate factual premise.  The examiner stated the Veteran's service records only showed a right foot contusion; however, service treatment records dated in June 1979 contain treatment for falling arches.  Consequently, the claim will be remanded to provide the Veteran an adequately reasoned medical opinion.  

Finally, a Remand is also required to obtain private medical records.  As delineated above, during the October 2020 VA examination, the Veteran identified treatment for his bilateral feet at Gentle Foot Care for two to three years prior to transferring care to VA in 2020.  These records have not been associated with the record and attempts must be made to obtain them.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. 1 Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for Gentle Foot Care for the claimed bilateral foot condition.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile. All requests for records must be documented in the record. 

2. Once the development above is completed, obtain an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot condition. An in-person VA examination need not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner or otherwise required by the evidence. The complete claims file, to include a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

Thereafter, the examiner must provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's bilateral foot condition, to include, but not limited to, bilateral flatfoot, hammertoes, and acquired pes cavus began during active service, manifested within the year following discharge from service, or was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

In rendering the opinion, the examiner must discuss (a) the Veteran's statement that since bootcamp his military-issued boots were too tight, but he was told "to suck it up"; (b) the Veteran's statement that during a 25-mile march, his feet were visibly bloodied and bruised and went through sweating/freezing cycles at night; (c) the Veteran's statement that his feet were "never the same" after service and that he had sought treatment for his feet for 30 years; (d) a June 18, 1979, service treatment note that the Veteran complained of right foot pain for three days with an assessment of "falling arches"; and, (e) a March 17, 1982, medical record (approximately two months after release from active duty) at which the Veteran reported aching in the "Lt. side of foot." 

If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

3. Obtain an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder. An in-person VA examination need not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner or otherwise required by the evidence. The complete claims file, to include a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

The examiner must provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include chronic anxiety disorder, began during active service, manifested within the year following discharge from service, or was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

In answering this question, the examiner must address the incidents of service described by the Veteran: 

a) Being "stomped" by drill instructors, disciplined when others did not follow instructions, being forced to exercise even "we couldn't [do] any more pushups," and having drill instructors "stand over top of us and yell [to do pushups] until tears came out of our eyes, then they would stomp us, and scream and put their foot on our back."

b) Carrying out a drill instructor's instructions "to give his friend and other soldiers 'blanket parties'" (described as "[w]e would thro[w] a blanke[t] over the violator while he slept[,] then we commence ... beating and kicking him"). 

c) Being ordered by a sergeant to get in water while fully clothed even though the Veteran did not know how to swim, and when the Veteran "got tired and was going under," the sergeant "threw [him] the rope, [he] grabbed it, then [the sergeant] let it go [and the Veteran] went under. Can't remember after that." (The Veteran describes that this caused a fear of water and that he never learned how to swim.)

d) During a practice skirmish against other platoons, one night the Veteran got separated from his platoon, encountered an enemy platoon and had to fight them in hand-to-hand combat, and then went into the bush (in the dark) where he had been warned dangerous animals lurked (bobcats, tarantulas, poisonous snakes, bears). When trekking alone in the dark, he came close to accidentally walking into a lake, and when he looked for his way back he hiked up a mountain "unending[ly]." (The Veteran describes that "[f]ighting the soldiers, images of animals, the sudden lake, and unending climb is continually replaying in my head.") 

If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported incidents and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is 

?

known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

 

 

K. L. WALLIN

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Davis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.