Citation Nr: A25031902
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240210-421350
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from a January 2024 rating decision that awarded service connection for bilateral foot, left knee, and left ankle disabilities; the appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's August 2023 appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated fee agreement, are valid.

2. A February 2018 rating decision previously denied service connection for bilateral foot, left knee, and left ankle disabilities.

3. The January 2024 rating decision that produced the past-due benefits from which an attorney fee is now sought arose from a supplemental claim to review the prior denial of these service connection claims in February 2018. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the January 16, 2024, rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from May 1982 to March 1990. 

The appellant is the Veteran's attorney, appointed to represent him in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. For that reason, the attorney does not represent the Veteran in this matter due to their opposing financial interests. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from the January 2024 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's February 2024 Notice of Disagreement in April 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal. 

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the January 16, 2024, rating decision; the appeal is granted.

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

For initial decisions issued on or after the effective date of the modernized review system (AMA) of February 19, 2019, agents and attorneys may charge claimants or the appellants for representation provided: After an AOJ has issued an initial decision on a claim or claims, including any claim to reopen under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a) or for an increase in rate of a benefit; a review request (such as a notice of disagreement (NOD), higher-level review (HLR), or supplemental claim) of the initial AOJ decision has been filed with respect to that decision; and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in 38 C.F.R. §14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1); see also Military-Veterans Advocacy v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 7 F.4th 1110 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

Analysis & Conclusion

The Board finds that the attorney is eligible for attorney fees based on the past-due benefits awarded by the January 2024 rating decision because this rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the claims of service connection for the bilateral foot, left knee, and left ankle disabilities, and all other requirements for fee eligibility have been met. 

First, the Board finds that the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the January 16, 2024, rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision granted initial service connection and disability ratings for seven distinct disabilities affecting the feet, left ankle and left knee, and established an initial 70 percent combined disability rating effective from September 2023 (although a later decision then granted an earlier effective date for the awards of service connection for the left ankle and left fifth toe). 

The Board also finds that the January 2024 rating decision that awarded service connection for bilateral foot, left knee, and left ankle disabilities was not the initial decision with respect to the case. Instead, service connection for these disabilities was previously denied by a February 2018 rating decision. 

In all, the attorney is eligible to receive a fee in this matter because, after the AOJ had issued an initial decision on these claims of service connection for the feet, left ankle, and left knee, the appellant, through his attorney, submitted a valid request for review of the prior denial with additional evidence presented, and these claims of service connection were then granted. Since the parties also complied with the relevant power of attorney and fee agreement requirements, the criteria are met to establish eligibility for an attorney fee, and the appeal is granted in the attorney's favor.

 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.