Citation Nr: A25031738
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439468
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for left knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2013 to October 2016.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision that was a higher-level review of a March 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in May 2024 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, the AOJ will be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider because the case is being remanded. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

An informal higher-level review conference was held before the AOJ in January 2024, and a conference worksheet is of record.

For purposes of clarity, the Board notes that the Veteran's representative has indicated that the right knee increased evaluation claim stems from an August 2021 intent to file a claim for compensation (intent to file)/January 2022 application form, rather than the November 2022 intent to file/December 2022 application form (all filed by his prior representative) considered by the AOJ for both the left and right knee increased evaluation claims.  However, the claim on the January 2022 application form was service connection for depression secondary to the service-connected left and right knee and left achilles tendon disabilities - listed on the application form as "depression secondary to s/c [service-connected] left knee degenerative arthritis with osteoarthritis & patellofemoral pain syndrome right knee" and "depression secondary to s/c left achilles tendon rupture."  The AOJ adjudicated that submission as such, granting service connection for adjustment disorder with depressed mood on a secondary basis to those service-connected disabilities in a March 2022 rating decision.  Thus, the claim date for the issues on appeal is based on the November 2022 intent to file/December 2022 application form.

On review, the Board finds that additional development is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The Veteran was provided VA examinations in January 2023 and February 2023 in connection with the claims.  In a recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Mar. 12, 2025), the Court concluded that the Board is required to discount the beneficial effects of medication when the relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use.  In so doing, the Court noted that its decision was consistent with its earlier precedential holdings in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) and McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267 (2016).  Because the 2023 VA examinations do not satisfy the requirements under Ingram based on the specific facts of this case, an additional VA examination was needed to ascertain the current severity and manifestations of the disabilities.

The Board also notes that the 2023 VA examination reports provide somewhat unclear information about the Veteran's functional status as to his ability to participate in VA knee examinations, such that he should be provided this additional opportunity for a new examination.  For example, the first examination report shows that the Veteran confirmed that he was able to drive to the appointment and flex his knees to get in the car, but the examiner also noted that testing could not be performed because the Veteran reported that he was unable to bend or flex his knees due to pain.  However, the VA peripheral nerves examination from that same day for a separate claim contains some bilateral knee findings, such as knee extension.  The second examination report shows that the Veteran was able to perform right knee testing, but the examiner indicated that the left knee was not tested because it was "damaged and unclaimed," where it is unclear if the left knee was simply not tested based on the corresponding January 2023 VA examination request that listed only the right knee.  Moreover, the Veteran's representative has indicated that he would participate in a new VA examination if the Board found one was needed, and she has argued that one would be appropriate to obtain adequate findings, including as to flare-ups.  See, e.g., May 2024 written statement.

The case is REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to ascertain the current severity and manifestations of his service-connected left and right knee disabilities.  Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disabilities under the rating criteria.  In so doing, the examiner should provide the range of motion of the left and right knees in degrees on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing.  If measurements for passive motion are the same or greater than the measurements for active motion, the examiner should so state.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should provide an explanation in the report based on the specific facts of this case.

The presence of objective evidence of pain, excess fatigability, incoordination, and weakness should also be noted, as should any additional disability (including any additional limitation of motion) due to these factors.

The examiner should also discuss any additional functional impairment that occurs during flare-ups and after repeated use over time, including any additional limitation of motion.  To the extent possible, he or she should address the frequency, duration, characteristics, and severity of flare-ups (through the examination findings, review of the medical records, and/or history provided by the Veteran).  

In providing the above measurements, the examiner should discount the beneficial effects of any medication the Veteran uses for his left and right knee disabilities.  If the examiner cannot do so without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable lay and medical evidence has been considered; whether the inability is due to the limits of the medical community or the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge; and whether there is additional evidence, which if obtained, would permit the opinion to be provided.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.