Citation Nr: A25031453
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240315-424051
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by irregular menstrual bleeding is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active-duty service from February 2019 to February 2020.  The current appeal before the Board originated from a March 2024 rating decision, in which a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), inter alia, denied entitlement to service connection for irregular menstrual bleeding.

In her March 2024 Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the option to have her appeal directly reviewed by a Veterans Law Judge.  In light of the Veteran's selection, the Board may only consider evidence dated through the date of the March 2024 rating decision.  Any evidence submitted after issuance of that rating decision may not be considered by the Board in this decision.  Notably, where the Board is remanding this claim to correct duty to assist errors, on remand, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) will have the opportunity to review any relevant evidence submitted after the March 2024 rating decision.  

Service connection for a disability manifested by irregular menstrual bleeding

The Board's review of the claims file reveals that further action by the AOJ on the service connection claim on appeal is warranted in order to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to March 2024 rating decision on appeal, and pursuant to the necessity to fulfill statutory and regulatory duties with respect to this claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA-contracted examination for her claimed disability in November 2023, at which time she was diagnosed with oligomenorrhea.  The examiner provided the opinion that the disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by a claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In providing the opinion, the examiner specifically noted that the disability was less likely than not caused by claimed in-service vaginal bleeding, which the Veteran suffered in 2019 after a fall incident.  The examiner pointed out that the Veteran's workup at the time of the in-service incident identified a normal intrauterine pregnancy on ultrasound as well as Gardnerella vaginalis and a urinary tract infection.  No pelvic inflammatory disease was identified.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms were unlikely to have resulted in irregular menses.  The examiner further indicated, however, that the Veteran's antepartum evaluation had already identified irregular menses.  The examiner did not provide an alternate etiology for the diagnosed oligomenorrhea, but rather, noted that it is often a sign of an underlying disease, and listed more than a dozen possible diseases. 

Notably, although the record reveals that the Veteran reported having irregular menstruation cycles in August 2019, during her active service, and the examiner noted that the Veteran had been identified as having irregular menses during service in the examination report, the examiner did not address whether the current disability was at least as likely as not etiologically related to or proceeding from the identified irregular menstruation identified during the Veteran's service.  Therefore, clarification is required.  Cf. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

Additionally, review of the claims file reveals that the Veteran had service in Iraq during the Persian Gulf War.  Thus, she is presumed to have been exposed to burn pits and other Persian Gulf environmental hazards, and the record confirms the Veteran's participation in toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  Notably, although associated with the claims file after the March 2024 rating decision, a November 2024 VA memorandum was provided confirming that the Veteran had military service that constituted presumptive toxic exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1119, and that based on her military occupational specialty as a combat engineer, she was exposed to disrupting chemicals, fuel, and industrial solvents.  Section 303 of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  Pub. L. 117-168, § 303; 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  

Based on the medical evidence of record, to include the November 2023 examination report, a clear etiology has not been identified for the Veteran's claimed disability.  Thus, the Board cannot foreclose the possibility that the Veteran's menstrual disorder symptoms may be associated with undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI), including menstrual disorder symptoms.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran should be afforded a new examination to obtain adequate opinions as to whether the claimed disability is related to in-service toxic exposure risk activities, or whether the claimed disability may be determined to consist of symptoms associated with an undiagnosed illness or MUCMI.  

Accordingly, this matter is hereby REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for the Veteran to undergo a VA Gulf War examination by an appropriate examiner.  Any and all indicated studies and tests deemed necessary by the examiner should be accomplished.  The claims file and a copy of this REMAND should be made available to the examiner for review.  

If any etiology opinion requested below requires an assessment/opinion to be provided by an examiner with specific expertise, please arrange for such examiner to examine the Veteran, as necessary, and to provide the requested opinions.

After review of the record, completion of the examination(s) (including any necessary tests and studies), and interview of the Veteran, the appropriate VA examiner should:  

(a.) clearly identify all of the Veteran's disabilities/conditions related to her claimed irregular menstrual bleeding, to include oligomenorrhea, currently present or present at any point pertinent to the current claims (even if now asymptomatic or resolved).  

(b.) For each claimed disability, specifically determine whether such disability is associated with a known clinical diagnosis, and if so, whether such diagnosis is related to or consists of a distinct and identifiable disability.

(c.) If any of the claimed signs and/or symptoms pertaining to the claimed disability is determined to not be associated with a known clinical diagnosis, please specify the relevant signs and symptoms that have not been attributed to a known clinical diagnosis; and, provide an opinion, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., an approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal probability) that such sings/symptom(s) represent an objective indication of chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness related to the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia.  

(d.) For any symptoms pertaining to the claimed disability that are associated with a diagnosed illness, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., an approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal probability) that any such illness constitutes a MUCMI without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology (related to the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia), that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as menstrual disorder symptoms and disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.

(e.) For each distinct and identifiable disability (including any condition that is not resulting from undiagnosed illness and for each condition that is manifested by pain and results in functional impairment of earning capacity, but that does not constitute a MUCMI), provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., an approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal probability) that the disability/condition had its onset during, or is otherwise medically-related to the Veteran's active service, to including determining if current disability is a continuation of the irregular menstruation identified during the Veteran's active service.  

For each such opinion rendered for a distinct and identifiable disability, the examiner must presume that the Veteran was exposed to fine, particulate matter from burn pits and other toxins due to his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations and specifically consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, including identified exposure to disrupting chemicals, fuel, and industrial solvents.

In addressing the above, the examiner must consider and discuss all relevant medical and other objective evidence of record, including evidence of irregular menstruation during the Veteran's service, and all lay assertions, to include the Veteran's reports as to the nature, onset, and continuity of relevant symptoms.  The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and medical history, and his assertions in this regard must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

A clear rationale for all opinions must be provided, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael Wilson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.