Citation Nr: A25031290
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-427880
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability, to include tendinopathy, (separately claimed as neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/right hip) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability, to include tendinopathy, (separately claimed as neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/right hip left hip secondary to right hip) is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for traumatic brain injury (TBI) (claimed as concussion with loss of consciousness, TBI, and lightheadedness) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. It is reasonably shown by competent evidence that the Veteran has a right hip disability, to include tendinopathy, that first manifested during active-duty service.

2. It is reasonably shown by competent evidence that the Veteran has a left hip disability, to include tendinopathy, that is secondary to a right hip disability.

3. Regarding the TBI claim, the weight of the probative evidence persuasively favors a finding that all contended symptoms are duplicative of the symptoms already compensated for under the service-connected disabilities of migraines and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, service connection for a right hip disability is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, service connection for a left hip disability is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for a compensable rating for a TBI disability based on stress, sleep disturbances, memory loss, and headaches, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8045.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2016 to January 2020. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal connection between the disease or injury in service and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Additionally, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis if the record contains evidence sufficient to establish: (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by the service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disorder was caused by the service-connected disability in either a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted).

Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability is not caused by a service-connected disability but would be less severe if not for the service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established when the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id.

Lay evidence may be competent evidence to establish incurrence. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question is one requiring medical knowledge. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In adjudicating an appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material favorable to the claimant. See Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (discussing the Board's inherent authority "to discount the weight and probity of evidence in the light of its own inherent characteristics and its relationship to other items of evidence"). To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

Evidence

The STRs show that, in April 2017, the Veteran presented to the clinic seeking a chiropractic referral. He complained of lower back pain radiating down toward his hips. The record notes the strength of flexion and adduction of the bilateral hips was normal. In June 2018, the Veteran presented to the theater clinic for abdominal pain. However, the abdominal radiograph showed an expansile lesion in the right ischium, which may be a result of bone remodeling from a prior fracture. It was recommended that, if no such history of trauma was found, a dedicated pelvis radiograph should be conducted to fully evaluate the finding. Pelvic imaging taken the same day confirmed an expansile, sclerotic lesion in the right ischium extending from the acetabulum to the ischial tuberosity. Differential diagnosis included osteochondroma, chronic avulsion of the hamstring with apophysis non-union, fibrous dysplasia, eosinophilic granuloma, or less likely an osteoid osteoma. Aggressive process such as sclerotic metastasis is unlikely unless the Veteran had a known history of malignancy.

One week later, the Veteran presented for a follow-up visit for the MRI. He denied any nausea, stomach, or right hip pain and was noted as asymptomatic. The record shows a diagnosis of neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin. No exam was conducted because the visit was to discuss the MRI results. 

In September 2018, the Veteran presented for a second pelvic MRI. The clinical history notes an asymptomatic sclerotic expansile bone lesion on the right ischium. The MRI showed a curvilinear osseous lesion-like seen related to the right ischial tuberosity parallel to the bone follows the osseous signal on all pulse sequences measuring 57 x 10 x 39.5 mm with no related enhancing soft tissue mass lesion. The hip joints were of normal alignment with no evidence of vascular necrosis, osteoarthrosis, or occult fracture. There was no bone marrow edema pattern or significant joint effusion. However, the curvilinear osseous lesion like seen related to the right ischial tuberosity with MRI signal intensity, morphology, and enhancement pattern was likely chronic avulsion injury of the right ischial tuberosity. The MRI report indicated clinical correlation should be considered. 

There are no VA treatment records or private treatment records to consider.

In August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination; and the examiner issued several medical opinions addressing direct service connection, secondary service connection, and a TERA opinion as discussed below. 

The August 2023 VA bone and other skeletal conditions disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) and the August 2023 VA hip and thigh conditions DBQ, show the Veteran reported his hip condition began in 2018 when he was seen and treated for GERD and an x-ray discovered the mass. When this began, the symptoms were small mass with stiffness, inflammation, and popping. The Veteran stated it remained untreated; he did not report using any assistive device to ambulate; his primary care physician referred him to another doctor for a follow-up examination; and he cannot walk for a long distance due to his discomfort. The Veteran reported he suffers from severe flare-ups of the right hip daily and lasting three- to six hours. The right hip flare-ups are precipitated by normal use and are alleviated by laying down. There are no flare-ups of the claimed left hip.

In the August 2023 VA hip and thigh DBQ, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tendinopathy in both hips. The examiner indicated that the initial range of motion (ROM) measurements were abnormal or outside of normal range for the bilateral hips and contribute to a functional loss, notably, difficulty with movement. 

The active ROM for the Veteran's right hip was as follows: flexion endpoint (125 degrees) at 75 degrees; extension endpoint (30 degrees) at 30 degrees, abduction endpoint (45 degrees) at 45 degrees, adduction endpoint (25 degrees) at 25 degrees, external rotation endpoint (60 degrees) at 60 degrees, and internal rotation endpoint (40 degrees) at 40 degrees. The active ROM for the Veteran's left hip was as follows: flexion endpoint (125 degrees) at 80 degrees; extension endpoint (30 degrees) at 30 degrees, abduction endpoint (45 degrees) at 45 degrees, adduction endpoint (25 degrees) at 25 degrees, external rotation endpoint (60 degrees) at 60 degrees, and internal rotation endpoint (40 degrees) at 40 degrees. The Veteran exhibited pain during flexion in both hips. Passive ROM values were the same as active ROM values. There was evidence of pain in weight-bearing, active motion, and passive motion that causes difficulty with movement. 

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing, but he was not examined immediately after repeated use over time; however, statements from the Veteran suggest pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time for the bilateral hips. ROM values for repeated use over time for the right hip are flexion endpoint at 65 degrees, with the remaining values being consistent with those evaluated during active ROM. For the left hip, ROM values flexion endpoint are 70 degrees, with the remaining values being consistent with those evaluated during active ROM. 

Although the Veteran was not examined during a flare-up, the evidence suggests that pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limit functional ability with flare-ups of the right hip. The estimated ROM values during the flare-ups of the right hip include a flexion endpoint of 55 degrees, with the remaining values being consistent with those evaluated during active ROM. There was no objective evidence of crepitus, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or femur or flail hip joint impairment. The examiner indicated that the bilateral hip condition impacts the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task because he has difficulty sitting, squatting, standing, or walking. The examiner noted a goniometer was used for all joint ROM measurements but there were no findings, signs, or symptoms to support a diagnosis of neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin of the hip.

In the medical opinion related to the DBQ for hip and thigh conditions, the examiner favorably determined the Veteran's bilateral hip condition was at least as likely as not proximately due to service on a secondary basis. The examiner reasoned the Veteran is diagnosed with tendinopathy of the right hip; the STRs show pain in the right hip, the September 2018 radiology report showed a likely chronic avulsion injury of the right ischial, the June 2018 radiology report confirmed expansile bone lesion of the right ischium, and there were differential diagnoses listed in the report. There were no biopsy results to confirm a neoplasm diagnosis; however, the examiner acknowledged the MRI findings were nonspecific; and there is no other testing available. A diagnosis of bilateral tendinopathy was given because the Veteran appears to have suffered from a chronic injury while serving as noted in records in 2018 and continues to have pain. Therefore, a nexus has been established. 

In the August 2023 VA bone and other skeletal conditions DBQ, the examiner indicated there was no benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases but acknowledged no imaging studies were performed in conjunction with the examination. The examiner remarked there was no neoplasm diagnosis because there are no findings, signs, or symptoms to support a diagnosis; and the Veteran's pain in service was associated with GERD. The examiner opined there was no chronic diagnosis given despite evidence in the STRs and a diagnosis of bilateral tendinopathy.

In the August 2023 muscle injuries DBQ, the examiner indicated the Veteran had an injury to a muscle group of the pelvic girdle, specifically, Group XVI pelvic girdle muscles, psoas, iliacus, pectineus, affecting flexion of the bilateral hips. Symptoms included consistent weakness and fatigue and/or pain on the right side. The examiner opined there is no presence of a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases. Again, the examiner acknowledged that no imaging studies or any other diagnostic tests were performed in conjunction with the examination. 

In the August 2023 VA medical opinion for direct service connection, the examiner opined there was no diagnosis of neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin of the bilateral hips because there were no findings, signs, or symptoms to support a diagnosis. The examiner opined it was less likely than not that a neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin of the right hip was incurred in or caused by service. The examiner reasoned there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis and cited to the STRs. 

In the August 2023 medical opinion considering TERAs, the VA examiner considered conflicting medical evidence and opined the Veteran does not have a cancer diagnosis based on the current available medical treatment records. There is no biopsy, surgical pathology, etc., which confirms a diagnosis. The Veteran is diagnosed with tendinopathy, a clinical syndrome characterized by persistent, localized tendon pain and loss of function. Most commonly, it is the result of repeated mechanical loading (this is termed "overuse").

In the August 2023 medical opinion for secondary service connection corresponding with the skin diseases DBQ, the examiner opined the Veteran's neoplasm was less likely than not related to service because there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis. The examiner only cited to the June 2018 pelvic imaging findings and provided no further rationale relying on the absence of evidence in the record. The examiner did not perform any diagnostic or laboratory testing to confirm or refute a cancer diagnosis.

In November 2023, a different VA examiner provided several, separate nexus opinions following a records review but without the benefit of an in-person examination. 

First, in the secondary service connection opinion, the examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left hip tendinopathy is caused by the diagnosed right hip tendinopathy and reasoned tendinopathy on one hip does not cause tendinopathy on the opposite hip. There is no further rationale. 

In a similar second opinion, also assessing secondary service connection, the examiner opined the hip disability was less likely than not related to service and reasoned there is a right hip diagnosis; the Veteran does not have a left hip diagnosis; and no left side findings were noted on the in-service radiology reports. 

Third, in the direct service connection opinion, the examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left hip disability was incurred in or the result of service because the Veteran does not have a left hip diagnosis; and there are no left side findings noted on the in-service radiology reports.

The Board notes the Veteran originally styled his claims for his bilateral hip disabilities as (1) neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/right hip and (2) neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/left hip secondary to right hip. See June 2023, VA 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. As outlined above, the record demonstrates that although the Veteran had an in-service diagnosis of neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/right hip, throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran was also diagnosed with tendinopathy of the bilateral hips. Accordingly, the Board has recharacterized the issues as claims for bilateral hip disabilities, as captioned above, to better reflect the scope of the Veteran's claims. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (claim of service connection encompasses all pertinent symptomatology, regardless of how that symptomatology is diagnosed).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability, to include tendinopathy, (separately claimed as neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/right hip) is granted.

The Veteran contends that his right hip disability is related to active service.

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection finding there was no current diagnosed disability, service treatment records (STRs) showed complaints of hip pain but did not show complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for this condition; and there was no link between a diagnosed medical condition and military service. The AOJ conceded the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) having served in Jordan and Kuwait from May- to December 2018 and had occupational exposure to fuels and other petroleum products. The Board will not disturb a favorable finding. Although the Veteran has a history of a hip condition during service, as outlined below, the primary question before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability.

As explained above, the evidence shows the Veteran is currently diagnosed with bilateral hip tendinopathy, pain, and limited ROM; therefore, he meets the first prong of service connection. It remains to be determined whether the right hip disability was incurred in or aggravated by service and whether it is proximately related to service.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements and finds that he is competent and credible to describe the onset of his symptoms, especially because they are consistent with the record. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). His symptoms relating to hip pain began during active service and continued after service. However, the Veteran is not competent to diagnose a current disability or provide a medical nexus opinion. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Nonetheless, as stated above, the VA examiner identified bilateral tendinopathy, which is consistent with- and in consideration of the Veteran's diagnosis, treatment, and diagnostic testing during service, and also consistent with the Veteran's lay statements of the onset of his bilateral hip pain beginning in 2018 during service.

The STRs offer clear evidence of a right hip disability that began during service. The Board finds that the August 2023 nexus opinion establishing service connection for right hip tendinopathy is adequate and significantly probative. The Veteran's right hip disability had its onset during service and is proximately related to service. The examiner's opinion that there was an injury to the muscle group of the pelvic girdle is significantly probative and is consistent with the STRs.

The Board finds the August 2023 negative nexus opinions as to the lack of a neoplasm diagnosis affecting the right hip whether on a direct-, secondary-, or presumptive basis due to a TERA are inadequate. Despite a preliminary diagnosis of neoplasm in the STRs, the pelvic imaging reports conducted during service, and the Veteran's lay statements that his primary care physician referred him to another doctor, the examiner did not conduct any diagnostic or laboratory testing to confirm or discount the possibility of a neoplasm or cancer diagnosis. The negative nexus opinions relied almost entirely on a lack of medical evidence and ignore the Veteran's lay statements. Such opinions are inadequate for adjudication. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). 

The same is true for the November 2023 VA opinions, despite the diagnosis of bilateral tendinopathy and evaluations showing limited ROM in the bilateral hips and evidence of functional limitations. The November 2023 medical opinions purport there is no medical evidence to support service connection. The Board finds the November 2023 VA opinions fail to consider the August 2023 diagnosis of bilateral tendinopathy and otherwise, improperly, rely on the absence of evidence in the STRs, ignore the Veteran's lay statements, and offer no rationale. Thus, the Board finds the negative nexus opinions are of little to no probative value.

There is competent and credible evidence of right hip pain since service, a positive nexus opinion as to bilateral tendinopathy, and inadequate negative VA medical nexus opinions regarding the etiologies of the bilateral hip disabilities. Although the Board could remand the claims for additional medical opinions, there is sufficient evidence to decide the claims; and a remand could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

As stated previously, in light of the foregoing, the Board recharacterized these issues as entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip disability as captioned above. See Clemons, supra. 

The above reflects that the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hip disabilities had an onset during the Veteran's service or are otherwise related to service. The medical evidence sufficiently supports a finding that service connection on a direct basis is warranted for a right hip disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability, to include tendinopathy, (separately claimed as neoplasm of unspecified behavior of bone, soft tissue, and skin/left hip secondary to right hip) is granted.

The Veteran contends his left hip disability is related to service.

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ determined the Veteran did not have a current left hip disability; therefore, there is no link to service. The threshold question before the Board is whether the Veteran has a currently diagnosed left hip disability.

As stated above, the evidence shows the Veteran has bilateral hip tendinopathy; and the right hip disability is service connected. Thus, it remains to be determined whether the Veteran's left hip disability is related to service. Service connection may be granted if the Veteran's left hip disability was caused by or aggravated by his service connected right hip disability. See Spicer, supra.

The Board finds the VA examinations and medical opinions of record, cumulatively, are entitled to substantial probative weight; and they are persuasive. The August 2023 VA medical opinions offering the bilateral tendinopathy diagnosis, related to an injury to the pelvic girdle, and the positive nexus opinion establishing the Veteran's left hip disability is secondary to his right hip disability reflect a thorough review of and familiarity with the Veteran's record and medical history, a physical examination with all the necessary findings, and a factual rationale. The August 2023 medical opinions are adequate and significantly probative to establish service connection on a secondary basis.

The Board finds the November 2023 negative nexus opinions are inadequate as they relate to the left hip disability. The opinions fail to consider an alternate theory for left hip tendinopathy, do not provide a supporting rationale nor were there any citations to any scientific- or medical literature. The rationale that the Veteran does not have a left hip diagnosis ignores the diagnosis made in August 2023. Moreover, the opinions rely on a lack of evidence. Therefore, the November 2023 opinions are of limited probative value.

Notwithstanding the negative nexus opinions, the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran; and entitlement to service connection for the left hip disability, to include tendinopathy, is warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Therefore, secondary service connection for a left hip disability is granted.

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for TBI (claimed as concussion with loss of consciousness, TBI, and lightheadedness) is denied.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to a compensable rating for his service connected TBI.

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for a TBI and assigned a non-compensable evaluation because the cognitive, behavioral issues, and headaches were more than likely from an alternative etiology.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such disabilities and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Although the evaluation of a service-connected disability requires a review of a Veteran's medical history with regard to that disorder, the primary concern in a claim for an increased evaluation for a service-connected disability is the present level of disability. VA is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation; however, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). VA has a duty to consider the possibility of assigning staged ratings in all claims for increase. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran's service connected TBI was assigned an initial 0 percent disability rating, effective June 7, 2023. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045. 

DC 8045 notes there are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after traumatic brain injury), emotional/behavioral, and physical.

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain. Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive. Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others. In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day. Cognitive impairment is evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

Subjective symptoms may be the only TBI residual or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction. Subjective symptoms that are TBI residuals, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, must be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified." However, VA must separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" table. Id.

Emotional/behavioral dysfunction is evaluated under § 4.130 (Schedule of Ratings - Mental Disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder, such as in the Veteran's case. Emotional/behavioral symptoms are only evaluated under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" when there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder. Id.

Physical dysfunction, including neurological impairment, is evaluated based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions. The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of TBI. Residuals not listed in Diagnostic Code 8045 that are reported on an examination will be evaluated under the most appropriate diagnostic code. Id.

Each condition is evaluated separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation and are then combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations. Id.

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" contains 10 important facets of TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms. These facets include: 1.) memory, attention, concentration, executive functions; 2.) judgment; 3.) social interaction; 4.) orientation; 5.) motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system); 6.) visual spatial orientation; 7.) subjective symptoms; 8.) neuro-behavioral effects; 9.) communication; and 10.) consciousness. The table provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total." However, not every facet has every level of severity. The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling. A 100 percent rating is warranted if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets. If no facet is evaluated as "total," the rating assigned is based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent. Id.

Additionally, disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are generally rated separately before ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. However, VA is prohibited from pyramiding (rating the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes). 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. When disabilities have duplicative or overlapping symptoms, the rule against pyramiding prohibits VA from compensating the Veteran more than once for the same symptom or impairment. Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).

Turning to the evidence, the STRs show that in September 2016, the Veteran suffered head trauma, he had a headache, felt dizzy and lightheaded, went to the bathroom and passed out. He complained of headaches, denied vision changes, numbness and other symptoms. A CT scan showed no acute intracranial abnormality. In the separation exam, the Veteran complained that he had a bad memory since the time of the accident. The examining physician noted short-term memory loss.

There are no VA treatment records or private treatment records related to the Veteran's TBI.

At an August 2023 VA examination for headaches, the Veteran reported the condition began during 2018 when he was overseas, he had throbbing pain near the temples, light sensitivity, and blurred vision. It remained untreated. The Veteran claimed it is hard to work and, sometimes, he must call out and just lay in bed. The examiner indicated the Veteran also suffers from pressure, nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, changes in vision, and sensory changes. Typical head pain lasts one- to two days; he suffers from prostrating attacks more than once per month and from completely prostrating and prolonged attacks with less frequency. The migraines impair the Veteran's focus and concentration.

In the August 2023 VA medical opinion addressing headaches, the examiner determined it was at least as likely as not the headaches were related to service. The examiner reasoned the Veteran has a diagnosis, had a history of headaches during service related to acute nasopharyngitis and his TBI; and he continues to suffer from headaches. 

In an August 2023 VA medical opinion addressing mental disorders, the examiner determined the Veteran has a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with anxiety, depression, and insomnia. The examiner determined the disorder causes an occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The Veteran reported that during service, he experienced ever increasing physical limitations; he would begin to have anxiety attacks, moodiness, irritability and more. The Veteran stated his chronic pain caused him to continue to experience anxiety, hyper vigilance, irritability, moodiness, growing isolation and other symptoms. He began to talk to his PCM about his depression, anxiety, and insomnia; and he suggested getting VA help. The Veteran stated he has been searching for a therapist and is looking into medication. The examiner listed the Veteran's symptoms of depressed mood, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The Veteran was oriented x4, denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation, auditory or visual hallucination, and did not express any delusional beliefs. He was able to express and understand complex ideas; speech was clear and logical. The examiner determined the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs. 

The Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for migraines and PTSD. See September 2024, Rating Decision Codesheet.

At a November 2023 VA examination for an initial evaluation of residuals of traumatic brain injury, The examiner indicated the Veteran's history of a TBI in September 2016 and assessed the facets of TBI-related cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms of TBI as follows: (1) memory, attention, concentration, executive functions as "no complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions"; (2) judgment as "normal"; (3) social interaction as "social interaction is routinely appropriate"; (4) orientation as "always oriented to person, time, place, and situation"; (5) motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system) as "motor activity normal"; (6) visual spatial orientation as "normal"; (7) subjective symptoms as "no subjective symptoms"; (8) neurobehavioral effects as "no neurobehavioral effects"; (9) communication as "able to communicate by spoken and written language and to comprehend spoken and written language"; and (10) consciousness as "normal." There were no other findings. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms were more than likely from an alternative etiology than the claimed TBI. The examiner remarked the Veteran has cognitive issues since the 2016 head injury described as mainly short-term memory loss, forgets recent conversations, trouble with concentration, writes things down, forgets to pay his bills on time, independent in ADL. The behavioral issue since 2018 or so, are described as anxiety, depression. No active SI/HI/domestic violence/abuse; no seizure diagnosed; headaches since 2016 head injury, bitemporal area, pressure like feeling, gets associated light/noise sensitivity as well as nausea, takes no meds, lasts for few hours, severe attacks of headaches about once per month affecting his work as a technician for airplanes. The Veteran has an additional confirmed/documented mental health disorder of anxiety, depression. The examiner also opined the behavioral symptoms are less likely related to claimed TBI.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements and finds that he is competent and credible to describe the onset of his symptoms, especially because they are consistent with the record. See Layno, supra. His symptoms relating to TBI symptoms began during active service and continued after service. However, the Veteran is compensated for his TBI symptoms as: (1) migraine headaches, under DC 8100, rated as 30 percent disabling; and (2) PTSD, to include traumatic brain injury, under DC 8045-9411, rated at 50 percent disabling, both of which were effective June 7, 2023. The rule against pyramiding prohibits assigning a compensable rating for the Veteran's symptoms more than once. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. To assign a rating for the symptoms of headaches, memory loss, and other behavioral issues under DC 8045 as residuals of a TBI would violate the rule against pyramiding. See Esteban, 6 Vet. App. at 261-62; Lyles, 29 Vet. App. at 107. There are no other symptoms which warrant a compensable rating.

(Continued on the next page)

The Board finds the probative evidence persuasively disfavors the claim; therefore, the claim for a compensable rating for residuals of a TBI under DC 8045 is denied.

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Treadwell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.