Citation Nr: A25031941
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 211230-207756
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right hand condition is granted.

An effective date earlier than August 14, 2020 for a service-connected lumbosacral strain (back condition) is denied. 

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The claim for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back condition is remanded.

The claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his right hand condition is at least as likely as not related to his active service. 

2. In June 2014, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for a back condition that was ultimately denied in an August 2015 rating decision; this decision became final. Thereafter, on August 14, 2020, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right hand condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for an effective date earlier that August 14, 2020 for the award of service connection for a back condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 19.52.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2002 to January 2006. 

In the December 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for tinnitus, an initial increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a service-connected back condition, and a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Service connection for a right hand condition is granted.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a right hand condition that he contends is related to his active service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship (nexus) between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

First there is evidence of a current disability. In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed with a fracture.  Next, there is evidence of an in-service incurrence as the AOJ also favorably found that he was treated for right hand pain on multiple occasions during active service. Finally, with respect to a nexus, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds his credible report of continuity of symptomology sufficient to establish a nexus for purposes of the third element of the service connection analysis as he is competent to report having experienced right hand pain since separation from active service. 

Accordingly, service connection is granted.

2. An effective date earlier that August 14, 2020 for a service-connected back condition is denied. 

The Veteran is seeking an effective date earlier than August 14, 2020 for his service connected back condition.

"[A] Substantive Appeal must be filed within 60 days from the date that the [AOJ] mails the Statement of the Case to the appellant, or within the remainder of the 1-year period from the date of mailing of the notification of the determination being appealed, whichever period ends later." 38 C.F.R. § 19.52(b).

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on a claim for compensation is to be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but not earlier than the date the claim was received. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a). Where a claimant continuously pursues a claim, entitlement may be considered from the date of receipt of the initial claim; however, in order to use supplemental claims to continuously pursue review of an issue and thereby protect the earliest possible effective date in the event of an award of benefits, the supplemental claims must be filed within one year of notification of the last AOJ or Board decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).

The Board notes the following, relevant procedural history.

In June 2014, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for a back condition. His claim was denied in a December 2014 rating decision. 

In June 2015, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection that was later denied in an August 2015 rating decision. In July 2016, he filed a Notice of Disagreement, and a Statement of the Case was issued in November 2016. In May 2017, more than 60 days after the issuance of the SOC, and more than a year after the issuance of the rating decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 9 appeal to the Board. 

In July 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking service connection for a back condition. Shortly thereafter, the AOJ sent notice advising that his claim would not be processed because it was filed on the wrong form. The AOJ advised that he use VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.

On August 14, 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim for service connection for a back condition.  In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection effective August 14, 2020. 

In light of the above, the Board finds that August 14, 2020 is the appropriate effective date for the Veteran's claim. Of note, the rating decision that denied service connection was issued in August 2015. The Veteran filed his Notice of Disagreement nearly one year later in July 2016. Thus, when the Statement of the Case was issued in November 2016, the one-year time period since the issuance of the rating decision had already lapsed, which only left the Veteran 60 days to file his VA Form 9 appeal to the Board. As noted above, he filed his appeal in May 2017, approximately six months later. Due to his untimely filing, the Veteran's May 2017 appeal to the Board was not perfected, and the August 2015 rating decision became final. Therefore, August 14, 2020, the date the Veteran filed his Supplemental Claim, is the appropriate effective date for his back condition. Accordingly, the claim for an earlier effective date is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act, remand is permissible for only: (a) correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors, and (b) correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

"[O]nce the Secretary undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, he must provide an adequate one...."  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  

1. The claim for service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for tinnitus which he contends is related to his active service. In the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that he was diagnosed with a current disability, met the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, and was exposed to hazardous noise during active service. Despite this, the AOJ denied service connection because there was no evidence of an in-service onset or nexus. 

During an October 2014 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his condition began in 2008, a "couple years after" his discharge from active duty. The examiner opined that his tinnitus was less likely than not a result of his military noise exposure because the Veteran reported that his condition did not begin during service. The examiner did not discuss whether his tinnitus was or was not a delayed response to his in-service hazardous noise exposure, and the AOJ did not request an addendum opinion regarding same. 

The Veteran attended a second VA examination in August 2020, however, the examiner did not provide a medical opinion because, as noted in the report, an etiology opinion was not requested. However, contrary to what is indicated in the examiner's report, a July 2020 examination request explicitly indicates that a direct service connection medical opinion was requested. The AOJ did not request an addendum opinion to address the examiner's omission. 

Here, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain an adequate medical opinion that addressed whether the Veteran's tinnitus was or was not a delayed response to his in-service hazardous noise exposure. Accordingly, the claim must be remanded for further development. On remand, the AOJ is directed to obtain an addendum opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus. 

2. The claim for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back condition is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking an initial increased rating for his service-connected back condition. The period on appeal before the Board is August 14, 2020 (the date of claim) to January 11, 2021 (the date the AOJ sent notice of its January 2021 rating decision). 

The Veteran attended a December 2020 VA examination at which he reported current symptoms of "achy sharp pain with movement."  He reported treating his pain with "nerve burning treatments." He also noted taking Tramadol and Gabapentin three times a day. He stated that his condition prevented him from working a full-time job. The examiner's report included measurements for initial range of motion (ROM) testing and observed repetitive use testing. The examiner also provided estimated ROM measurements for repeated use over time and flare-ups. Of note, the report did not address the ameliorative effects, if any, of the Veteran's medication. Specifically, the clinician failed to quantify, estimate, or describe what the severity of his symptoms would be without medication, thus leaving the Board without the requisite information needed to assess the severity of his condition. Failing to obtain an addendum opinion regarding the possible ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medications was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As such, the matter must be remanded for a retrospective opinion.  

3. The claim for a TDIU is remanded.

During the December 2020 VA examination referenced above, the Veteran reasonably raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU; however, the issue was not addressed in the January 2021 rating decision. Given VA's duty to maximize benefits, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional error in satisfying this duty when it failed to recognize and adjudicate this issue in the first instance. Accordingly, the matter is remanded. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's back condition. If a new examination is necessary in order to render an opinion, one should be scheduled. 

The examiner is asked to provide a retrospective medical opinion regarding the severity of the Veteran's condition, discounting the ameliorative effects on his range of motion, if any, from his use of Gabapentin and Tramadol for the period from August 14, 2020 to January 11, 2021. 

If the examiner is unable to offer such an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should indicate whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), in the record (additional facts are required), or by the examiner (does not have the needed knowledge or training).

2. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus. If a new examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. The examiner is directed to answer the following questions: 

Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's tinnitus was caused by his active service, to include whether his tinnitus is/is not a delayed response to his in-service hazardous noise exposure? Why or why not?

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Graison-McBride, Kimberly F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.