Citation Nr: A25031066
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-409607
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, the application to readjudicate the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Since the unappealed April 2019 rating decision, new and relevant evidence has been received that tends to prove the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

2. The Veteran is currently in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for his erectile dysfunction and is already in receipt of special monthly compensation (SMC) for loss of use of a creative organ under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).

3. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot has manifested as severe symptoms and more nearly approximates marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities.

4. The evidence of record does not contain five or more treatment interventions documented by electrocardiogram (ECG) within a 12-month (one year) period.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria to readjudicate the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 3.2501.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.20, 4.27, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5003-5276.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Codes 7010.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from January 1991 to January 2011.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from January 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In January 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, most recently addressed in an April 2019 rating decision.  In October 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.  Therefore, the Board must determine whether new and relevant evidence has been received for the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder based only on the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

The rating decision on appeal for the issues of increased ratings for left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot, supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation, and erectile dysfunction was issued in January 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, for the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  For the remaining claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran was gainfully employed throughout the rating period on appeal.  See e.g., October 2022 VA Examination.  Thus, the issue of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability has not been raised by the record.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

1. New and relevant evidence 

Under the AMA, a claimant may pursue a claim or issue previously denied by the AOJ or the Board by filing a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) along with new and relevant evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(a)(2) and § 3.2501.  If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the AOJ will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the AOJ will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim, including evidence that raises a new theory of entitlement not previously addressed.  Id.

By way of recent background, an April 2019 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The Veteran did not timely file a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) and no new and relevant evidence was submitted within one year.  Thus, the April 2019 rating decision became final.

Subsequently, in October 2022, the Veteran filed a claim requesting the AOJ reconsider the Veteran's claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  An October 2023 rating decision denied the claim on the basis that the evidence the Veteran submitted was not new and relevant.

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted correspondence indicating that in 1996, while stationed in Fort Lewis, Washington, one of his children died, contributing to his acquired psychiatric disorder(s).  This evidence is new, in that it was not previously submitted or considered.  It is also relevant as it tends to prove a matter at issue.  Accordingly, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been received and readjudication of the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is warranted.

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his erectile dysfunction.  The Veteran is currently assigned a noncompensable rating for his erectile dysfunction under DC 7522.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Effective November 14, 2021, under DC 7522, a noncompensable rating is warranted for erectile dysfunction with or without penile deformity.  This is the highest rating allowable under the law.  As the Veteran's disability is explicitly listed in the rating schedule, rating it pursuant to an alternate DC would not be appropriate. See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336-37 (2015).

The Board notes that, prior to November 14, 2021, a 20 percent rating was warranted for deformity of the penis with the loss of erectile power.  However, because the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for his erectile dysfunction in February 2022, his claim must be considered under the amended version of the diagnostic code.  

Footnote 1 to Diagnostic Code 7522 indicates individuals with erectile dysfunction should also be reviewed for entitlement to SMC for loss of use of a creative organ under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).  In this case, the record reflects that the Veteran is already in receipt of SMC for the loss of use of a creative organ throughout the period on appeal.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his erectile dysfunction in October 2022.  The Veteran reported his current symptoms as unable to obtain or maintain an erection.  Outside this diagnosis, there was nothing abnormal noted related to male reproductive organ conditions.  

The Veteran has not otherwise contended he experiences any symptoms due to his erectile dysfunction apart from an inability to obtain or maintain an erection.  As such, extraschedular consideration is not warranted.

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction under DC 7522 must be denied.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his left foot degenerative arthritis.  

The Veteran's left foot degenerative arthritis is currently rated 20 percent disabling pursuant to DC 5003-5276.  Hyphenated codes are used when a rating for a particular disability under one diagnostic code is based upon rating of the residuals of that disability under another diagnostic code.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  The hyphenated diagnostic codes in this case indicate that degenerative arthritis under DC 5003 is the service-connected disorder and that acquired flatfoot (pes planus) under DC 5276 is the residual condition.  

Pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5003, degenerative arthritis established by X-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) for the specific joint or joints involved.  When, however, the limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints involved is noncompensable under the appropriate diagnostic codes, a rating of 10 percent is for application for each such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion.  Limitation of motion must be objectively confirmed by findings such as swelling, muscle spasm, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion.  In the absence of limitation of motion, X-ray evidence of involvement of two or more major joints or two or more minor joint groups, with occasional incapacitating exacerbations warrants a 20 percent evaluation.  X-ray evidence of involvement of two or more major joints or two or more minor joints warrants a 10 percent evaluation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5003.

Under Diagnostic Code 5276 a noncompensable rating is assigned for mild symptoms relieved by built-up shoes or arch support.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for bilateral or unilateral moderate symptoms with weight-bearing line over or medial to great toe, inward bowing of the Tendo Achilles, pain on manipulation and use of the feet.  For a unilateral disability, a 20 percent rating is assigned for severe symptoms and requires objective evidence of marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), pain on manipulation and use accentuated, an indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for pronounced symptoms and requires marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the Tendo Achilles on manipulation, and the disability is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The criteria in Diagnostic Code 5276 are conjunctive.  See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision meant that all of the conditions listed in the provision must be met).  Compare Johnson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 9 (1994) (only one disjunctive "or" requirement must be met in order for an increased rating to be assigned).  See also Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152 (2009) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 is not applicable when the ratings criteria are successive and not variable).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his left foot degenerative arthritis in February 2022 and diagnosed with bilateral pes planus and degenerative arthritis of the left mid foot.  The Veteran reported pain/burning in the middle of his left foot whenever he walks or stands for prolonged periods of time.  The Veteran did not report flare-ups or functional loss after repeated use over time.  The Veteran reported pain on the use of his left foot but not pain on manipulation.  The Veteran did not have swelling on use, characteristic calluses, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces, objective evidence of marked deformity, marked pronation, inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, or inward displacement of the Achilles' tendon.  The examiner noted the Veteran did have decreased longitudinal arch height of both feet on weight-bearing and the weight-bearing line is over or medial to the great toe in both feet.  The examiner did not report the Veteran suffered from any plantar fasciitis, Morton's neuroma, metatarsalgia, hammer toe, hallux valgus, hallux rigidus, pes cavus, malunion or nonunion, surgical procedures, or any additional foot injuries or conditions.  The examiner described the Veteran's functional limitations in his left foot due to pain as disturbance of locomotion.  The Veteran reported pain on weight-bearing he described as burning in the midfoot with extended waling, going upstairs, or standing.  The Veteran does not use any assistive devices.  

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for his left foot degenerative arthritis in October 2022 and diagnosed with left foot pes planus and degenerative arthritis of the left mid foot.  The Veteran reported a sharp pain with numbness and tingling in the middle of his left foot whenever he walks or stands for prolonged periods of time.  The Veteran did report flare-ups he described as sharp pain, but did not report that his flare-ups impacted the function of his left foot.  He also reported functional loss after repeated use over time using stairs and standing for prolonged periods of time.  The Veteran reported pain on the use of his left foot and pain on manipulation.  The Veteran did have swelling on use, but did not report characteristic calluses, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces, decreased longitudinal arch height, objective evidence of marked deformity, marked pronation, inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, a weight-bearing line over or medial to the great toe, nor inward displacement of the Achilles' tendon.  The examiner did not report the Veteran suffered from any plantar fasciitis, Morton's neuroma, metatarsalgia, hammer toe, hallux valgus, hallux rigidus, pes cavus, malunion or nonunion, or surgical procedures.  The examiner reported moderate degenerative arthritis that does not chronically compromise weight bearing but does require arch supports, custom orthotic inserts, or shoe modifications.  The examiner described the Veteran's functional limitations in his left foot due to pain as swelling, disturbance of locomotion, interference with sitting, interference with standing, pain, and fatigue.  The Veteran reported pain on passive motion, active motion, weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, and on rest he described as throbbing pain.  The Veteran constantly uses shoe inserts.  

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's left foot degenerative arthritis does not warrant a rating higher than 20 percent under any applicable Diagnostic Code.  There is no evidence to suggest the Veteran suffers from marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, or marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achilles on manipulation that is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances.  The Board notes that there is no indication of bilateral symptoms, or x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis in the Veteran's right foot. 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran is entitled to separate ratings under other potentially applicable diagnostic codes.  However, there is no lay or medical evidence showing that the Veteran's service-connected left foot degenerative arthritis was manifested by or more nearly approximated hallux valgus, hallux rigidus, hammertoes, weak foot, claw foot, or malunion or nonunion of the tarsal or metatarsal bones.  As such, consideration of Diagnostic Codes 5277, 5278, 5279, 5280, 5281, 5282, or 5283 are inapplicable.  Additionally, because there is no evidence the Veteran suffers from plantar fasciitis, DC 5269 is not applicable.  Therefore, additional separate ratings are not warranted for the period on appeal.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's service-connected left foot degenerative arthritis under the diagnostic criteria for other foot injuries.  In this case, his left foot degenerative arthritis has manifested as chronic pain in the left foot, particularly when aggravated by increased activity.  The evidence of record does not suggest that the condition affecting his foot was the result of "injury," such as to permit the use of Diagnostic Code 5284 as an alternative Diagnostic Code.  See Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484 (2016).  Finally, granting a separate rating would constitute pyramiding.  Therefore, the Board finds that a rating under Diagnostic Code 5284 is not warranted for the period on appeal.

The Board has also considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, and the holdings in DeLuca.  However, a higher disability rating for service-connected left foot degenerative arthritis is not warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain or weakness in this case, as the Veteran's symptoms are supported by pathology consistent with the assigned 20 percent rating, and no higher schedular rating is warranted for the period on appeal.

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for left foot pes planus with degenerative arthritis of the mid foot must be denied.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his atrial fibrillation.  

The Veteran's atrial fibrillation is currently rated 10 percent disabling pursuant to DC 7010.

Pursuant to DC 7010, a 10 percent rating is assigned for supraventricular tachycardia confirmed by ECG, with one to four treatment interventions per year; or, confirmed by ECG with either continuous use of oral medications to control or use of vagal maneuvers to control.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for supraventricular tachycardia confirmed by ECG, with five or more treatment interventions per year.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his heart condition in October 2022 and diagnosed with supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation.  The examiner noted the Veteran's atrial fibrillation did not qualify as ischemic heart disease.  The Veteran requires continuous medication for control of his atrial fibrillation.  The examiner noted the Veteran does have a cardiac arrhythmia requiring cardioversion treatment intervention 1-4 times per year.  The examiner further noted the Veteran did not have a heart valve condition, any infectious heart conditions, pericardial adhesions, or procedures for the treatment of a heart condition.  The Veteran was hospitalized in 1991 for atrial fibrillation.  

The Veteran's VA treatment records throughout the period on appeal present a similar disability picture.  Interpreting the law in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board interprets the phrase "per year" to mean a 12-month period versus a calendar year.  None of the evidence, lay or medical, suggests the Veteran's atrial fibrillation required five or more treatment interventions per year, confirmed by ECG.  

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for supraventricular arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation must be denied.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran contends that his acquired psychiatric disorder began on active duty, and he specifically contends it began, at least in part, due to the death of his child during service.

In addition to the Veteran's claim for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the Veteran's treatment records contain diagnoses for generalized anxiety and major depressive disorder.  In Clemons, the Court found that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental health disability that could reasonably be encompassed by the Veteran's description of the claim.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  As a result, the Board has expanded the Veteran's claim to include any acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran has not received a VA examination to evaluate his acquired psychiatric disorder.

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  Failure to obtain a VA examination for his acquired psychiatric disorder is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In this instance, because the Veteran has diagnoses or persistent or recurrent symptoms for an acquired psychiatric disorder, has provided testimony regarding an in-service event, and there is some indication of a potential relationship between the in-service event and his acquired psychiatric disorder, remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the etiology of any diagnosed psychiatric disorder.  The entire claims file must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner is asked to:

(a.) Clarify all acquired psychiatric disorders diagnosed.  If the examiner feels that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for an acquired psychiatric disorder, a complete explanation for why this is so must be provided.

(b.) Next, for each diagnosed disability, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to service, to include the Veteran's claimed stressors.

A complete rationale for any medical opinion rendered must be provided. 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Feistritzer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.