Citation Nr: A25031234
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 250114-510373
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Payment or reimbursement of non-Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) special mode transportation provided by King American Ambulance (KAA) service on June 14, 2024, is granted, subject to laws and regulations regarding payment.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran received non-VA emergency ambulance care provided by KAA on June 14, 2024, which was not related to a service-connected disability; the Veteran was service connected at 70 percent at the time of the care on appeal. 

2. The Veteran's condition was of such a severity that it reflected a medical emergency which a prudent layperson would have sought emergency treatment.

3. The evidence of record indicates, and the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) initially indicated that the treatment was emergent in nature, for which he was treated at a VA Medical Center (VAMC) emergency room.

4. The Veteran was eligible for special mode transportation to a VAMC for an emergent evaluation for a fall related to suspected complications from a recent thrombectomy and was unable to defray the cost of the transportation.

5. VHA denied the claim as untimely submitted, as not received within 30 days of the date the beneficiary travel was completed, and care was not associated with a scheduled examination, he was not determined to be visually impaired, have a spinal cord injury, or an amputee whose travel was related to a rehabilitation program, nor was the care for acute suicide crisis.

6. Resolving reasonable doubt for the Veteran, the claim for reimbursement of beneficiary travel expenses was timely submitted.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for payment or reimbursement of expenses related to beneficiary special mode transportation, provided by KAA on June 14, 2024, are met, subject to laws and regulations regarding payment.  38 U.S.C. §§ 111, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 70.1-70.50.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from March 1965 to December 1968.  See DD 214.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 administrative decision of the VHA.

In a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), which the Board received on January 14, 2025, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

On March 5, 2025, the Veteran was notified of his option to switch dockets to an Evidence Submission or Hearing Docket, within 60 days of the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or within a year of the decision on appeal.  See March 2025 Board Docketing Letter.  The Veteran has not submitted additional evidence or a docket switch request.  As the Board is granting the claim, the Veteran is not prejudiced by the Board addressing the merits of this appeal.   

1. Payment or reimbursement of special mode travel on June 14, 2024.  

The Veteran seeks payment or reimbursement of expenses related to emergency care provided by KAA on June 14, 2024.  See January 2025 VA Form 10182.

The VHA initially denied payment of the claim as untimely, as not received within 30 days of when the beneficiary travel was completed under 38 C.F.R. § 70.20(c).  See VHA Beneficiary Travel File, received on March 5, 2025, pg. 13 (containing Explanation of Payment (EOP)).  The EOP indicates that the claim was also reviewed under 38 U.S.C. § 1728, related to non-VA emergency care.  See id.  The VHA decision letter indicates that the claim submitted by the ambulance service under as a community medical claim was rejected under provisions of beneficiary travel, as travel not for a scheduled compensation and pension examination, the Veteran was not vision impaired, spinal cord injured or an amputee whose travel was  in connection with the VA's special disabilities rehabilitation program, the care was not for a suicide crisis, and it was untimely filed more than 30 days after the travel was completed.  See id. at pgs. 15 (citing 38 C.F.R. § 70.10(a)(3); 38 U.S.C. § 111(b)(1)(G); 38 C.F.R. § 17.1210; and 38 C.F.R. § 70.20(c)).  The claim was not denied for reasons of the Veteran's income or other health insurance.

Beneficiary Travel - Special Mode

Generally, VA beneficiary travel is a payment for travel expenses incurred in the United States to help Veterans and other persons obtain care or services from the VHA. 38 U.S.C. § 111; 38 C.F.R. § 70.10.  A Veteran is eligible for beneficiary travel payments for travel to or from a VA facility or VA-authorized health care facility for the following: 1) treatment for a service-connected disability, regardless of the disability rating; 2) treatment for any disability, provided that the veteran has a service-connected disability rated at 30 percent or more; 3) a scheduled compensation and pension examination; 4) if the veteran receives pension under 38 U.S.C. § 1521; 5) if the veteran's annual income does not exceed the maximum annual rate of pension that the veteran would receive under 38 U.S.C. § 1521; or, 6) if, the veteran is unable to defray the expenses of that travel under certain circumstances. 38 U.S.C. § 111; 38 C.F.R. § 70.10(a).

The claimant must apply for payment of beneficiary travel within 30 calendar days after completing beneficiary travel that does not include a special mode of transportation.  38 C.F.R. § 70.20(b).  For beneficiary travel that includes a special mode of transportation, a claimant must apply for payment of beneficiary travel and obtain approval from VA prior to the travel.  If the travel included a special mode of transportation and the claimant without prior approval applies for payment of the beneficiary travel within 30 days after the travel is completed, the application will be considered timely submitted if the travel was for emergency treatment.  38 C.F.R. § 70.20(c).  Special mode of transportation includes an ambulance or other mode of transportation specifically designed to transport disabled persons. 38 C.F.R. § 70.20.

When payment is requested for beneficiary travel that includes a special mode of transportation, including by ambulance, VA will approve payment if: (1) the travel is medically required; (2) the beneficiary is unable to defray the cost of such transportation; and (3) VHA approved the travel prior to travel in the special mode of transportation, or the travel was undertaken in connection with a medical emergency.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 70.4(d), 70.2.

In rendering a decision, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of all medical and lay evidence of record, account for evidence it finds persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  If the positive and negative evidence is evenly or approximately balanced, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another, is the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine not for application).

Application

Turning to the evidence, the Board notes an incomplete missing documentation memorandum is of record which indicates, "Please find attached the VHA file for _______ appeal for Mileage Reimbursement. I received the request to fulfill this document request on February 24, 2025.  As you review this file, you will notice that the following documentation is missing: o   [.]"   VHA File, pg. 2.   It appears that a beneficiary travel reimbursement claim was created by VHA on the same day it was denied.  Thus, it is unclear from the record whether the ambulance service submitted a claim prior to September 2024 as a community medical claim.  

On June 14, 2024, the KAA ambulance service was dispatched to the Veteran's home after he fell at home, two days after his discharge from a VA Medical Center (VAMC) for a thrombectomy/percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTCA) with placement of a stent, right femoral bypass with an ipsilateral, sartorius flap vein hematoma.  See VHA file, pg. 6 (containing medical records from the emergency department of the San Francisco VAMC).  Therefore, he had recently been treated at the VAMC, with complications two days after discharge.  An ambulance was dispatched to his home, and brought him back to this VAMC, as his complaints were of terrible groin pain since treatment for a thrombectomy two days earlier.  See VHA File, pg. 6.  The ambulance service determined, perhaps on advice of the VAMC, that his condition may be related to the PTCA and stent he received at the VAMC two days earlier.  

Unfortunately, the ambulance service trip report is not of record in the claim file. Thus, it is not possible to conclusively determine, that the emergency medical service (EMS) consulted with the VAMC regarding a recent procedure and that VAMC directed that the Veteran be brought to the VAMC.  However, it makes sense that the EMS contacted the facility for which he was recently undergoing treatment, which may have had a complication.  The file indicates that the Veteran had his last dose of an anticoagulant therapy the day before the event.

Upon careful review of the file, VA Treatment Records (CAPRI) which overlap with the date of service on appeal, are of record.  These records indicate that the Veteran had undergone a balloon angioplasty and thrombectomy at a San Francisco VAMC via a bilateral groin access for a left sided hematoma and was discharged to his home on June 12, 2024.  See CAPRI, received on June 28, 2024, pg. 1.  Therefore, the Board finds that at least as likely as not, his condition was related to complications from his treatment at the VAMC 2 days earlier.  After a holistic view of the record, the Board finds that the record tends to corroborate that the EMS contacted the VAMC and brought the Veteran to the VAMC either at the direction and authorization of that VAMC, or because EMS determined his condition was related to treatment at the VAMC.  

Therefore, the Board finds the evidence indicates that the Veteran's condition was related to treatment at the VAMC two days earlier.  The Board further finds that it is at least as likely as not that the KAA brought the Veteran to the VAMC on advice from the VAMC, for which his condition was related.  Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence is at least evenly balanced that the KAA brought the Veteran to the VAMC on advice, or authorization, of the VAMC. 

Furthermore, the Board notes that this care was emergent in nature.  Where special mode of transportation is provided without prior approval, and an application for beneficiary travel was not received within 30 days after the travel is completed, the application will be considered timely submitted if the travel was for emergency treatment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 70.20(c).  As the care in this case was emergent in nature, the claim is considered timely.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 70.4(d), 70.2.

Regarding timeliness, the Board notes the missing documentation memorandum is incomplete.  Additionally, the EOP indicates that the claim had been filed under Community Care provisions.  Thus, it makes sense that KAA would file for Community Care reimbursement if the care was authorized by the VAMC.  As any Community Care filings are not of record, and the missing documentations memorandum appears incomplete, the Board finds the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether a claim was filed prior to September 2024.  Therefore, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is for application as to the timeliness of filing in this case.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

After resolving reasonable doubt for the Veteran, the Board finds the claim was timely.  As this was the primary reason for the VHA denial of the beneficiary travel special mode transportation claim, and he was otherwise found eligible, the Board finds that the claim is warranted.  The claim for payment or reimbursement of beneficiary travel, special mode provided by KAA on June 14, 2024, is granted subject to laws and regulations regarding payment. 

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McKenzie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.