Citation Nr: A25031072
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231103-390290
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

A total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

?

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has been unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1984 to December 1987. 

This matter is on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision.

In a November 2023 notice of disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

A TDIU. 

Legal Criteria 

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, attention must be given to: The veteran's history, education, skill, and training; Whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy, or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue.  Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, and reaching, as well as auditory and visual limitations; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

For purposes of this decision, the Board uses the term "sedentary" to have the common meaning of a non-physical job, primarily involving sitting and usually performed in an indoor, office environment.  See Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139, 147-48 (2018).

Analysis

The Veteran contends that he should be granted TDIU based upon his service-connected disabilities.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that his physical disabilities result in discomfort and pain making it difficult for him to perform basic activities and to get adequate rest.  The Veteran then indicated that his lack of sleep results in irritability, poor memory, lack of concentration, difficulty performing mental tasks, and an overall inability to handle workplace stress and decisions.  The Veteran indicated that he was forced to retire early because his disability symptoms and functional deficiencies caused him to be unreliable and unpunctual.  The Veteran reported he last worked in June 2019.  See November 2022 statement. 

Initially, in the May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran is not working and meets the schedular criteria for TDIU.  The Board is bound by these?prior favorable findings, which were not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, the threshold for a schedular TDIU has been met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  

The Board notes that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities include residuals of cold weather injury to the right hand at 30 percent from January 1998, residuals of cold weather injury to the left hand at 30 percent from January 1998, residuals of frostbite of the right foot at 30 percent from August 2001, residuals of frostbite to the left foot from August 2001, and tinea pedis at zero percent from December 1987, for a total combined rating of 80 percent.

In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in connection with the claim.  The private clinician concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected medical conditions render him unable to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment.  The Veteran's education includes completing high school.  The Veteran worked as a mail equipment operator for the US Postal Service (USPS) from 1989-2019.  The Veteran's tasks included physically demanding work and sedentary responsibilities.  The private clinician opined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in feet pain, causing difficulty with prolonged weight bearing such as standing or walking, and high impact activities.  The clinician opined that the Veteran requires frequent non-weight bearing breaks.  The clinician also opined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in hand pain, especially activities requiring fine motor coordination, including typing, gripping, pushing, and pulling.  The clinician also explained that the Veteran's pain and resulting sleep deprivation make it difficult for the Veteran to concentrate and complete daily task in the workplace.  The private clinician's opinion was based upon review of the Veteran's medical records, military personnel file, lay assertions, and relevant medical literature.  The Board finds that the opinion is adequate because it was provided by a medical professional, it is based on an accurate medical history, and it provides a clear explanation for the conclusions and supporting data.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295 (2008).

The Veteran was also afforded a May 2023 VA examination to assess the severity of his cold injury residuals.  The Veteran described having current numbness and pain to the bilateral hands and feet.  The Veteran indicated that his bilateral hand and feet pain is constant and described his numbness as feeling like pins and needles.  The Veteran reported that he currently does not have enough strength to open things.  As a result of these findings, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's conditions impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.  Id. 

The Board finds that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of the combined effects of his service-connected disabilities.  In this regard, the Veteran's statements and medical evidence shows that the severity of his feet conditions prevent him from standing, walking, or performing high-impact activities for prolonged periods, resulting in the need for frequent breaks.  Additionally, the Veteran's bilateral hand pain causes difficulty with activities that require fine motor coordination, such as typing, gripping objects, opening things, pushing, or pulling.  Thus, the Veteran's physical limitations would prevent him from engaging in physically demanding work.  Furthermore, the severity of the pain from the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have caused sleep impairment, resulting in lack of concentration and inability to perform basic work tasks.  This impairment along with the Veteran's bilateral hand disabilities prevent the Veteran from transitioning to a completely sedentary field of employment.  

Therefore, particularly when reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds the Veteran has been unable to obtain or follow gainful employment due to the limitations caused by his service-connected disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  Thus, a TDIU is warranted.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fyffe, Michael C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.