Citation Nr: A25031989
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240320-425207
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis ("neck disability"), as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis ("back disability") is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of a 30 percent rating, effective January 6, 2023, for service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis ("foot disability") is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's neck disability was caused, or aggravated by, his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from July 2006 to July 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 higher-level review rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which adjudicated the Veteran's request for higher-level review of a prior October 2023 rating decision.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the back and foot disability claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service-connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Service connection for a disability may also be granted on a secondary basis if a Veteran has: (1) a current disability; and (2) the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. Id.

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that his neck disability is secondarily related to his service-connected disabilities, including his existing service-connected lumbar spine disability.  See February 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his cervical spine conditions in January 2023, where the Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine.  Moreover, in its March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of cervical spine degenerative arthritis.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The Board finds, therefore, that the first element of service connection has been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

The Veteran has been awarded service connection for numerous conditions, including lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis ("back disability"). As such, the remaining question for the Board is whether there is a link between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, including his back disability, and his neck disability. After careful consideration of the evidence, the Board finds that the evidence is in at least approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's neck disability is caused by his service-connected disabilities, including his back disability.

The Veteran was afforded a VA medical opinion for his neck disability in March 2019, where the examiner concluded that the Veteran's neck disability is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected back disability.  The examiner reasoned that the medical literature does not support that lumbar degenerative disc disease causes cervical degenerative disc disease.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in December 2019 from Dr. T.J.S.  In his report, Dr. T.J.S. indicated that he conducted an extensive review of the Veteran's service and medical records and concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's neck disability is secondarily related to his service-connected back disability.  Dr. T.J.S. reasoned that although the March 2019 VA examiner's contention that the medical literature does not support a nexus between these two conditions, the examiner did not cite to any medical literature in support of this conclusion and this review was cursory and incomplete.  Moreover, Dr. T.J.S. indicated that he did review the relevant medical literature and found that it does indeed support a nexus between these conditions.

The Veteran was afforded another VA medical opinion for his neck disability in January 2023, where the examiner again concluded that the Veteran's neck disability is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected back disability, or aggravated by this condition.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's neck and service-connected back disabilities are not medically related and that a thorough review of the medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship between.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is at least approximately balanced regarding whether the Veteran's neck disability is secondarily caused by his service-connected disabilities, including his service-connected back disability.  While the Board acknowledges that the March 2019 and January 2023 VA examiners found that the Veteran's neck disability is less likely than not caused by his service-connected back disability, the Board affords greater probative weight to the private medical opinion of Dr. T.J.S. for two reasons.  First, the Board finds that Dr. T.G.S.'s report provides an opinion that is more probative in that Dr. T.G.S. cited to specific sources of medical literature in support of his opinion, while both examiners failed to cite to a single source of the medical literature that they purported to review.  Second, the Board notes that both VA examiners utilized the standard of "proximate cause" in regards to secondary service connection, a standard which was found unlawful by the Federal Circuit in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360 (Mar. 8, 2023).  As such, the Board affords less weigh to these opinions due to the use of an incorrect standard.

At this point, the Board could remand the claim for yet another VA medical opinion which utilizes the proper standard pursuant to the holding in Spicer. Given the evidence of record, however, a request for another opinion could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Accordingly, the claim for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability as secondary to service-connected back disability is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for service-connected lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of a 30 percent rating, effective January 6, 2023, for service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is remanded.

The Veteran claims entitlement to an increased rating for his lumbar spine disability and an earlier effective date for the award of a 30 percent rating for his foot disability. Recently, in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. Vet. App. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that when evaluating musculoskeletal conditions, the beneficial effects of medications must be discounted where the applicable diagnostic code does not reference medication as a factor in evaluation. Here, the Veteran reported at a January 2023 VA lumbar spine examination that he treats his back disability with Tramadol, Cyclobenzaprine and Ibuprofen as needed. At a January 2023 VA foot disabilities examination, he reported treating his pes planus and plantar fasciitis with Tramadol and Advil as needed. Although Advil, and its generic equivalent, Ibuprofen, are over-the-counter medications, Tramadol is an opiod used to treat muscle pain and Cyclobenzaprine is a muscle relaxant. The Veteran's use of these medications, in particular the latter two, could have a significant impact on his range of motion and perception of pain related to his back and foot disabilities. As the diagnostic codes used to evaluate these disabilities do not consider medication as a factor in evaluation, the Board finds that additional clarification is required. The failure to obtain examinations that address the ameliorative effects of medication constitute pre-decisional duty to assist errors warranting remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain addendum opinions from an appropriate VA examiner(s) to provide an opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's lumbar spine and pes planus/plantar fasciitis disabilities absent the ameliorative effects of medication. 

The examiner is asked to quantify the extent to which the Veteran's use of pain medication ameliorates the functional impairment of his lumbar spine and pes planus/plantar fasciitis. If possible, please attempt to estimate this in terms of degrees of range of motion.

If this is not feasible, the examiner should provide a detailed explanation and rationale for why this could not be accomplished. Specifically, if the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be rendered. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Hillman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.