Citation Nr: A25031809
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231127-396531
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period on appeal, with consideration of additional loss due to pain, repetitive use and flare-ups, the Veteran's left knee strain was manifested by flexion that was most restricted to 120 degrees with normal extension.

2. During the period on appeal, with consideration of additional loss due to pain, repetitive use and flare-ups, the Veteran's right knee strain was manifested by flexion that was most restricted to 120 degrees with normal extension.

3. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's right knee showed lateral instability that was productive of slight impairment; there were no signs of recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, or the prescribed use of an assistive device or brace.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 3.326(a), 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 3.326(a), 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5260.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 3.326(a), 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5257.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2009 to March 2013.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2022 rating decision pertaining to the issue of increased disability ratings for his bilateral knees.  In October 2023, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR and requested review of a May 2023 rating decision pertaining to the issue of entitlement to service connection for CFS.  In November 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued two separate HLR decisions, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2022 decisions for the bilateral knees and the May 2023 rating decision for the CFS.   

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  In his November 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran requested review of a claim for service connection for thoracolumbar spine condition.  However, that claim was already appealed to the Board in the May 2022 VA Form 10182.  The prohibition on concurrent elections under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) precludes the Veteran from filing an appeal for this issue.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar spine condition is not presently on appeal before the Board and will not be addressed further in this decision.

Due to the Veteran's election of the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 and May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions for the Veteran's bilateral knees and CFS, respectively, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for CFS, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Finally, regarding the characterization of the issue on appeal for the right knee instability claim, the November 2023 HLR decision on appeal continued a noncompensable (0 percent) rating for that disability.  However, subsequent to that decision, in a January 2025 decision, the Board restored a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's right knee instability, effective December 23, 2021.  This decision was implemented by the AOJ in a January 2025 rating decision.  As a result of these decisions, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal to reflect that for the period on appeal, the Veteran has a 10 percent disability rating for right knee instability and is seeking a higher disability rating.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time, based on the facts found, are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as "staging the ratings." Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to increased disability ratings for bilateral knee disabilities. 

As of the date of this decision, the Veteran's left and right knee strains are assigned 10 percent disability ratings under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260.  Additionally, his right knee is assigned a 10 percent disability rating for instability under DC 5257.  The Veteran is seeking higher evaluations for his bilateral knee disabilities.  In his August 2022 claim, he reported he deals with daily, consistent, severe knee pain in both knees.  He also reported that his instability and pain had only gotten worse over time.  See August 2022 VA 21-526EZ.

The relevant diagnostic codes for the knee include DC 5260, which rates based on limitation of flexion of the leg.  A 0 percent is warranted for flexion limited to 60 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 45 degrees.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 30 degrees.  And a maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 15 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

DC 5261 rates based on limitation of extension of the leg.  A 0 percent is warranted when extension is limited to 5 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is warranted when extension is limited to 10 degrees.  A 20 percent rating is warranted when extension is limited to 15 degrees.  A 30 percent rating is warranted when extension is limited to 20 degrees.  A 40 percent rating is warranted when extension is limited to 30 degrees.  And a maximum 50 percent rating is warranted when extension is limited to 45 degrees.  Id.

Full range of motion of the knee is from 0 degrees extension to 140 degrees flexion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

DC 5257 provides ratings for symptoms of recurrent subluxation or instability and patellar instability. Recurrent subluxation manifested by a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation, is rated 10 percent.  A sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation, is rated 20 percent.  An unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation, is rated 30 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, pain is inapplicable to ratings under DC 5257 because it is not predicated on loss of range of motion. See Johnson v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 7, 11 (1996).

DC 5258 provides for a 20 percent rating for a dislocated semilunar cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the knee joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

DC 5259 provides for a 10 percent rating for symptomatic residuals of removal of a semilunar cartilage.  Id.

Ratings under DC 5259 require consideration of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 because removal of a semilunar cartilage may result in complications producing loss of motion. VAOGCPREC 9-98. Thus, if there are symptoms as a residual of a meniscectomy (partial removal of semilunar cartilage in the knee) which are subluxation or instability, or limitation of motion, separate ratings for such manifestation may be assigned. However, DC 5258 contemplates symptoms of frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint. A locked knee is "a condition in which the knee lacks full extension and flexion because of internal derangement, usually the result of a torn meniscus." http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/locked+knee. Thus, locking encompasses limitation of motion such that assigning additional and separate rating for limited knee flexion or extension under, respectively, DCs 5260 or 5261 would constitute pyramiding under 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 and, as such, is prohibited. See VAOPGCPRECs 23-99 and 9-93.

A claimant who has limitation of motion and instability of a knee, may be rated separately under Diagnostic Codes 5260 and 5257. Any separate rating must be based on additional disabling symptomatology that meets the criteria for a compensable rating. VAOPGCPREC 23-97 (1997); VAOPGCPREC 9-98 (1998). Separate ratings under Diagnostic Code 5260 for limitation of flexion and Diagnostic Code 5261 for limitation of extension, may be assigned for disability of the same knee; however, any separate rating must be based on additional disabling symptomatology that meets the criteria for a compensable rating. VAOGCPREC 9-2004 (2004).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, may not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under section 4.40 or section 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, as part of the present claim, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022.  See September 2022 VA Knee and Lower Leg Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner diagnosed a bilateral knee strain.  The Veteran's current symptoms consisted of constant pain and loss of range of motion, which he treated with over-the-counter (OTC) medication such as Ibuprofen.  The Veteran also reported flare-ups in both knees described as a burning sensation while walking downstairs or in a squatting motion, and sharp pain.  The flare-ups occurred every couple of days, lasted hours, and were precipitated by walking downstairs, bending, prolonged standing or walking.  The severity was indicated to be moderate, and the alleviating factor was OTC medication such as Ibuprofen.  Functionally, the Veteran reported similarly difficulty in both knees with walking downstairs, prolonged walking or standing due to the pain.  The Veteran did not report a history of, and no history of instability, recurrent subluxation of the knee, or effusion of the knees was noted.  Range of motion testing showed loss of range of motion in both knees.  For both knees, the Veteran's active range of motion flexion endpoint was 125 degrees with normal extension.  Pain was noted with both flexion and extension.  Pain was documented with weight-bearing, active motion and caused functional loss including difficulty walking downstairs, and with prolonged walking or standing due to pain.  There was no objective evidence of crepitus, and no tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint.  Passive range of motion was not tested because the testing would increase the risk of further injury. The examiner did not estimate the limitation of motion experienced by the Veteran if he was to perform the passive range of motion testing.  However, the examiner nevertheless observed that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions; no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions was noted.  The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time, but evidence procured from the Veteran suggested that pain would significantly limit his functional ability in both knees with repeated use over time.  The examiner estimated the range of motion of the joint after repeated use over time would be limited to 120 degrees of flexion with normal extension.  The examiner was not conducted during a flare-up either, but the examiner also found that pain would significantly limit the functional ability of both knees during a flare-up.  Again, the estimated range of motion of the joint would be limited to 120 degrees of flexion with normal extension.  There were no additional factors contributing to the Veteran's disability noted, and there was no evidence of muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  The examiner also did not find that the Veteran suffered from recurrent subluxation or persistent instability in either knee, and no ligament tears had occurred.  Joint stability was tested for both knees.  The Veteran's anterior, posterior, medial and lateral instability were all normal. The Veteran did have a diagnosis of shin splits on both the right and left side, with treatment for less than 12 consecutive months.  The examiner explained the condition was acute for both knees, and resolved.  No assistive device was used for ambulation.  Functionally, it was reported that the Veteran worked as a corrections officer.  He had lost 0-1 week of work in the last year, but he had limitations from his bilateral knee strain in the form of reported pain with ambulation, even with short distances.

The Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records document continuous complaints of pain in the bilateral knees, which was treated with cream.

After reviewing the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities were limited, at most to 120 degrees of flexion, with consideration of functional loss during a flare-up and after repeated use as well as pain.  The right and left knee maintained normal extension, as evidenced by the September 2022 VA examination report.  Accordingly, the range of motion limitation of the right and left knee, with consideration of functional loss, supports a 10 percent rating.  A rating in excess of 10 percent under DC 5260 is not warranted because neither knee showed flexion limited to 30 degrees, even with consideration of pain and functional loss following repeated use or during a flare-up.  A higher, or separate, rating based on extension (under DC 5261) is likewise not warranted as the Veteran demonstrated normal extension even with consideration of pain and functional loss following repeated use or during a flare-up.

With respect to instability, the record reflects the Veteran is service-connected for instability associated with his right knee strain under DC 5022-5257 and assigned a 10 percent disability rating.  In his August 2022 claim, the Veteran reported his instability worsened over time.  However, following joint stability testing, which included the Lachman test and Posterior drawer test, the September 2022 VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, or recurrent patellar instability in either knee.  As instability was not diagnosed, the examiner did not indicate whether the Veteran required a prescribed ambulation device.  However, it is noted that the September 2022 VA examiner did document that the Veteran did not use any assistive devices for his bilateral knee strain.  Based on this evidence, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted for right knee instability.  Likewise, a separate rating for left knee instability is not warranted.

The Board acknowledges that the VA examination of the Veteran's knees must include joint testing for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). The Board has also considered the Court's holding in Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017), addressing 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, which states that a VA examiner must "express an opinion on whether pain could significantly limit functional ability" and the examiner's determination in such regard "should, if feasible, be portrayed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to pain on use or during flare-ups." Here, the Board finds that the September 2022 VA examination complied with these requirements. In that regard, the September 2022 examiner addressed both repeated use over a period of time and flareups and estimated additional range of motion that would be lost.

The Board has considered whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain or due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45. See also DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202. Functional loss contemplates the inability of the body to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance, and must be manifested by adequate evidence of disabling pathology, especially when it is due to pain. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. Additionally, painful motion is an important factor of disability; and joints that are painful, unstable, or malaligned, due to healed injury, should be entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Here, the September 2022 VA examiner reported that the Veteran had no evidence of muscle atrophy, or ankylosis in either knee. While there was clear evidence the Veteran suffered from flare-ups with functional loss including burning sensations and pain which affected his ability to use stairs and squat, and there was also evidence that the Veteran suffered from additional range of motion loss after repeated use and during flare-ups, the additional range of motion lost in both knees following repetitive use testing and during a flare-up was considered in assigning the Veteran's disability ratings under DC 5260.  As previously discussed, the functional loss that the Veteran demonstrated did not equate to the criteria needed to assign a higher rating under DCs 5260.

The Board acknowledges that the September 2022 VA examiner provided an additional diagnosis of bilateral shin splints in both the Veteran's knees.  However, the September 2022 VA examiner further opined that the diagnosed bilateral shin splints were less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee strains.  In support of that opinion, the examiner explained that the conditions were acute and had since resolved with no objective evidence of tendonitis or shin splints on the day of the examination, even though the Veteran reported subjective complaints of pain with range of motion and various activities. The examiner highlighted that radiographic evidence was negative for any chronic conditions related to the Veteran's knees, but the examiner nevertheless provided a diagnosis of bilateral knee strain due to the Veteran's subjective complaints of pain during the examination.  Despite this diagnosis, the examiner indicated there was no new condition related to the Veteran's knees, and his complaints of pain were found to be consistent with his previous examinations and while in service.  The examiner thus concluded that a secondary relationship could not exist when there was no new condition related to his knees.

Lastly, for the entire period at issue, because there is no medical evidence of ankylosis, malunion of the tibia and fibula or genu recurvatum, or painful scar a higher evaluation is not warranted under another diagnostic code for the knees. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5262, 5263 and 7802.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for CFS is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for CFS due his confirmed service in Southwest Asia.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Veteran was provided a VA Chronic Fatigue Syndrome examination in June 2022.  At that time, the Veteran reported feeling fatigued.  He reported that he had requested an evaluation by his VA treatment provider who ordered labs, including Vitamin D and TSH level, and all results were normal.  The Veteran was referred instead to behavioral health for further evaluation.  Following an examination of the Veteran, the June 2022 VA examiner determined the Veteran did not meet the criteria for CFS.

The Veteran was provided additional VA examinations in April 2023. In the Gulf War General Medical Examination, the Veteran's medical history was reported to be normal with no symptoms, abnormal findings, or complaints reported.  The examiner indicated the Veteran did not have any diagnosed illnesses for which an etiology could not be established.  In the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome examination, the Veteran again reported that he never felt rested despite getting a good night's sleep.  However, following an examination, it was again determined that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of CFS.  The April 2023 VA examiner even speculated that the Veteran might have sleep apnea, noting that the Veteran had been scheduled for sleep studies in Florida, which were not completed prior to the Veteran moving out of state.  The VA examiner stated, "His fatigue and morning headaches could well be secondary to obstructive sleep apnea, especially given his [body mass index] of 44 which places him at high risk for sleep apnea."

Despite the medical opinions provided by the June 2022 VA examiner and the April 2023 VA examination, it is noted that during the latter examination, the Veteran reported he had been given a diagnosis of CFS in December 2022 by his primary care provider in Florida.

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records shows that the Veteran requested to be evaluated for fatigue; however, CFS was not diagnosed.  Instead, the Veteran was evaluated for Vitamin D and B-12 deficiencies as well as for a low thyroid function.  He was also encouraged to undergo a sleep study and was referred to mental health for an insomnia disorder related to another mental disorder.  See March 2022 and June 2022 VA treatment records.  

However, in addition to VA care, the Veteran also sought private treatment for his complaints related to fatigue.  Although his private treatment provider did not provide any treatment records for December 2022, the available records show that in November 2021 and June 2022, the Veteran was assessed with "chronic fatigue."  See Private treatment records from J.R.E., DO, received March 2023.  

The private treatment records from J.R.E., DO were available at the time of the Apri 2023 VA examination.  Despite this, they do not appear to have been considered nor were they addressed by the April 2023 VA examiner who found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of CFS.  Therefore, the Board finds the April 2023 VA examiner's opinion to be inadequate.   As this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds that remand is warranted for an addendum medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for an addendum medical opinion from a qualified VA medical professional regarding the Veteran's claim of service connection for CFS, to include fatigue due to undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness.

If the examiner determines that he or she is unable to provide an adequate opinion without an examination, the Veteran should be scheduled for an appropriate examination. A complete rationale should be provided for each opinion given. The examiner should:

a) Identify whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of CFS or other disease with a clear and specific etiology.

b) If a diagnosis of CFS is not provided, then is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's symptoms of fatigue, sleep disturbances, etc., represent (i) an undiagnosed illness or, alternatively (ii) a diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multisymptom (MUCMI) or illness resulting from a MUCMI? The reviewing clinician should address whether the disability has a partially explained etiology or a partially explained pathophysiology.

An "undiagnosed illness" means a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.

The term "MUCMI" refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs, and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. Chronic MUCMIs of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered "medically unexplained."

(Continued on the next page)

?

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. The reviewing clinician must fully explain the rationale for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements as well as VA and private treatment records, as deemed appropriate. If the reviewing clinician cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Churchwell, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.