Citation Nr: A25031321
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 231030-389080
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition is denied.

Service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition is denied.

Service connection for a low back condition is denied.

Service connection for a right knee condition is denied.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a left lower extremity nerve condition began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a right lower extremity nerve condition began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a low back condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a right knee condition began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a low back condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2005 to April 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the issues of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and a right shoulder condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In addition to service connection on a direct basis, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

1. Service connection for a left lower extremity nerve condition

2. Service connection for a right lower extremity nerve condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left and right lower extremity nerve condition. See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. She asserts that after she developed her "service-related low back condition," she began to experience numbness, tingling, and pain in her lower extremities that continues today. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138. 

In the July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed with lower extremities intermittent tingling at her February 2023 VA examination. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the first element of service connection is established.

With respect to the second element of service connection, the evidence does not show an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury. A clinical examination conducted at the Veteran's separation from service did not reveal any lower extremity abnormalities.

Post-service treatment records do not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a lower extremity nerve condition.

During her June 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed lower extremities intermittent tingling. The Veteran reported onset in 2005. She began having pain in her lower back during basic training, but she did not get treatment for her back because she thought it was normal. Thereafter, she began to have tingling and occasional pain down her legs when she over did it physically. The examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, the Veteran's claimed condition is not due to service because there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis and military service. The examiner stated that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. The examiner noted that there is no history of any lumbar spine diagnosis or treatment. 

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms she perceived with her own senses, such as pain. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, the Board finds her contemporaneous statements made during service to be significantly more credible and probative than subsequent statements made to VA for purposes of seeking compensation. See Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) (VA cannot ignore a veteran's testimony simply because the veteran is an interested party; personal interest may, however, affect the credibility of the evidence), see also Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994) (contemporaneous evidence has greater probative value than subsequently reported history).

Specifically, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not contain any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a lower extremity nerve condition. In her February 2010 self-report of medical history, she denied having any numbness or tingling. If the Veteran had been experiencing tingling and occasional pain down her legs continuously since her claimed low back condition began in 2005, even if she thought it was normal, it would be expected that she would have reported such symptoms when directly asked about their existence. Instead, the Veteran indicated that she did not have, and had never had "numbness or tingling." Based on this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements of in-service tingling and occasional pain down her legs are not credible.

As the evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence, the nexus element cannot be met. As a result, service connection for a left and/or right lower extremity nerve condition on a direct basis must be denied.

Further, the Board finds the persuasive evidence does not establish the Veteran's lower extremities intermittent tingling disability manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation or demonstrate chronicity and continuity of symptomatology post-separation. Therefore, the Board finds that service connection for a left or right lower extremity nerve condition on a presumptive basis as a chronic disease is also not warranted.

Additionally, the Veteran stated that her bilateral lower extremity nerve condition started after her low back condition, suggesting that her lower extremity nerve condition may be due to her low back condition. However, service connection has not been awarded for a low back condition. Therefore, service connection is not warranted on a secondary basis.

Accordingly, as the elements of service connection are not met, the Veteran's claims for a left and right lower extremity nerve condition are denied.

3. Service connection for a low back condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a low back condition. See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. She asserts that she injured her back from physical training exercises at boot camp and that her MOS required to sit at a desk all day which hurt her back. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

To establish service connection, there must be a current disability. Pain resulting in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, can constitute a disability. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-68 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

A review of the Veteran's STRs do not demonstrate any diagnosis or treatment for the spine. Instead, STRs specifically indicate no musculoskeletal symptoms, full range of motion, and no tenderness of the spine. See STRs dated January 2006, July 2006, and October 2006. The Veteran had a normal clinical evaluation of her spine at separation. See April 2010 Report of Medical Examination. In her February 2010 self-report of medical history, she denied having any recurrent back pain or any back problem.

Post-service treatment records show that in October 2011, the Veteran reported no current musculoskeletal complaints. Thus, to the extent the Veteran contends that she has a low back condition that began during service and has continued since, the Board finds such statements lack credibility. The Board recognizes that the Veteran reported back pain since service. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138. However, as noted, the Veteran denied having any back injuries or complaints at the time of her separation from service and no spine abnormalities were identified. Thus, based on this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements of ongoing low back symptomatology are not credible.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in June 2023. She reported that she began having low back pain in service due to road marching, running on concrete, and exercising. In addition, she stated that her MOS caused her to sit all day making her back pain worse. She reported feeling a bit better after service but noticed pain after standing or sitting for long periods. Physical examination revealed that the Veteran had normal range of motion of her spine. After reviewing the record, in addition to interviewing and examining the Veteran, the examiner determined that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis associated with her claimed low back pain.

While the Veteran is competent to report pain in her lower back, at her June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran denied any functional loss or impairment as a result of her low back pain and the examiner indicated that the claimed low back pain would not impact the Veteran's ability to perform any occupational task. Based on the foregoing, the record does not support a finding of low back pain with functional loss or an impairment of her earning capacity because the Veteran maintained full range of motion in all tests, she maintained normal muscle strength, and no additional factors were noted to contribute to her claimed disability. Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a back disability at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). As there is no current disability, service connection for a low back condition is denied.

4. Service connection for a right knee condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right knee condition. See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. She asserts that she injured her right knee from physical training exercises and boot camp. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138. She stated that as a result of exercising and marching all over the base on concrete and asphalt while wearing boots, her right knee started to bother her and has hurt since. Id.

In the July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, the claimed issue became manifest to a degree of 10 percent of more following service, the diagnosed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to service, and the Veteran's June 2023 VA examination documents a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the first element of service connection is established.

With respect to the second element of service connection, the evidence does not show an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury. A clinical examination conducted at the Veteran's separation from service did not reveal any lower extremity abnormalities.

Post-service treatment records also do not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a knee condition until June 2023 when an x-ray examination revealed moderate narrowing patellofemoral joint space.

During her June 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed right knee degenerative arthritis, other than posttraumatic. The Veteran reported onset in 2005. She reported that she began having pain in her right knee during basic training but did not recall any trauma or injury of any type. She did not see anyone for her right knee while in service. However, she endorsed ongoing pain after leaving service. In addition, the Veteran reported that she gained weight after service and that her primary care doctor stated that her knee pain was due to weight gain after which she stopped asking about it. She had no current or past treatment for her right knee.

The examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, her claimed condition is not due to service because there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of degenerative changes right patellofemoral joint space and military service. The examiner stated that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms she perceived with her own senses, such as pain. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. However, the Board finds her contemporaneous statements made during service to be significantly more credible and probative than subsequent statements made to VA for purposes of seeking compensation. See Cartright, 2 Vet. App. at 25 (VA cannot ignore a veteran's testimony simply because the veteran is an interested party; personal interest may, however, affect the credibility of the evidence), see also Curry, 7 Vet. App. at 68 (contemporaneous evidence has greater probative value than subsequently reported history).

Specifically, the Veteran's STRs do not contain any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a right knee condition. Instead, in her February 2010 self-report of medical history, she denied having any knee trouble despite noting the presence of multiple other concerns. If the Veteran had been experiencing right knee pain continuously since 2005, it would be expected that she would have noted it on her self-report of medical history. Thus, based on this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements of an in-service right knee injury are not credible.

As the evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence, the nexus element cannot be met. As a result, service connection for a right knee condition on a direct basis must be denied.

Further, the Board finds the persuasive evidence does not establish the Veteran's right knee condition manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation or demonstrate chronicity and continuity of symptomatology post-separation. Therefore, the Board finds that service connection for a right knee condition on a presumptive basis as a chronic disease is also not warranted.

Accordingly, as the elements of service connection are not met, the Veteran's claim for a right knee condition are denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

In remanding these issues, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

1. The issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for tinnitus, which she asserts is due to exposure to frequent varying levels of ear noise trauma to include generators, based on her military occupational specialty (MOS) as an information specialist. See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ March 2023 VA Form 21-4138. She also asserts that she was exposed to noise from firing weapons during basic training. Id.

Following examination in May 2023, a VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus but opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure because the Veteran's description of symptoms does not meet the Dauman and Tyler (1992) definition of tinnitus cited in the Tinnitus Handbook (Tyler). The opinion is internally inconsistent because the examiner acknowledged that the Veteran has recurrent tinnitus but then stated that her symptoms do not meet the definition of tinnitus. The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a predecisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Therefore, the Board finds remand is needed to obtain an addendum opinion.

2. The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right shoulder condition. See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. She asserts that she injured her right shoulder from physical training exercises, including pushups and pull ups. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023. She reported that she began having pain in her right shoulder from carrying her ruck sack over her right shoulder during basic training and that she has continued to have pain in her right shoulder two to three times per week. The examiner provided an unfavorable nexus opinion stating that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. However, the examiner failed to support his finding that there was no continuity of symptomatology shown by the evidence of record despite the Veteran's reports of continuous symptoms since service.

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the examiner did not consider all relevant facts in this case, which renders the opinion inadequate. As the failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a predecisional duty to assist error, the Board finds remand is needed to obtain an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether tinnitus had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service.   

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that her reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. However, if there is a medical reason to doubt its veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's statements or recollection are inconsistent with the evidence in this case, medical principles relating to the onset and progress of the disease, the specific findings in the record, and/or your professional judgment.

If the reviewing health care provider finds that a physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

2. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's right shoulder strain had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service. 

If the reviewing health care provider finds that a physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that her reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. However, if there is a medical reason to doubt its veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's statements or recollection are inconsistent with the evidence in this case, medical principles relating to the onset and progress of the disease, the specific findings in the record, and/or your professional judgment.

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

A clear rationale for all opinions must be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.