Citation Nr: A25031833
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 201208-122958
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy or radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy or radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability other than left foot sprain, to include left foot drop, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 3, 2019, for the grant of service connection for left foot sprain is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 3, 2019, for the grant of service connection for left knee sprain and chondromalacia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain and chondromalacia is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left foot sprain is remanded.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active-duty service from January 1975 to December 1976.

The issues are on appeal under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) from a rating decision issued in November 2020.  The Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement in December 2020 electing the direct review lane.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

The Board is remanding the issue to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2020 rating decision.  The Veteran submitted a private nexus opinion in December 2019, prior to the November 2020 rating decision on appeal.  That examination diagnosed lumbar and cervical disabilities and related those to his active service.  The examiner provided no rationale or explanation for this finding, but did cite to medical records that are not associated with the claims file.  The Veteran claimed he injured his back and neck while in Germany, but provided no additional details regarding the nature of the injury.  The Board finds that the AOJ should attempt to obtain the Veteran's treatment records and then provide a VA examination prior to deciding on the merits.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy or radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy or radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability other than left foot sprain, to include left foot drop is remanded.

The Board notes that the Veteran's bilateral neuropathy, bilateral radiculopathy, and left foot drop have been noted to be caused by the Veteran's lumbar spine disability.  As the issues are inextricably intertwined with the issue of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability, they must be remanded for readjudication upon completion of the lumbar spine disability development.  

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Board is remanding the issue to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2020 rating decision.  The Veteran submitted a private nexus opinion in December 2019, prior to the November 2020 rating decision on appeal.  That examination diagnosed degenerative arthritis of the knees and related those to his active service.  As noted above, the examiner provided no rationale or explanation for this finding, but did cite to medical records that are not associated with the claims file.  The Veteran claimed he injured his knees while in Germany, but provided no additional details regarding the nature of the injury.  In October 2020, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  The examiner noted abnormal range of motion of the right knee, but provided no diagnosis and no nexus opinion regarding the right knee.  The Board finds that the AOJ should attempt to obtain the Veteran's treatment records and then provide a VA examination prior to deciding on the merits.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

The Board is remanding the issue to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2020 rating decision.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2020, prior to the November 2020 rating decision on appeal.  The examiner noted no diagnosis of a right foot disability.  The Veteran's treatment records, however, note claw foot right foot diagnosed in July 2019.  A new VA examination is required to address this discrepancy before a decision on the merits may be made.  

8. Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 3, 2019, for the grant of service connection for left foot sprain is remanded.

9. Entitlement to an earlier effective date than April 3, 2019, for the grant of service connection for left knee sprain and chondromalacia is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

11. Entitlement to a TDIU due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

Prior to the November 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ was aware of an August 1977 rating decision.  The rating decision addresses service connection for nervous, pain in the arm, and left knee.  The decision shows SC for depressive neurosis and soft tissue calcification of the left patella and NSC for pain in the arm.  Although the rating decision notes it was for hospital or outpatient treatment purposes, the same day medical care was authorized for nervousness, insomnia, pain in arm, and pain in the left knee, despite pain in the arm being NSC.  The record contains no claim form or other procedural documents.  At no point does the record contain evidence of discontinuing authorization or SC for depressive neurosis or soft tissue calcification of the left patella treatment.  These issues are also not addressed on the current Rating Decision Codesheet.  As such, the Board finds that parts of the claims file are missing.  A remand is required to allow VA to obtain these records.  If the records are not available, the AOJ should provide a formal finding and attempt to reconstruct the timeline prior and subsequent to the grant in the August 1977 rating decision.  As these records could affect the effective dates of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, the claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, and the TDIU claim, the Board is remanding all four issues. 

Additionally, the Board notes that further development is required regarding the Veteran's psychiatric claim.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2020, prior to the November 2020 rating decision.  At that time the examiner noted that the Veteran had never been diagnosed with a mental disorder, that he had no psychiatric treatment during his military service, had no psychiatric treatment within one year after discharge from military service, and had never had a formal psychiatric examination until the current one.  All these statements are blatantly inaccurate as the Veteran had psychiatric complaints in service, had psychiatric complaints within one year of separation from service, and had a formal psychiatric examination in July 1977.  As such, a new VA examination is required before a decision on the merits may be made. 

Finally, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in December 2019.  The examiner noted that the Veteran is in a comprehensive psychiatric and psychological therapy with poor improvement.  The record does not contain any psychiatric treatment records.  As such, a remand is necessary to obtain any psychiatric or psychological treatment records.  

12. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain and chondromalacia is remanded.

13. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left foot sprain is remanded.

The Board notes that a review of the record reveals the Veteran takes medication for his left knee and his left foot.  Specifically, the Veteran noted that he takes over the counter medication and lidocaine patches.  As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's left foot and left knee disabilities.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain and associate with the claims file any documents relating to the August 1977 rating decision, to include any claims forms or any severance of benefits.  If the records are unavailable, the AOJ should provide a formal finding and should attempt to reconstruct the Veteran's claims file from that period.  

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his psychiatric or psychological treating provider as referenced in the private December 2019 medical opinion.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his Cayey Menonita Hospital records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

4. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his Servicios Radiologicos Del Este records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

5. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his Advanced Physical Therapy records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

6. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his MHM Ortho Rehab Wellness Center records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

7. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his Mediko Imaging records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from the provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

8. Schedule the Veteran for a new VA orthopedic examination with an appropriate examiner.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	 Does the Veteran have a current lumbar spine disability?

b.)	If so, is the Veteran's lumbar spine disability caused by his active service, to include any physical activities performed in the completion of his duties?  

c.)	Does the Veteran have a current cervical spine disability?

d.)	If so, is the Veteran's cervical spine disability caused by his active service, to include any physical activities performed in the completion of his duties?

e.)	Does the Veteran have a current right foot disability?  The examiner should address the July 2019 diagnosis of claw foot.  

f.)	If so, is the Veteran's right foot disability caused by his active service, to include any physical activities performed in the completion of his duties?

g.)	Does the Veteran have a current right knee disability?  The examiner should address the notation of abnormal range of motion in the October 2020 VA examination.

h.)	If so, is the Veteran's right knee disability caused by his active service, to include any physical activities performed in the completion of his duties?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered

9. Schedule the Veteran for a new VA psychiatric examination with an appropriate examiner.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	 Does the Veteran have a current psychiatric disability, to include any depression or anxiety?  

b.)	If so, is the Veteran's current psychiatric disability causally related to his in-service and post-service complaints, treatment, and diagnoses?    

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  

10. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the Veteran's left foot and left knee disabilities.  An examination should only be scheduled if the clinician deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinions. 

a.)	The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service-connected left foot and/or left knee disabilities. 

b.)	If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record. 

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veresink, Patricia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.