Citation Nr: A25031448
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 241015-500769
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence of record shows that his bilateral hearing loss had its onset in active service.

2. The evidence of record shows that his tinnitus was caused by hearing loss.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385.

2. 4. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1966 to June 1968. 

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2024 rating decision of VA.  In his October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Hearing docket, pursuant to AMA.

The Veteran appeared at a hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in April 2025.  A transcript of the hearing is in the Veteran's file.  The Board notes that it may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the April 2025 hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service" the so-called "nexus" requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). 

For the purposes of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from bilateral hearing loss as a result of his active duty service.  A review of the Veteran's DD214 shows that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was truck driver.

Service treatment records are negative for complaints or findings of hearing problems.

The Veteran was afforded a VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination in May 2019.  The Veteran reported having trouble understanding and comprehending what others were saying.  He reported exposure to gun noise while in service.  Upon examination, a diagnosis of sensorineural hearing loss was provided.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was not at least as likely as not caused by or a result of an event in military service.  The VA examiner noted that there was no permanent positive threshold shift from enlistment to separation for both ears.  Both the entrance and exit audiograms showed normal hearing sensitivity.  The Veteran's MOS was truck driver which had a low probability for hazardous noise exposure.  No previous complaint about hearing loss was noted.

The Veteran also noted experiencing ringing or a beeping sound which began a few years earlier.  The Veteran stated that he had fluctuating beeping sounds in his ears that were disruptive to his daily life, were irritating and that he could not concentrate.  It was noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of clinical hearing loss, and his tinnitus was at least as likely as not a symptom associated with the hearing loss, as tinnitus was known to be a symptom associated with hearing loss.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's MOS was truck driver which had a low probability for hazardous noise exposure.  There was normal hearing sensitivity noted from enlistment to separation.  No previous complaint about tinnitus was noted.

A May 2019 private treatment record shows that the Veteran had reported gunfire and truck noise exposure during service.  He noted difficulty hearing, to include understanding conversational speech.  The Veteran also noted experiencing high pitched, intermittent tinnitus, bilaterally.  Upon examination, the private doctor found mild sloping to severe sensorineural hearing loss, with good speech discrimination scores, bilaterally.  The private doctor found that the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus were at least as likely as not caused by or the result of an event in military service.  The private doctor stated that loud levels of noise, including gunfire and truck engine noise were known to cause cochlear outer hair cell damage which could result in hearing loss and tinnitus.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination in May 2023.  It was noted that the Veteran's MOS had a moderate probability for hazardous noise exposure.  Upon examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was not at least as likely as not caused by or a result of an event in military service.  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's hearing remained within normal limits during service.  It was noted that the Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2006) stated there was insufficient scientific basis to conclude that permanent hearing loss directly attributable to noise exposure would develop long after noise exposure.  The IOM panel concluded that based on their current understanding of auditory physiology a prolonged delay in the onset of noise-induced hearing loss was "unlikely".  This suggested auditory damage would not occur after noise exposure was ceased.  In other words, inner ear hearing should not change after noise exposure was removed.  The IOM report also indicated there was not sufficient evidence from longitudinal studies to determine whether permanent noise induced hearing loss could develop much later in one's lifetime, long after noise exposure was ceased.  Until such longitudinal studies occurred, one assumed hearing loss due to noise exposure occurred at time of insult and progression of separation hearing within normal limits to hearing loss after military noise exposure was due to other possible non-military factors.  Since hearing was within normal limits on separation, hearing loss was considered less likely than not associated with military event even with noise concession.  

Next, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus started when he was inspecting aircrafts, and that he experienced ringing in both ears.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not a symptom associated with the Veteran's hearing loss.  The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  It was noted that the Veteran stated that his tinnitus occurred after leaving service in 1968.  In 2019, he reported tinnitus onset few years ago.  Military noise exposure was conceded.  In-service records were silent on tinnitus.  Significant threshold shift (STS) was an indicator of auditory damage.  STS during service was undetermined.  Occupation after separation was Aircraft Inspector which suggested noise exposure.  Tinnitus was known to occur at time of insult.  Considering all, with varying tinnitus onset changing after claim determination, possible noise exposure after separation and absent documentation of tinnitus prior to 2019, the above opinion was formed.

At the Veteran's April 1, 2025 Board hearing, he and his representative noted a July 2024 private medical opinion in which the private doctor noted a review of medical records and opined that it was as likely as not that there was a nexus between the Veteran's active military service and the development of hearing loss and tinnitus.  The private doctor noted that a hearing deficit commonly occurred in tandem with tinnitus.  There was a functional deficit in the ability to comprehend the spoken via the "ringing in the ears."  

The Veteran contends that he was exposed to noise while in service.  A review of the record shows that the Veteran has a hearing impairment for VA purposes in both ears pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  The Board notes that tinnitus is a condition where lay observation can be competent as to the presence of the disability.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 37 (2002).  The Veteran is competent to state that he has ringing in his ears, and thus the Board finds that he currently has tinnitus.  Id.  Next, the Board finds that there is conflicting medical and lay evidence in this case.  

The Board is mindful of the negative May 2019 and May 2023 VA medical opinions.  However, the reports only serve to counterbalance the private opinions dated in May 2019 and July 2024 indicating that the Veteran was exposed to noise while in service and that it was at least as likely as not that his hearing loss and tinnitus were a direct result of that exposure and the Veteran's statements reported at his April 2025 Board hearing.

Fortunately, when there are multiple opinions and they are competent as well as contradictory, the benefit of the doubt doctrine provides a solution for the Board. The doctrine is triggered when the evidence has reached a stage approaching an equal balance between the positive and the negative.  

In this matter, as there is competent medical and lay evidence both in favor of and against the Veteran's claims that his tinnitus and hearing loss were caused by in-service exposure to excessive noise, the Board finds an approximate balance has been attained, and the benefit of the doubt goes to the Veteran on the issue of whether service connection is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

This appeal is granted.

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.