Citation Nr: A25031780
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231220-405777
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the Veteran's disability rating for service-connected left ear hearing loss from 10 to 0 percent effective June 13, 2023, was improper, and a 10 percent rating is restored as of that date.  

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity cold injury residuals is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity cold injury residuals is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity cold injury residuals is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity cold injury residuals is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression and anxiety, is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran was in receipt of a 10 percent rating for service-connected left ear hearing loss from January 2019 to June 2023, a period of less than five years.

2. At the time of the reduction, there was reasonable doubt as to whether there was improvement in the Veteran's service-connected left ear hearing loss disability.

3. The evidence of record is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has cold injury residuals affecting his right and left upper extremities and his right and left lower extremities that are related to in-service cold exposure and injury.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction of the rating for service-connected left ear hearing loss from 10 percent to 0 percent was improper, and the criteria for restoration of the 10 percent rating are met, effective June 13, 2023.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e), 3.344, 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13, 4.85.

2. The criteria for the award of service connection for cold injury residuals of the right and left upper extremities, and the right and left lower extremities have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from December 1977 to December 1980.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in November 2023 and December 2023, constituting initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the November 2023 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the Veteran's service-connection claims for cold injury residuals of the bilateral upper and bilateral lower extremities.  In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's left ear hearing loss disability rating from 10 to 0 percent, effective June 13, 2023, and denied service-connection claims for back, cervical spine, left knee and psychiatric disabilities.  The AOJ also denied the Veteran's claim for a TDIU.

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Such was confirmed by the Veteran his representative with resubmission in January 2024.  

Therefore, with respect to the Veteran's cold injury residuals claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  With respect to all other claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal, respectively, cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that on his VA Form 10182, the Veteran requested that the Board review a June 2023 rating decision that also denied entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cold injury residuals.  Review of the record shows that after receiving notice of the June 2023 rating decision, the Veteran filed a June 29, 2023 Supplemental Claim requesting readjudicating of these issues.  The AOJ performed additional evidentiary development and issued the November 2023 rating decision, referenced above, again denying the claims after considering the newly-added evidence.  The Board will favorably construe the Veteran's disagreement with the AOJ's cold injury residual determinations as a disagreement with the more recent November 2023 rating decision, as such will allow for a complete review of all evidence of record as of the date of that decision.  As discussed below, such includes a positive medical nexus opinion that supports the award of the benefits sought.  

In addition, on his VA Form 10182, the Veteran and his representative requested Board review of an October 2023 rating decision that denied entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.  However, in November 2023, prior to filing his VA Form 10182, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim with the AOJ requesting review of the same.  The AOJ had not yet issued its decision in response to the Supplemental Claim when the Veteran submitted his December 2023 VA Form 10182.  VA's laws and regulations prohibit claimants from filing review options under the AMA concurrently.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  In other words, the Veteran was not permitted to request Board review of his right knee claim in December 2023 without having first withdrawn his pending November 2023 Supplemental Claim for the same claim.  As such, the Board will not discuss the Veteran's service-connection claim for a right knee disability in this decision.  The Board observes however that the AOJ ultimately did address the Veteran's November 2023 Supplemental Claim in a March 2024 rating decision, which denied entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability.  The Veteran duly requested Board review of the March 2024 rating decision by filing another VA Form 10182 later that month.  The Board addressed the issue in recent March 2025 decision.

For the remanded claims listed above and discussed below, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. The reduction of the Veteran's disability rating for service-connected left ear hearing loss from 10 to 0 percent effective June 13, 2023, was improper, and a 10 percent rating is restored as of that date.  

By way of background, the AOJ granted the Veteran entitlement to service connection for a hearing loss disability of the left ear in an August 2016 rating decision.  An initial noncompensable (zero percent) rating was assigned, effective November 17, 2015.  The AOJ awarded an increased rating from 0 to 10 percent for the Veteran's left ear hearing loss in a March 2019 rating decision, effective January 14, 2019.  In doing so, it appears the AOJ rated the left ear hearing loss disability as if service connection was established for hearing loss of both ears, notwithstanding the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(f).  

In any event, the AOJ revisited the Veteran's left ear hearing loss rating once again in a May 2023 rating decision.  Within that decision, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's rating from 10 to 0 percent, effective February 23, 2023, utilizing test results obtained at a February 23, 2023 audiological examination.  The AOJ did not discuss why it was reducing the rating, other than simply noting that test results showed a noncompensable rating was warranted.  

The Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim later that month requesting review of the prior May 2023 decision to reduce his rating for left ear hearing loss.  In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ extended the Veteran's previously assigned 10 percent rating to June 13, 2023, instead of reducing the rating as of February 23, 2023; however, it still reduced the rating from 10 to 0 percent effective June 13, 2023. The AOJ based this reduction on a finding of improvement, as shown by audiometric testing completed on that date.

For reductions in ratings to be properly accomplished, specific requirements must be met.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e), 3.344; see also Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277 (1992).

Here, because the Veteran's overall disability rating was undisturbed by the reduction, there was no requirement that the Veteran first receive advance notice of a proposed reduction with an opportunity to respond, as per the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).  See Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that VA was not obligated to provide a veteran with advance notice of a rating reduction under circumstances where the decision did not result in an overall reduction in compensation being paid to the veteran).

With regard to disability ratings in effect for a period of 5 years or more, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b) are for application. Where a veteran's schedular rating has been both stable and continuous for 5 years or more, the rating may be reduced only if the examination on which the reduction is based is at least as full and complete as that used to establish the higher evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a). Ratings for disease subject to temporary or episodic improvement will not be reduced on the basis of any one examination, except in those instances where the evidence of record clearly warrants the conclusion that sustained improvement has been demonstrated. Id. 

With respect to disabilities that are likely to improve (i.e., those in effect for less than 5 years), as in this case, reexaminations disclosing improvement in disabilities will warrant a rating reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

Notably, VA is required in any rating-reduction case "to ascertain, based upon review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations." Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1993); see also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991) ("[t]hese requirements for evaluation of the complete medical history of the claimant's condition operate to protect claimants against adverse decisions based on a single, incomplete[,] or inaccurate report and to enable VA to make a more precise evaluation of the level of disability and of any changes in the condition").

Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 4.10 provides that "[t]he basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment," and 38 C.F.R. § 4.2 directs that "[e]ach disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work." "Thus, in any rating-reduction case not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work." Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10.

In a rating reduction case, VA has the burden of establishing that the disability has improved.  See Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991).  After review of the evidence of record, and for the reasons discussed below, the Board finds reasonable doubt as to whether there was improvement in the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss warranting reduction.

Prior to June 13, 2023, a February 2023 examiner indicated that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss impacted his ability to understand speech at normal conversational levels in quiet environments, and especially impacted his ability to understand speech in the presence of background noise.  The Veteran also had trouble understanding speech on the telephone.  The examiner noted that the Veteran relied on visual cues to communicate, and that his hearing loss created a stress on his personal relationships.  See the February 2023 examiner's report, at 5.  VA treatment reports noted that the Veteran required the use of hearing aids. See, e.g., a January 7, 2021 VA Audiology Clinic Note.

Although the June 13, 2023 examination documented hearing test results showing a better hearing acuity and speech discrimination score on that day, the report does not contain enough information to demonstrate that the Veteran had experienced actual improvement in his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work as of that date.  Indeed, the Veteran reported continued inability to hear others-specifically, his grandchildren.  While the AOJ made a point to highlight that earwax irrigation previously took place in February 2023, there was no indication within the June 2023 examination report indicating that excess wax buildup was the cause of prior more severe levels of hearing loss.  There was also no indication that the Veteran no longer needed to utilize hearing aids.  

In its December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the Veteran's disability looking exclusively to the numerical audiometric test results within the June 2023 examination report. The AOJ did not articulate any actual finding regarding improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  The AOJ also made no reference to, or finding of, a clear and unmistakable error in its prior award of a 10 percent rating to establish an alternative basis for a reduction.

Based on the analysis outlined above, and after review of all the evidence of record prior to the December 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that the June 2023 audiological examination report was, at best, incomplete, and that reasonable doubt remains as to whether actual improvement in the Veteran's disability occurred, warranting a reduction in rating.  As such, the reduction was improper, and the 10  percent disability rating for left ear hearing loss is restored, effective June 13, 2023.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity cold injury is granted.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity cold injury is granted.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity cold injury is granted.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity cold injury is granted.

Service connection may be granted on a direct basis for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Notwithstanding the lack of evidence of disease or injury during service, service connection may still be granted if all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Veteran asserts he has current cold injury residuals to the upper and lower extremities that are due to extended exposures to cold temperatures and frostbite injury during active duty service.  In particular, he described extreme cold exposure while sleeping in tents and working outside while training at Fort Dix, New Jersey in the winter months in 1977 and 1978.  Service personnel records confirm the Veteran served at Fort Dix from the time of his enlistment in December 1977 to February 17, 1978, and the Board finds no reason to call into question the Veteran's competent reports of in-service cold exposure and frostbite during this period of service.  Notably, the Veteran did not participate in an examination upon separation from service.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran also described additional cold exposure while stationed in Germany, but service personnel records-to include the Veteran's DD Form 214-do not show the Veteran had any foreign service.  In any event, the Board accepts the Veteran's reports of cold exposure and injury during his New Jersey service in 1977 and 1978 as credible.

At an October 2023 Cold Injury Residuals examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with cold injury residuals of the right and left upper extremities, and of the right and left lower extremities.  The examiner documented the Veteran's reports of onset of symptoms in 1977 while at Ft. Dix in the winter months, suffering frostbite to his hands and feet performing outdoor activities, to include sleeping outdoors in tents.  The examiner noted the Veteran's reports of chronic pain since the in-service occurrences.  

Upon examination, the examiner noted right and left hand, and right and left foot arthralgia and other pain, cold sensitivity, locally impaired sensation, numbness and color changes.  The examiner identified an intolerance to cold with loss of color to the fingers and toes bilaterally when exposed to cold, and constant pain and numbness and tingling of the fingertips and toes bilaterally.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had limitation of fine motor tasks of the hands bilaterally, and that the Veteran should not work in cold weather environments.  The examiner ultimately concluded that the Veteran's conditions were at least as likely as not incurred in, or caused by his in-service cold exposure and injuries.  In support, the examiner highlighted the Veteran's own reports of in-service cold exposure and resulting symptoms, and noted that the current physical examination findings were supportive of the Veteran's history.  

There are no other medical opinions of record addressing the etiology of the Veteran's cold injury residuals. 

After considering the evidence above, the Board finds the evidence to be at the very least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has cold injury residuals of the right and left upper and right and left lower extremities related to cold exposure and injury during his period of active duty service.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the benefits sought on appeal are granted.   

REASONS FOR REMAND

6. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disability is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has back, cervical spine and left knee disabilities that are related to gait impairment and altered biomechanics caused by his service-connected right and left foot disabilities, which include right foot malunion/nonunion of the tarsal/metatarsal bones, and separate foot injury.  In addition, as discussed above, the Board has now granted entitlement to service connection for cold injury residuals affecting his lower extremities. 

A March 2023 examiner opined against this connection.  In support, while acknowledging that a significantly altered gait over a period of years may impact an opposite or uninjured part of the body, the examiner indicated that in this case, although post-service records documented left knee arthritis, they showed no evidence of a current lumbar spine or cervical spine disability, nor was there evidence of any altered gait at all.  The Board observes, however, that a spine examination that took place earlier in March 2023 specifically identified a diagnosis of intervertebral disc syndrome and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  A separate March 2023 cervical spine examination identified a diagnosis of cervical strain.  

In addition, a prior January 2023 foot examination report documented both the Veteran's and the foot examiner's discussion of gait alteration due to his service-connected foot disabilities.  The Veteran indicated that his foot pain had affected his gait, which caused him to fall.  He noted constant throbbing bilateral foot and toe pain, stiffness, tightness, popping, locking, discomfort, and occasional swelling.  He noted pain with walking and worsening pain in cold weather.  Upon examination, the examiner identified pain in the feet on active and passive motion, as well as in weight bearing, and indicated that the pain to the Veteran's feet had affected his gait and caused him to fall.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran was unable to walk more than 10 minutes, and could not bear weight during a flare-up. 

It appears that the clinician who provided the March 2023 medical nexus opinion was not fully aware of the diagnoses already established in the record, and the functional impact of the Veteran's service-connected foot disabilities described and identified upon examination in January 2023.  Prior to denying the Veteran's left knee, back and cervical spine claims, the AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion based on a full understanding of the Veteran's disability picture.  Remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

9. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, depression, and anxiety, is remanded.

The Veteran reports he has a current psychiatric disability that he believes is related to several in-service stressors, to include suffering a personal assault and witnessing sexual assault.  In February 2023, the Veteran appeared for a psychiatric disability examination, at which time the examiner concluded that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for a PTSD diagnosis, but did meet the criteria for diagnosis of an unspecified anxiety disorder.  The Veteran's VA treatment records also document the presence of an insomnia disorder.  

The February 2023 examiner opined against a relationship between the Veteran's mental health disability and his service based in part on observation of a lack of documentation of stressors within the Veteran's service records. The examiner also questioned the Veteran's reliability as a historian.  The examiner appeared to discount an in-service disciplinary action because the Veteran could not recall the circumstances of the action.  The examiner also speculated that the Veteran may not have been reporting an accurate history in large part based on the fact that the Veteran was reading notes in response to questions, which the examiner speculated may have been prepared by someone else.  

Importantly, prior to examination, the Veteran specifically noted that his company records while serving at Ft. Belvoir and Ft. Hood may document the several of the events and offenses he contends to have witnessed.  See the Veteran's January 2022 VA Form 526EZ, at 3; see also the January 2022 Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD, at 1.  However, the AOJ did not attempt to obtain the Veteran's unit histories prior to scheduling the February 2023 examination or denying the Veteran's claim.  Although the Veteran later indicated that he himself did not report what he witnessed for fear of retaliation, the AOJ should have nevertheless obtained the unit histories prior to examination and adjudication in light of the Veteran's original suggestion that they may include corroborative information.  Such is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error that must be corrected on remand.  

Concerning the adequacy of the February 2023 medical assessment itself, the Veteran reported to the AOJ in a subsequent May 2023 statement that he felt uncomfortable with the examiner, and believed the examiner did not thoroughly address the life-threatening events the Veteran reported in prior statements.  While the examiner did discuss the Veteran's stressor statements within the examination report, it is unclear to what degree the examiner's own questions as to the Veteran's reliability as a historian influenced the negative nexus opinion.  Indeed, with respect to the fact that the Veteran read from notes during the examination, the examiner acknowledged it was the Veteran's right to have notes.  The examiner then stated that "this isn't to say the situations did or didn't happen, but [the Veteran] was unable to report his own subjective experiences in the absence of assistance from notes he brought to the exam . . .", which the examiner suspected were completed by an unknown person.  The examiner provided no further commentary to assist in assessing the Veteran's reliability.

In addition, the service records that are on file confirm that the Veteran received punishment for falling asleep on the job in May 1980.  The February 2023 examiner did not adequately discuss whether such may be an in-service marker for incurrence of a personal assault.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).  On remand, after completing the above-referenced records request, another psychiatric examination should be scheduled, and an adequate medical opinion obtained addressing direct service connection.  

Finally, the Board observes that on his January 2022 Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD, the Veteran also stated that severe pain from his injuries and residual conditions also contribute to the severity of his PTSD, depression, and anxiety.  However, prior to denying the Veteran's claim, the AOJ did not obtain an opinion addressing whether any current psychiatric condition may be secondarily related to his service-connected disabilities.  On remand, an opinion addressing secondary service connection should also be secured. 

10. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The Veteran contends his service-connected disabilities prevent him from securing and following gainful employment.  The issue of entitlement to a TDIU issue is intertwined with implementation of the awards granted by the Board in this decision, as well as with the development ordered on remand.  As such, entitlement to a TDIU must also be remanded at this time.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take all appropriate steps to request the Veteran's unit histories and/or logbooks corresponding to his active duty service at Ft. Belvoir (February 1978 to May 1978) and Ft. Hood (May 1978 to December 1980).  If records are unavailable, this should be documented in the claims file.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for examinations to address the nature and etiology of his back, cervical spine and left knee disabilities.  The examiner should review the Veteran' medical records, to specifically include the January 2023 foot examination report, and take a history from the Veteran as to the progression of his symptoms.

After review of the record, interview and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back, cervical spine, and/or left knee disability was caused or aggravated by his service-connected foot disabilities, to include based on overcompensation or altered mechanics or weightbearing?  In providing a response, the examiner must consider and discuss whether the Veteran's back, cervical spine and/or left knee disability would have been less severe "but-for" his service-connected foot disabilities, to include either because there is an etiological link or because the service-connected disabilities resulted in the inability to treat the back, cervical spine or left knee.

Please consider and discuss what impact, if any, the gait impairment identified at the Veteran's January 2023 foot examination had on the Veteran's claimed disabilities of the back, cervical spine and left knee.

All opinions should be supported by a medical explanation or rationale.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a mental health examination with an examiner other than the February 2023 examiner, to assess the nature and etiology of any current psychiatric disabilities.  The examiner should review the Veteran's medical records, and take a history from the Veteran as to the progression of his symptoms. 

Upon review of the record, interview and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Identify all current acquired psychiatric disorders.  If PTSD is diagnosed, the examiner must specify the stressor or stressors upon which the diagnosis is based.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any such acquired psychiatric disorder had onset in, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active duty service?  In providing a response, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence reviewed indicates, from a medical perspective, that an in-service personal assault occurred, as the Veteran has so described.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).  Please consider and comment on disciplinary action taken in March 1980 for the Veteran's failing to remain awake during his tour of duty, which is documented in the Veteran's service records.

If there is a medical reason that supports, or calls into question the Veteran's reported history of in-service events and symptom history, this should be explained.

(c.) Notwithstanding the above, it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a psychiatric disability that was caused or aggravated by pain from his service-connected disabilities?  In providing a response, the examiner must consider and discuss whether the Veteran's psychiatric disability would have been less severe "but-for" his service-connected disabilities, to include either because there is an etiological link or because the service-connected disabilities resulted in the inability to treat the psychiatric disability.

(Continued on Next Page)

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Chiappetta, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.