Citation Nr: A25031301
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240514-442251
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for status post cervical discectomy is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for back condition of lower back pain, claimed as lumbar spine, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, his status post cervical discectomy is etiologically related to his service.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, his back condition of lower back pain (claimed as lumbar spine) is etiologically related to his service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for status post cervical discectomy have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for back condition of lower back pain (claimed as lumbar spine) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1972 to August 1973.

This matter was denied in an April 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for status post cervical discectomy and a back condition (claimed as lumbar spine).

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for his back condition (claimed as lumbar spine). The AOJ denied the claim in the July 2023 rating decision on appeal.

In June 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for status post cervical discectomy.  The AOH denied the claim in an August 2023 rating decision.  The AOJ issued a subsequent rating decision finding new and relevant evidence was submitted and again denied the claim in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.

In May 2024 the Veteran timely submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), seeking service connection for his back condition (claimed as lumbar spine) and status post cervical discectomy. The Veteran requested direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.

Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: 1) a current disability; 2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and; 3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  It follows, that when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applied.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record. A layperson is competent to report on the onset and recurrence of symptoms. See, Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that "[w]hether lay evidence is competent and sufficient in a particular case is a factual issue to be addressed by the Board").

The Board has a duty to assess the credibility and weight given to evidence. Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 523 U.S. 1046 (1998); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367 (2001).  Indeed, in Jefferson v. Principi, 271 F.3d 1072 (Fed. Cir. 2001), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit), citing its decision in Madden, recognized that the Board had inherent fact-finding ability.  Id. at 1076; see also, 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (a).  Moreover, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to weigh and assess the evidence.  Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992).

As a finder of fact, when considering whether lay evidence is satisfactory, the Board may also properly consider internal inconsistency of the statements, facial plausibility, consistency with other evidence submitted on behalf of the Veteran, and the Veteran's demeanor when testifying at a hearing.  See, Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 38 (2007); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

In determining the probative value to be assigned to a medical opinion, the Board must consider three factors. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). The initial inquiry in determining probative value is to assess whether a medical expert was fully informed of the pertinent factual premises (i.e., medical history) of the case. A review of the claims file is not required since a medical professional can also become aware of the relevant medical history by having treated a Veteran for a long period of time or through a factually accurate medical history reported by a Veteran. See, Id. at 303-04.

The second inquiry involves consideration of whether the medical expert provided a fully articulated opinion. See, Id. A medical opinion that is equivocal in nature or expressed in speculative language does not provide the degree of certainty required for medical nexus evidence. See, McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The third and final factor in determining the probative value of an opinion involves consideration of whether the opinion is supported by a reasoned analysis.  The most probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning.  Therefore, a medical opinion containing only data and conclusions is not entitled to any weight. In fact, a review of the claims file does not substitute for a lack of a reasoned analysis.  See, Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304; see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions.").

To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to service connection for status post cervical discectomy is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for back condition, claimed as lumbar spine, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his cervical spine and lumbar spine conditions are related to a single injury incurred during his service.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that during training he was climbing a wall, rappelled part of the way down, then dropped approximately 8 feet to the ground - he was not immediately able to rise from the ground.  He further stated his injuries bothered him throughout his active duty to the present, worsening overtime.  The Veteran also noted that "back then they wouldn't let you hold up the platoon to go to medical," so he "just kept going."  See February 2023 Statement in Support of Claim; see also February 2023 Statement in Support of Claim; see also July 2023 Neck (Cervical Spine) Conditions Examination Report.

In the rating decisions on appeal, the AOJ conceded that 1. the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability of status post cervical discectomy; and 2. has a diagnosis for lumbar spine injury as his Richmond VA Medical Center treatment records show current treatment for low back pain.  Thus, the Board finds the first element of service connection - a currently diagnosed disability - has been met.

Therefore, the remaining issues before the Board are the second and third elements of service connection - an in-service event, injury or disease, and a causal relationship between the Veteran's currently diagnosed disabilities and the claimed in-service event, injury, or disease.

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and VA treatment records.  As the Veteran contends, his service treatment records are silent for any injury to his cervical or lumbar spine in service.  The Board notes there are multiple notations of leg pain.  Additionally, the Veteran's DD 214 shows that he was discharged with honorable character of service with a notation that separation was due to failure to demonstrate adequate potential for promotion advancement.  

Further, in what appears to be the Veteran's initial visit to a VA treatment center, the Veteran complained of low back pain and informed the provider he had a cervical discectomy in 2010.  See January 2021 VA Treatment Note.  The Veteran complained of low back pain and cervical spine issues and was treated for these issues by VA since 2021.  See generally, 2021 - 2023 VA Treatment Records.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his cervical spine injury in July 2023.  At that time, the examiner confirmed that the Veteran had a diagnosis of status post cervical discectomy.  The examiner noted the Veteran reported onset of this condition occurred on an obstacle course in basic training.  The examiner opined that "[t]here are no evidence of chronicity of treatment compliance linking any neck condition during military in-service from separation in 1993 for more than 35 years till condition of Cervical discectomy 2010."  The examiner determined that there was no medical nexus to establish service connection.  No etiology or intercurrent causes were provided and the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements in the opinion proffered. 

This rationale does not explain to the Board why his current cervical spine disability is not related to service.  The examiner's contention that the Veteran waited 35 years to complain of his cervical spine disability is neither persuasive nor accurate, as even the examiner noted the Veteran underwent surgery for this condition in 2010.  Further, there is no explanation connecting the observed facts from the record to the examiner's conclusion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("It is the fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion."); id. at 301 (holding an examiner may not merely list facts and conclusions with no reasoned explanation connecting the two); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (noting that a VA examiner's opinion, which relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim of service connection could be proven").  Therefore, the Board affords this opinion limited probative value.

The Board notes the Veteran was not afforded an examination for his lumbar spine disability.  Here, the Board does not need to remand the claim to correct these inadequacies, as the Board is able to resolve the reasonable doubt and find that the Veteran's neck condition, status post cervical discectomy and lower back pain condition  had its onset during the Veteran's active service.  See, Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (holding that it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against an appellant's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private nexus opinion for his cervical spine disability and his lumbar spine disability.  In the cervical spine nexus letter, the provider opined that, based upon professional education and experience, relevant medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, the Veteran's current cervical intervertebral disc and spinal stenosis condition is at least as likely as not due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his neck/cervical spine injury that occurred during active-duty military service.  The provider explained that there was no pre-military history of a neck/cervical spine issue, no intercurrent event, injury, or disease process post service that would have caused the Veteran's current disability, and the neck injury correlates to the mechanism of the injury/event described by the Veteran.  The provider further explained the medical literature supports that a prior neck injury is a primary cause of chronic cervical spine conditions due to post traumatic pathological degenerative processes and mechanisms and that members of the military are at increased risk of chronic cervical spine degeneration.

In the lumbar spine nexus letter, the provider noted the Veteran had a diagnosis of lumbar strain which correlates to the active-duty injury described by the Veteran.  The provider opined that, based upon professional education and experience, relevant medical literature, evidence of record, and history of symptoms, the Veteran's current lumbar strain is at least as likely as not due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his back/lumbar spine injury that occurred during active-duty military service.  The provider explained that there was no pre-service evidence of a low back condition.  The provider further explained medical literature supports that prior low back injury can cause a chronic lumbar strain with mechanical and functional instability, leading to re-injury, weakened muscles and joint capsules, and significant disability.

The Board finds that the private medical opinions are adequate and place the evidence at least in approximate balance.  The private medical opinions each provided reasons for conclusions based on accurate characterization of the evidence of record and relevant medical literature available.  Therefore, the December 2022 private medical opinion is entitled to significant probative weight. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

Additionally, the Board finds that this Veteran's claimed disabilities herein more likely than not began during active service.  While the Veteran is not shown to possess the necessary medical expertise to diagnose his status post cervical discectomy or lumbar strain or render an opinion regarding the etiology of either disability, he is competent to report what he observed and experienced firsthand. See, Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  Furthermore, the Board finds no reason to doubt the credibility of the Veteran's lay assertions.  As to his observations that his symptoms began during active service and the continuity of symptomology or worsening from in-service until diagnosis, the Board affords these statements persuasive probative weight.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the Veteran has 1) current medical diagnoses for status post cervical discectomy and a back (lumbar spine) condition, 2) an in-service event or injury, as noted by the Veteran's lay statements, and 3) medical nexus opinions that demonstrate his current diagnoses are related to his service.  The totality of the evidence shows the Veteran's claimed disabilities are related to his service.

Given the evidence of a current disability, the probative lay statements of record, and the positive private medical nexus opinions, the Board resolves any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his status post cervical discectomy and back (lumbar spine) condition onset during active service.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claim is granted.

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Herring, Victoria B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.