Citation Nr: A25031383
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 210712-171080
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder s denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder with depressed mood is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The most probative and persuasive evidence weighs against a finding that PTSD was diagnosed during or contemporaneous to the appeal period.

2. The most probative and persuasive evidence weighs against a finding that depressive disorder was diagnosed during or contemporaneous to the appeal period.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2002 to March 2006.

In the July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or the Veteran's attorney with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder with depressed mood, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be established for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection requires competent evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) the incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury during service; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for PTSD requires (1) medical evidence of a diagnosis of PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptoms and the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(f), 4.125(a).

A Veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in order to prevail. To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim. Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518 (1996); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

1. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for depression.

The Veteran claims that entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression is warranted.

While the Board observes that the Veteran's initial claim to establish service connection for these disabilities was denied by the AOJ in an earlier rating decision, the AOJ favorably found in the rating decision on appeal that new and relevant evidence sufficient to warrant reconsideration of the matter had been received.  As such, the Board need not re-address this threshold matter and may proceed with readjudication of the merits of the previously denied claim.

In addition, the AOJ favorably found in the rating decision on appeal that the Veteran was previously diagnosed with depression and that the Veteran currently carried a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with depressed mood.  The AOJ also previously found that the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD; however, this finding was overturned in the April 2021 Higher-Level Review decision which found that the finding that the Veteran was currently diagnosed with PTSD was clearly erroneous.  As will be explained in detail below, the Board finds that there is clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary of a finding that the Veteran carries a current diagnosis of depression.  With respect to the finding that the Veteran is diagnosed with adjustment disorder with depressed mood, because there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by it.

The service medical records do not show complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of any psychiatric disability while in service.  The Veteran's January 2006 separation examination was normal.

April 2019 VA treatment records show the Veteran previously had a diagnosis of depression which had been in remission for 13 years.  VA treatment records do not show a diagnosis of PTSD.  The Veteran received a PTSD Screening in April 2019 which resulted in a score of 0, indicating no signs or symptoms of PTSD were present.

In a September 2019 statement, the Veteran's wife stated that she believed the Veteran suffered from great uncertainty, fear, and anxiety during his deployment to Jordan.  She stated that the Veteran currently suffered from social anxiety and depression, and has self-medicated with drugs and alcohol.

In a September 2019 Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, the Veteran stated that he suffered from a stressful incident where he was deployed without the customary waiting period after basic tech school training.  Protocol was not followed, the Veteran was not given security clearance and therefore could not attend briefings prior to deployment into hostile territory. The Veteran claimed this resulted in PTSD.  The Veteran also related the following incident: during deployment the Veteran was not allowed to leave the base because of dangerous conditions because of hair and skin color (blond and white) in region.  While they were told Jordan was friendly to the operation the behavior of Jordanian people indicated the opposite.  This resulted in high stress levels.  Explosion on base led to everyone running for cover.  Not having briefings prior to deployment continue to cause uncertainty and stress.  The Veteran also related the following stressful incident: many events during deployment caused PTSD.  Having to carry guns even in the shower, explosions that happened without warning, combat landings into enemy territory, warnings not to leave base due to white skin and blond hair, obviously unfriendly behavior of Jordanians while being told they were supportive of the efforts.  The Veteran claimed that PTSD and adjustment disorder, self-medication, anxiety and depression resulted from this incident.

In a December 2019 statement, the Veteran repeated similar claims from his previous statements.  The Veteran also stated that he was issued a brand new M-16 but could not sight the weapon in.  Thus, he had a gun that was not combat-ready.  The Veteran asserted that his mental health conditions were based on fear of hostile military or terrorist activity.  

In a February 2020 statement, the Veteran's sister claimed that the Veteran served in Operation Iraqi Freedom.  The sister reported that the Veteran seemed sad during his deployment to Jordan.  The sister described a change in attitude in the Veteran, that the Veteran was previously happy, popular, and social, but that he was antisocial and isolated after returning from deployment.

In a February 2020 statement, the Veteran's parents stated that their son was deployed suddenly after arrival at Andrews AFB.  The Veteran was part of the first servicemembers deployed to Jordan to prepare the way for the arrival of additional servicemembers.  The parents described how their son became withdrawn and subject to high anxiety after he returned from his deployment.  He has not been employed outside the home for about seven years.  He isolates and is antisocial.  They believe that he now suffers from anxiety, depression, and PTSD.

In a February 2020 VA medical examination, the Veteran was not diagnosed with PTSD because the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under DSM-5 criteria.  The Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and major depressive disorder, single episode, in remission.  With respect to adjustment disorder, the examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms were in response to the recent stressor of his wife's health problems and adding on the role of business owner in addition to other responsibilities of caring for son, wife, and home.  The examiner stated that this condition is not service related.  With respect to major depressive disorder, the examiner stated that the Veteran reported a history of depression that started in service and for which he sought treatment within a year of discharge.  The Veteran was diagnosed with depression at that time and treated with Cymbalta.  The Veteran's depression resolved in 2009 and he discontinued medication in2014 with no concerns related to depression since that time.  The Veteran's VA health promotion in April 2019 was negative for depression or PTSD symptoms.  The examiner stated that all lay statements were reviewed, and specifically mentioned the Veteran's statements and the wife's statement.  The examiner implied that the Veteran's wife's statement was entitled to little probative weight because the wife did not know the Veteran during his service, at the time of the reported stressor, and thus, could not serve as a witness to any changes in behavior during that time.

The February 2020 VA examiner issued February 2020 service connection opinions for the Veteran's diagnosed major depressive disorder, single episode, in remission, and the Veteran's diagnosed adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's major depressive disorder, single episode, in remission, was a result of an in-service stressor related event, as he sought mental health treatment within one year of discharge and was prescribed anti-depressant medication (Cymbalta) that same year.  The Veteran's depression was currently in remission and had not been problematic since 2009.  For adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the disorder was the result of an in-service stressor-related event, as these symptoms began a few months ago (years after service) in response to the stressor of the Veteran's wife leaving work and the Veteran being asked to take on the role of caring for son, home, and starting a new business.  The Veteran's distress was focused on this shift and was not present prior to this shift in responsibility.

In a May 2020 private examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with major depression, recurrent episode, and posttraumatic stress disorder.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's PTSD was characterized by hypervigilance, avoidance, and the Veteran's depression was characterized by anhedonia and depressed mood.  The examiner stated that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  The examiner did not state that any evidence had been reviewed, including the evidence of the Veteran's claims file.  The examiner believed that every PTSD criterion was met, and that the Veteran suffered from depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impaired judgment, disturbances of mood and motivation, and suicidal ideation.

There is no evidence that the May 2020 private examiner issued opinions on service connection in relation to the May 2020 examination.

In a December 2020 statement received by VA in January 2021, the Veteran described being upset and scared by not receiving pre-deployment briefings.  The Veteran also stated that he feared he would die when his C-130 engaged in evasive diving maneuvers as he was deploying to Jordan.  The Veteran also described being stressed by having to account for issued ammunition and for other airmen being disciplined for not properly securing their rifles.  The Veteran also described hearing a loud explosion while he was on base that occurred in the distance to which the airmen did not react, while the soldiers dove to the ground.  He also described feeling hated by the Jordanian people.  The Veteran also reported not feeling safe when riding in the back of a car with Middle Eastern men.  The Veteran reported experiencing hypervigilance.

The Veteran shared an article received January 2021 on U.S. troop deployments to Jordan.

In a February 2021 VA medical examination, the examiner diagnosed adjustment disorder with depressed mood.  The examiner did not diagnose any other mental conditions.  The examiner believed that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, to include all lay statements of record.

In a February 2021 VA medical opinion, the examiner, after reviewing the entire claims file and all related lay statements, opined that the Veteran's PTSD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms do not meet the criteria for PTSD, and that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's sole currently diagnosed mental health condition was adjustment disorder with depressed mood as a result of his cat's death.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the clinical threshold for a depressive disorder diagnosis.

The Veteran submitted July 2021 articles on mental illness.

The Board has considered all of the lay evidence of record.  However, while the Board finds that the Veteran and his family members are credible and competent to report on the Veteran's fear and anxiety during and after deployment, hypervigilance, and other related symptoms, the Veteran and his family members are not competent to make a medical diagnosis.  The Board is not free to substitute its own judgment for a medical expert.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).  

The Board finds the February 2020 and February 2021 VA examiners' opinions to be competent, credible, and persuasive.  The VA examiners did not diagnose PTSD or current depression.  The Board finds the VA examiners' examinations and opinions to be more probative than the lay statements of record and the May 2020 private examination.  The opinions of the VA examiners are highly probative because they are supported by a detailed rationale and provided by a trained medical professional.  The VA examiners specifically identified and discussed the Veteran's contentions and theory concerning service and the claimed disability.  Accordingly, the VA examiners' opinions are found to carry significant weight and to be the most persuasive evidence of record.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion he reaches; as is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).  To the extent that the Veteran's and Veteran's family members' lay statements, including lay statements of continuity of symptomatology, could be found to be competent and credible, the Board finds that they are outweighed by the February 2020 and February 2021 VA examination opinions because of the examiners' medical training, objective examination of the Veteran, and review of the medical records.  The Board also finds that the VA opinions are more persuasive than the private opinion as the VA examiners considered the complete record, examined the Veteran, and cited to specific evidence in making the opinions.

The Veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD relies on a single diagnosis from the May 2020 private examination.  The February 2020 and February 2021 VA examinations did not diagnose the Veteran with PTSD.  The Board finds that the May 2020 private examination is inadequate because the examiner did not indicate that the Veteran's claims file had been reviewed.  In addition, the examiner did not provide any indication that any past medical records of the Veteran had been reviewed.  A thorough examination is one that "takes into account the records of prior medical treatment, so that the evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one."  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Therefore, the Board finds that the May 2020 private examination is inadequate, and its diagnosis of PTSD is outweighed by the February 2020 and February 2021 examinations which found no such diagnosis.  The VA examiners of the February 2020 and February 2021 examinations certified that they had reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, and provided information in their examination reports corroborating that they had engaged in that claims file review.  

With respect to the Veteran's claim for depression, the Board finds that clear and unmistakable evidence exists to overturn the AOJ's finding that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with depression.  The VA medical record to which the AOJ based its finding is an April 2019 VA treatment record.  That treatment record states that the Veteran has a history of depression and that the depression had been in remission for 13 years.  In addition, the February 2020 VA medical examination corroborated this treatment record when the examiner diagnosed major depressive disorder, single episode, in remission.  Because both the February 2020 VA medical examination and the April 2019 VA treatment record agree that the Veteran previously had depression, but was at that time in remission, the Board finds that the Veteran does not carry a current diagnosis of depression during or contemporaneous to the appeal period.  In addition, the February 2021 VA medical examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with depression.  The May 2020 private examination is inadequate for the reasons stated in the previous paragraph, and its diagnosis of depression is outweighed by the contrary evidence stated in this paragraph.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service. However, the Board finds that the entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression is not warranted by the evidence of record.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression.  The Board finds that there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  As the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression, the claim must be denied.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Neither the Veteran nor the Veteran's attorney raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Accordingly, after a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and against a finding that PTSD and depression was incurred in or is related to service.  The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran in that it is clear that the Veteran sincerely believes that PTSD and depression are related to service.  However, the most persuasive evidence of record does not support that contention.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service to our country.  However, as the weight of the evidence is against the claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression, the claim must be denied.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder with depressed mood.

The Veteran claims that service connection for PTSD and depression is warranted.

However, the Board is required to consider alternative current conditions within the scope of the filed claim.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Here, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of adjustment disorder with depressed mood, diagnosed by both the February 2020 and February 2021 VA medical examinations.  While the February 2020 VA examination rendered an opinion that the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was less likely than not related to service, the February 2021 VA medical opinion did not opine on whether the Veteran's diagnosed adjustment disorder was related to service.  The Board finds that, in this respect only, the February 2021 VA medical opinion was incomplete and inadequate.  

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate examination and medical opinion addressing the date of initial onset and probable etiology of the Veteran's adjustment disorder prior to adjudicating the Veteran's claim represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected on remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must request that the Veteran be scheduled for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature, date of initial onset, and etiology of his adjustment disorder. The complete electronic record must be made available to, and reviewed by, the VA examiner prior to conducting the examination. All necessary studies and tests must be conducted.

After review and examination of the claims file, the examiner should answer the following:

(a.) Confirm a diagnosis of adjustment disorder.

(b.) If a diagnosis of adjustment disorder is confirmed, provide a date of initial onset (month and year).

(c.) Provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's adjustment disorder is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or the result of any incident of active duty.

All opinions should be supported by a clear rationale, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.

2. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appealed issue in light of the totality of evidence of record.  If any benefit sought is not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his attorney 

(Continued on the next page)

with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.