Citation Nr: A25031677
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240205-414370
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for broken toe is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that the Veteran has a broken toe condition related to active service or events therein.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for broken toe have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2017 to February 2023.

A rating decision was issued in February 2023 that denied entitlement to service connection for broken toe and bilateral ankles. This constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the February 2023 decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior February 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 decision. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision which was subsequently subject to HLR, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for left and right ankles, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Neither the Veteran nor her representative has raised any issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board . . . to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board"); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to duty-to-assist argument).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Without a current disability, service connection cannot be established. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The requirement for a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability either at the time a claim for VA compensation is filed, or at any time during the pendency of that claim. A claimant may be granted service connection even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The requirement of a current disability is also satisfied when a claimant has a disability recent to the date of claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

Additionally, pain without a diagnosis can constitute a current disability if the pain results in functional impairment in earning capacity. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). The Federal Circuit limited its holding in Saunders, stating "[w]e do not hold that a veteran could demonstrate service connection simply by asserting subjective pain-to establish a disability, the veteran's pain must amount to a functional impairment. To establish the presence of a disability, a veteran will need to show that her pain reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Id. at 1367-68. Accordingly, subjective pain alone is not enough to establish a current disability, and consideration should be given to the impact, or lack thereof, from the reported pain, focusing on evidence of functional limitation.

Entitlement to service connection for broken toe

The Veteran contends that she has a broken toe condition that is due to her military service. 

In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied service connection for the Veteran's claimed broken toe condition based on the lack of a current disability. The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran reported having a broken toe on her disability claim, which was received during her period of active duty. The issue before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current broken toe disability. 

A service treatment record from January 2019 reflects that the Veteran was seen for "pain on base of 5th metatarsal with weight bearing" and diagnostic imaging was ordered to "evaluate for fractures or other abnormalities." The results from the imaging showed "[t]here are no findings suspicious for an acute or healing fracture." This establishes an in-service complaint of pain at the base of the 5th (pinky) toe and an in-service injury for the purposes of service connection, however it excludes a toe fracture.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2022, and the VA examiner completed the Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for Foot Conditions, Including Flatfoot (Pes Planus). This DBQ addressed the Veteran's then-pending claims for bilateral pes planus, bilateral foot pain, left foot sprain, bilateral metatarsalgia, and bilateral broken toe. Regarding the broken toe claim, the VA examiner found "no radiographic evidence of current foot fracture or old healed fracture" after review of the results of the diagnostic testing done on the Veteran's feet. The Veteran's medical records do not contain any mention of a broken toe, nor is there any lay evidence describing an injury where the Veteran broke any of her toes in service. The fact that she claimed broken toe is not sufficient to establish that diagnosis during or after service.

The Board acknowledges that the Foot Conditions DBQ contains the Veteran's report of "numerous airborne/ruck injuries." However, this history encompassed all the claimed conditions addressed during that examination, and there is no specific evidence regarding any broken toes.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran had a broken toe recent to February 3, 2023 or during the pendency of the claim. Rather, the evidence weighs against a current or historical fracture of a toe. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The Veteran's claim for service connection for a broken toe condition is therefore denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she has left ankle pain that is related to her active-duty service. Specifically, she states that her ankle pain began in service during rucking and airborne training. 

In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied service connection for the Veteran's claimed left ankle pain condition based on the lack of a current disability. The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran reported having bilateral ankle pain on her disability claim, which was received during her period of active duty. The issue before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current left ankle disability. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination regarding her claimed ankle conditions in November 2022. Regarding the history of her left ankle pain, the Veteran reported that she began to have ankle pain in 2017 due to "airborne/rucking" with the symptoms at onset being "pain, rolled ankles, unstable." Her current left ankle condition results in "pain when weight bearing," and she uses wraps, braces, and insoles for it. The current impact is that it "limits what [she] can do (walk far, [she] can't run, etc.)." 

Regarding flare-ups, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported that flare-ups of the left ankle occur when she runs, resulting in pain and that the left ankle "feels sprained." The left ankle flare-ups are precipitated by weight-bearing and last a "day or so," and are alleviated by ice and not using that foot. The VA examiner noted that "[t]here is no functional impairment of the left ankle due to flare-ups," but proceeded to note that flare-ups result in functional impairment as the Veteran "can't weight bear on foot" during flare-ups.

The VA examiner found no current diagnosis associated with the claimed left ankle condition. The examiner noted no history of ankle instability; normal range-of-motion (ROM) measurements; no passive ROM measurements taken; no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation; repetitive-use testing was conducted, with no additional loss of function or ROM noted after three repetitions. The examiner noted that the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up, and checked "no" for whether statements from the Veteran suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups. The examiner did not give an estimate for the Veteran's ROM during flare-ups. The examiner indicated that the Veteran does not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion (including braces). Regarding functional impact, the examiner found that the claimed ankle conditions do not impact the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task (such as standing, walking, lifting, sitting, etc.). The examiner noted that passive ROM testing for both ankles "was not performed as it would increase the risk of further injury." 

The Veteran's service treatment records show complaints of pain in both ankles on January 24, 2020; "acute onset of left ankle pain since Thursday last week" on March 9, 2020; "chronic L foot/ankle pain" and radiographic testing showing "No acute osseous abnormality" in the left ankle on March 20, 2020; and a diagnosis of "Other instability, left ankle" on July 13, 2020.

The Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination is inadequate for rating purposes because it is based on an inaccurate factual premise. Specifically, insofar as it indicates that there is no history of left ankle instability, it ignores without explanation both the noted left ankle instability in her service treatment records and her competent reports of left ankle instability. Additionally, the VA examination is inadequate insofar as it is internally inconsistent in noting no ROM impairment but indicating that passive ROM testing for both ankles "was not performed as it would increase the risk of further injury," and marking "no" for whether statements from the Veteran suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups, without addressing the Veteran's description of her functional limitations during flare-ups.  

A disability may be found to exist even in the absence of a diagnosis, where the condition results in functional impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. Here, the VA examiner indicated that the left ankle condition does not result in functional impairment, whereas the Veteran reported that the left ankle condition limits what she can do by preventing her from running at all or walking far. Additionally, during flare-ups the Veteran reported that she is unable to bear weight on her left ankle. However, there is insufficient evidence for the Board to determine whether the Veteran's ankle pain limits her earning capacity.  

The AOJ's denial of the Veteran's claim without obtaining an adequate examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is necessary. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided). 

2. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she has right ankle pain that is related to her active-duty service. Specifically, she states that her right ankle pain began in service during rucking and airborne training.  

In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied service connection for the Veteran's claimed right ankle pain condition based on the lack of a current disability. The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran reported having bilateral ankle pain on her disability claim, which was received during her period of active duty. The issue before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current right ankle disability. 

The November 2022 VA examination also addressed the Veteran's claimed right ankle pain condition. Regarding the history of her right ankle pain, the Veteran similarly reported that she began to have ankle pain in 2017 due to "airborne/rucking" with the symptoms at onset being "pain, rolled ankles, unstable." Her current right ankle condition results in "pain when weight bearing," and she uses braces wraps, braces, and insoles for it. The current impact is that it "limits what [she] can do (walk far, [she] can't run, etc.)." 

Regarding flare-ups, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported that the right ankle flare-ups occur less than the left ankle, but there is still pain on weight bearing. The right ankle flare-ups are precipitated by weight-bearing, result in pain, and last a "day or so." The right ankle flare-ups are alleviated by not using that foot. The VA examiner noted that "[t]here is no functional impairment of the left ankle due to flare-ups," but proceeded to note that flare-ups result in functional impairment as the Veteran "can't weight bear on foot" during flare-ups. 

The VA examiner found no current diagnosis associated with the claimed right ankle condition. The examiner noted no history of ankle instability; normal ROM measurements; no passive ROM measurements taken; no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation; repetitive-use testing was conducted, with no additional loss of function or ROM noted after three repetitions. The examiner noted that the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up, and checked "no" for whether statements from the Veteran suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups. The examiner did not give an estimate for the Veteran's ROM during flare-ups. The examiner indicated that the Veteran does not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion (including braces). Regarding functional impact, the examiner found that the claimed ankle conditions do not impact the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task (such as standing, walking, lifting, sitting, etc.). The examiner noted that passive ROM testing for both ankles "was not performed as it would increase the risk of further injury."

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect that the Veteran received treatment for right ankle pain during service, including a note of "chronic right ankle pain for 1 year. Pain is on right 5th metatarsal at base and radiates up fibularis longus/brevis. Aggravated by running. Has been through PT for past year without benefit" on November 13, 2019; complaints of pain in both ankles on January 24, 2020; a note regarding the Veteran's "chronic R ankle instability and recurrent sprains" and radiographic imaging testing showing "No acute findings of the right ankle" on February 5, 2020; a note regarding musculoskeletal complaints including "ankles bilaterally concerning for various levels and healing stages of overuse injury" on February 8, 2020; and a diagnosis of "Other instability, right ankle" on July 13, 2020.  	

Again, the Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination is inadequate for rating purposes because it is based on an inaccurate factual premise insofar as it indicates that there is no history of right ankle instability, contrary to both the noted chronic right ankle instability in her service treatment records and her competent reports of right ankle instability. Additionally, the VA examination is inadequate insofar as it is internally inconsistent in noting no ROM impairment but indicating that passive ROM testing for both ankles "was not performed as it would increase the risk of further injury," and marking "no" for whether statements from the Veteran suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups, without addressing the Veteran's description of her functional limitations during flare-ups.  

As noted above for the left ankle, the VA examiner also indicated that the right ankle condition does not result in functional impairment, whereas the Veteran reported that the left ankle condition limits what she can do by preventing her from running at all or walking far or bearing weight on her right ankle during flare-ups. But again, there is insufficient evidence for the Board to determine whether the Veteran's ankle pain limits her earning capacity.

The AOJ's denial of the Veteran's claim without obtaining an adequate examination constitutes pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is necessary. Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed left and right ankle conditions. The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand.

(a.) Please identify any right or left ankle disability(ies) present at any time since February 3, 2022.

(b.) If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, does that functional impairment affect the Veteran's earning capacity? Why or why not?

(c.) If the examiner finds that ankle symptoms without a diagnosis result in functional impairment of the Veteran's earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to each of the following:

(d.) Direct service connection - Is a right ankle disability at least as likely as not related to service, including constituting a diagnosable condition with the onset of symptoms during service? Please discuss the February 5, 2020 service treatment record noting "chronic R ankle instability and recurrent sprains."

(e.) Direct service connection - Is a left ankle disability at least as likely as not related to service, including constituting a diagnosable condition with the onset of symptoms during service? Please discuss the March 20, 2020 service treatment record noted "chronic L foot/ankle pain."

In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms began in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible? 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.