Citation Nr: A25031879
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453839
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches secondary to service-connected neck strain with degenerative disc disease (DDD) and spondylolisthesis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea secondary to service-connected allergic rhinitis (claimed as chronic rhinitis) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1988 to September 1988, October 1989 to September 1992, and June 1994 to September 1995.

This appeal arises under the AMA.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied a claim of service connection for migraine headaches secondary to service-connected neck strain with DDD and spondylolisthesis and sleep apnea secondary to service-connected allergic rhinitis in a February 2024 rating decision, following which the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review.  In June 2024, the AOJ completed its Higher-Level Review based on the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision and issued an unfavorable decision.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board and requested Direct Review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches secondary to service-connected neck strain with degenerative disc disease and spondylolisthesis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed migraine headaches are caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Specifically, he asserts that his migraine headaches are either caused or aggravated by his service-connected neck strain with DDD and spondylolisthesis disability.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.303 (a).  To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In this context, "aggravation" refers to any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence.  The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions.  Aggravation of a disability need not be permanent.  

In June 2024, the AOJ scheduled the Veteran for VA examinations and opinions for secondary service connection.  As it relates to the claim for migraine headaches, the examiner opined it was less likely than not the Veteran's migraines are proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected neck disability.  The examiner stated the two conditions are not medically related.  The examiner also stated a thorough review of the medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.  

Unfortunately, the Board finds the VA opinion to be inadequate in the sense that it is incomplete, as the examiner only addressed whether service-connected neck strain with DDD and spondylolisthesis caused migraines.  For the most part, in secondary service connection claims, both causation and aggravation are to be addressed for the opinion to be adequate.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

Accordingly, as the June 2024 VA examination is incomplete, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and the claim must be remanded for a new VA opinion.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea secondary to service-connected allergic rhinitis (claimed as chronic rhinitis) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Specifically, he asserts that his sleep apnea is either caused or aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis disability.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.303 (a).  To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In this context, "aggravation" refers to any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence.  The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions.  Aggravation of a disability need not be permanent.  

In June 2024, the AOJ scheduled the Veteran for VA examinations and opinions for secondary service connection.  The examiner opined it was less likely than not the Veteran's sleep apnea is proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis disability.  The examiner stated the two conditions are not medically related.  The examiner also stated a thorough review of the medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.  The examiner cited to a NIH article on obstructive sleep apnea.  

Unfortunately, the Board finds the VA opinion to be inadequate in the sense that it is incomplete, as the examiner only addressed whether service-connected allergic rhinitis caused sleep apnea.  For the most part, in secondary service connection claims, both causation and aggravation are to be addressed for the opinion to be adequate.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

Accordingly, as the June 2024 VA examination is incomplete, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and the claim must be remanded for a new VA opinion.

The Board does not, at this time or by this remand, make any determination, express or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from the examiner who provided the June 2024 migraine headache and obstructive sleep apnea opinions.  If the examiner is not available provide access to the electronic claims file to another qualified medical practitioner for review.  The examiner must provide the following opinion:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's diagnosed migraines are aggravated by his service-connected neck strain with DDD and spondylolisthesis disability.

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis disability.

The examiner is advised that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability regardless of its permanence.

(Continued on the next page)

?

All opinions must be accompanied by a complete rationale for all conclusions reached.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resort to mere speculation, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation. The provider should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e., additional facts are required (and identification of such needed facts), or the examiner lacks the knowledge or training needed).

 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mitchell, Kimberly A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.