Citation Nr: A25031602
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-408483
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a back disability (claimed as lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease) is dismissed.

The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, is dismissed.

The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for shin splints, tendonitis, anterior tibial compartment syndrome, genu varum is dismissed.

The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety is dismissed.

The appeal as to entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance is dismissed.

The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability (claimed as arthritis with winged scapula and drooping also claimed as muscle group XXII/trapezius condition over shoulders) is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for seizure disorder (claimed as mini strokes) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for dysthymic disorder is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for cervical strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine, spondylolisthesis and cervical angina is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for elevated transaminases- fatty liver disease is denied.

REMANDED 

Entitlement to service connection for splenomegaly is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a vision disability (claimed as visual disturbances) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time of the January 2024 rating decision and January 2024 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal concerning the issues of entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, and entitlement to service connection for shin splints, the Veteran already had an August 2020 VA Form 10182 pending at the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) for the same issues.

2. For the claim for entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety, there is no case or controversy regarding the benefit sought on appeal, as the Board granted entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder in a July 2024 Board decision.

3. An August 2021 rating decision granted the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition. 

4. After the Veteran appealed to the Board through a VA Form 10182, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) fully granted the claim for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance in an October 2024 rating decision.

5. A seizure disorder is not shown during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

6. An acquired psychiatric disorder, to include dysthymic disorder, that is separate and distinct from the already service-connected psychiatric disabilities has not been shown. 

7. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's cervical spine disability manifested with limitation of forward flexion to 15 degrees or less; however, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's cervical spine disability manifested in unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine. 

8. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's elevated transaminases- fatty liver disease has manifested with no compensable symptoms or chronic residuals. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a back disability (claimed as lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease) is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

2. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

3. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for shin splints, tendonitis, anterior tibial compartment syndrome, genu varum, is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

4. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety is rendered moot and is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

5. The appeal as to entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance is rendered moot and is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. 

6. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability (claimed as arthritis with winged scapula and drooping also claimed as muscle group XXII/trapezius condition over shoulders) is rendered moot and is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. 

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for seizure disorder (claimed as mini strokes) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 3.102, 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for dysthymic disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 3.102, 3.303(a), 3.304. 

9. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for cervical strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine, spondylolisthesis and cervical angina have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5242-5237.

10. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable disability rating for elevated transaminases- fatty liver disease have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.20, 4.27, 4.114, DC 7399-7345.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from July 1972 to June 1981.

These matters come before the Board on appeal from January 2024 rating decisions of a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Dismissals

1. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a back disability (claimed as lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease) is dismissed. 

2. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, is dismissed. 

3. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for shin splints, tendonitis, anterior tibial compartment syndrome, genu varum, is dismissed. 

The Veteran claims he has a back disability, right lower extremity radiculopathy, and bilateral shin splints as a result of his service.

By way of history, the issues of entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include right lower extremity radiculopathy, and entitlement to service connection for shin splints, were denied in a February 2020 rating decision. The Veteran subsequently filed a request for Higher Level Review. In a July 2020 Higher Level Review rating decision, the AOJ again denied the claims for entitlement to service connection for a back disability, right lower extremity radiculopathy, and shin splints. As a result, in August 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 as to the issues and elected the Direct Review docket.

However, beginning in September 2021, the Veteran submitted various forms, including multiple VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claims, as well as VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review claims regarding the issues of entitlement to service connection for a back disability, right lower extremity radiculopathy, and shin splints. The AOJ subsequently denied the issues in January 2024 rating decisions. In January 2024, the Veteran appealed these decisions to the Board via another VA Form 10182. These appeals are currently before the Board as a result of the VA Form 10182 filed in January 2024.

With respect to the denial of a claim, a claimant may either elect to submit a supplemental claim, higher-level review, or submit an appeal to the Board, but may not elect multiple review options. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 3.2501. Such concurrent election is specifically prohibited by 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b), which states, "[A] claimant who has filed for review under one of the options available under paragraph (a) of this section may not, while that review is pending final adjudication, file for review under a different available option."

In this case, the Veteran initially requested an appeal of the issues of service connection for a back disability, to include right lower extremity radiculopathy, and shin splints to the Board on the Direct Review docket following the July 2020 rating decision. While this request was pending, the Veteran subsequently submitted supplemental claims regarding the same issues. He also did not withdraw the August 2020 VA Form 10182. As that did not happen, the January 2024 rating decisions were spurious and issued in error, and any appeal of such is ineligible for Board review and must be dismissed. 

Because the Veteran may not seek review of an appeal while another review is pending final adjudication, the Board may not review the appeals resulting from the January 2024 VA Form 10182 and they must be dismissed based on improper concurrent election. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b). As such, the appeals pertaining to the issues of service connection for a back disability, right lower extremity radiculopathy, and shin splints, are dismissed and will not further be addressed by the Board in this decision. 

The Board emphasizes to the Veteran that the merits of the issues dismissed above will be addressed in a separate Board decision under the proper docket number.

4. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety is dismissed. 

The Board has jurisdiction where there is a question of law or fact on appeal to the Secretary. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. § 20.101. The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (d)(5).

The issue of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder was denied in a May 2020 rating decision. The Veteran then appealed the May 2020 rating decision to the Board in February 2021 via a VA Form 10182. The Board issued a decision in July 2024 granting entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder. This grant was implemented by the AOJ in a July 29, 2024, rating decision. 

Thus, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder is moot and should be dismissed, as it has been granted and there is no justiciable case or controversy before the Board at this time with respect to this claim. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. § 20. 200.

Accordingly, the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder is dismissed.

5. The appeal as to entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability (claimed as arthritis with winged scapula and drooping also claimed as muscle group XXII/trapezius condition over shoulders) is dismissed. 

In an August 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted the Veteran's claim for service connection for a left shoulder condition, claimed as limited motion of shoulders and upper back, assigned a 20 percent disability rating effective January 2, 2021.

Thus, the Board finds that this appeal of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is moot. 

The Board has jurisdiction where there is a question of law or fact on appeal to the Secretary. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. § 20.101. The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(d). The Veteran's claim for service connection for a left shoulder disability has already been granted in full by the August 2021 rating decision. Therefore, there is no longer any pending adverse determination for the Board to adjudicate with respect to this appeal of entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability. Shoen v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 456 (1994).

Accordingly, the appeal on the merits of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is moot by virtue of the prior grant of service connection and must be dismissed. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

6. The appeal as to entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance is dismissed. 

In a January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance. The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in January 2024 appealing the matter to the Board. However, while this appeal has been pending, the Veteran filed an additional claim for entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance in March 2024. Subsequently, the AOJ then granted that claim in an October 2024 rating decision. 

The Board's jurisdiction is provided by 38 U.S.C. § 7104. The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. 

As the claim was fully granted, there is no fact or law remaining in controversy; thus, the appeal is moot and is dismissed due to lack of jurisdiction. Id.

Service Connection

To establish service connection for a disability, there must be competent evidence of the following: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or "nexus" between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 236 (2010); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). When these elements are satisfied, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to or the result of, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) a current disability exists, (2) the veteran has a service-connected disability; and (3) the current disability was either (a) caused by; or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). "Aggravation," in the context of secondary service connection, is demonstrated when there is "[a]ny increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease." 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b). In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals held 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. Therefore, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

The VA is also required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Lastly, a veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise. Under 38 U.S.C. § 5107, the benefit of the doubt rule is clear and unambiguous on its face. Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), affirmed en banc 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

7. Entitlement to service connection for seizure disorder (claimed as mini strokes) is denied. 

As a preliminary matter, although the January 2024 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted, the Board finds that the AOJ made the implicit finding that such new and relevant evidence had in fact been submitted, as it readjudicated the merits of the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the Board will proceed with a discussion of the merits.

The Veteran contends his seizure disorder is secondary to his service-connected traumatic brain injury (TBI).  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that in the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with seizures. The AOJ noted that he had complaints of seizures in VA medical records. In this regard, under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104. Here, however, VA treatment records throughout the claims file do not reflect diagnosis or treatment of any isolated seizures, seizure-like events, or a seizure disorder. Additionally, the VA examinations of record for the Veteran's service connected TBI all reflect that the Veteran does not have seizures as a residual of his TBI. 

To the extent that the AOJ identified the VA treatment records as evidence of a diagnosis of a seizure disorder during the claim period on appeal, the record reflects clear and unmistakable error in this favorable finding. As such, the AOJ's favorable finding in this regard has been rebutted and is therefore not binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board finds that the threshold element of the claims for service connection, i.e., a current disability, is not met. In this regard, the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing he is currently diagnosed with a seizure disorder. Indeed, the available medical treatment records as well as VA examinations for the period on appeal fail to show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of any type of seizure disability. 

While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay assertions and his belief that he has a seizure disorder that is etiologically related to service or to his service connected TBI, as a lay person, and under the facts of this case, he is not shown to possess the necessary medical knowledge and expertise to diagnose a medical disability or relate such to service. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376, n. 4.

The Board concludes that the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing that he has the disability he claims. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(a) ("[A] claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits."); Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (holding that it is the claimant's general evidentiary burden to establish all elements of the claim). In addition, the evidence does not show symptoms resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity to warrant a diagnosis of a seizure disorder. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). The available medical evidence shows no current diagnosis or even symptoms relevant to a seizure disability. The medical evidence outweighs the lay evidence in this case.

Where the evidence does not support a finding of a current disability upon which to predicate a grant of service connection, there can be no valid claim for that benefit. See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). As there is no current evidence of a seizure disorder, a remand for a VA examination is not required. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i).

Because the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claim is therefore denied.

8. Entitlement to service connection for dysthymic disorder is denied. 

The record reflects that the Veteran has been diagnosed with and is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder (rated in conjunction with his TBI) currently 100 percent disabling. However, he has argued that he has an additional, separate, psychiatric disorder to include dysthymic disorder, that stems from his period of service; however, the record does not show that he has been diagnosed with a dysthymic disorder at any time during the pendency of the appeal.

In this regard, the Veteran has undergone numerous VA examinations for psychiatric disorders. Throughout the examinations, the Veteran has been diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, and mild cognitive impairment. See e.g., February 2019 VA examination; October 2019 VA examination; December 2021 VA examination. However, no diagnosis for dysthymic disorder has been made throughout the record. Additionally, the Veteran's VA treatment records and private treatment records do not contain a diagnosis for dysthymic disorder. 

Service connection may only be granted for a current disability. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). As there is no confirmed current diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder independent of his currently service-connected PTSD, major depressive disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder, at any time during the pendency of the appeal, service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include dysthymic disorder, is not warranted.

The Veteran has asserted that he experiences feeling of depression, low mood and energy, and other psychiatric symptoms, which the Board has considered. He is indeed competent to describe symptoms capable of lay observation because this requires personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, however, he is not competent to diagnose any current disorder due to the medical complexity of the matters involved. Further, many of these symptoms are attributable to his currently service-connected psychiatric disorders.

Such competent evidence has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined the Veteran during his current appeal and the VA examinations, and clinical records obtained and associated with the claims file. Here, the Board attaches greater probative weight to the clinical findings than to the lay statements that have been submitted. 

Because the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claim is therefore denied.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

9. Entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for cervical strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine, spondylolisthesis and cervical angina is granted. 

The Veteran contends generally that his service-connected cervical spine disability is more severe than currently rated.  

The Veteran's cervical spine disability is currently assigned a 20 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5242-5237 under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula). Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires the use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis of the rating assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen.

DC 5242 refers to degenerative arthritis or degenerative disc disease other than IVDS of the spine. DC 5237 refers to cervical strain. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DCs 5242-5237.

Under the General Rating Formula, in pertinent part, a 20 percent rating is warranted when forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or there is muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A rating of 30 percent is assigned when forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine is found.

A 40 percent rating is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 100 percent rating is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

Note (2) states that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is zero to 45 degrees, extension is zero to 45 degrees, left and right lateral flexion is zero to 45 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation as zero to 80 degrees. A normal combined range of motion of the cervical spine is 340 degrees. The combined range of motion is the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. Id.

Note (5) instructs that for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis occurs when the entire cervical spine is fixed in flexion or extension, which results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking due to a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen, dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurological symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis. Id.

Note (6) instructs that disability of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments should be evaluated separately unless there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which is rated as a single disability. It also instructs that IVDS may be rated under either the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." The cervical spine has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

In a July 1982 rating decision, service connection for a neck disability was originally granted. The Veteran did not file a notice of disagreement contesting the initial rating. The Veteran filed the current claim for increased on June 3, 2023. 

Given that compensation already has been established, and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Therefore, the relevant temporal focus for this disability is one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim; thus, the review period begins on June 3, 2022. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in August 2022. During the examination, the Veteran reported current symptoms including severe pain in the neck, particularly in the left upper side, an inability to look skyward without pain, radiculopathy, limitation of motion, cervicogenic headaches, mobility and balance issues. The Veteran reported he currently treats his neck condition with physical therapy, massage therapy, acupuncture, limiting use of computers, ibuprofen daily, as well as Lidocaine patches as needed. The Veteran reported he "tries" to stay active with moderate gardening but can no longer sit behind a desk or a computer without developing severe neck, shoulder, and head pain. He also indicated he cannot sit and speak with people unless facing them head one, due to sharp pains in his neck when turning his head. 

The Veteran reported flare-ups of his cervical spine condition, stating that flare-ups occur daily and are severe, lasting about 30 minutes. The Veteran indicated that the flare-ups are precipitated by turning (or rotation) of the neck, looking up, down, or sideways, or using the computer. The Veteran endorsed functional impairment due to his cervical spine disability, including difficulty sleeping, lying down, looking up and around, and driving. 

Range of motion testing revealed the Veteran's forward flexion of the cervical spine was limited 25 degrees; extension to 40 degrees; right and left lateral flexion limited to 20 degrees; right lateral rotation to 50 degrees; and left lateral rotation to 35 degrees. All ranges of motion exhibited pain. The examiner noted that passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion. The VA examiner noted objective evidence of crepitus, as well as objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint, located left paraspinal area around C2-C6. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions. There was no additional loss of function or range of motion following. The Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, but the examiner noted that procured evidence suggests that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance would significantly limit the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time. The VA examiner estimated the Veteran's cervical spine range of motion immediately after repeated use over time, stating the Veteran's forward flexion of the cervical spine would be limited to 5 degrees; extension to 10 degrees; right and left lateral flexion limited to 5 degrees; right lateral rotation to 10 degrees; and left lateral rotation to 5 degrees. Additionally, the Veteran was not being examined during a flare-up, but the examiner indicated that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance would significantly limit the Veteran's functional ability with flare-ups. The examiner estimated that during flare-ups, all ranges of motion of the cervical spine would be limited to 0 degrees. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had localized tenderness of the cervical spine, not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, as well as muscle spasms and guarding, resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. The VA examiner noted no additional factors contributing to the Veteran's cervical spine disability. The Veteran's muscle strength was slightly reduced, but the VA examiner noted no muscle atrophy. Sensory exam was normal. The examiner noted no ankylosis of the spine. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran does have IVDS of the cervical spine but had no episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician in the past 12 months. Imaging studies had not been performed. 

The Veteran underwent an additional VA neck examination in April 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported current symptoms including pain, limited range of motion, and radiculopathy. The Veteran reported he currently treats his neck condition with acupuncture, massage, and Lidocaine. The Veteran denied flare-ups of his cervical spine condition. The Veteran endorsed functional impairment due to his cervical spine disability, including decreased and limited range of motion of his neck. Range of motion testing revealed all normal range of motion findings. Specifically, the Veteran's range of motion was not limited upon testing. The VA examiner noted that extension exhibited pain. The examiner noted that passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion, except for the Veteran's extension of the cervical spine, which was limited to 30 degrees. The VA examiner noted no objective evidence of crepitus nor objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions. There was no additional loss of function or range of motion following. The Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, but the examiner noted that procured evidence suggests that pain would significantly limit the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time. The VA examiner estimated the Veteran's cervical spine range of motion immediately after repeated use over time, stating the Veteran's forward flexion of the cervical spine would be limited to 45 degrees; extension to 30 degrees; right and left lateral flexion limited to 45 degrees; and right and left lateral rotation to 80 degrees. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not have localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasms of the cervical spine. The VA examiner noted that less movement than normal was a factor contributing to the Veteran's cervical spine disability. The Veteran exhibited full muscle strength, and the VA examiner noted no muscle atrophy. Sensory exam was normal. The examiner noted no ankylosis of the spine. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have IVDS of the cervical spine. Imaging studies had not been performed.

In consideration of the above, the Board finds the evidence of record more nearly approximates a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability for the period on appeal. 

Specifically, as stated above, a 30 percent rating is warranted forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less. Here, in the August 2022 VA examination report, the examiner estimates that, in consideration of repeated use over time, the Veteran's cervical forward flexion is less than 15 degrees. Additionally, the August 2022 VA examination report also indicated that while the VA examiner noted no evidence of ankylosis, the examiner estimated that with flare-ups, the Veteran would effectively have no range of motion. In a recent case, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) stated that analysis of functional loss equivalent to ankylosis is applicable to evaluations for spinal disabilities. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). As such, based on these findings, the Board finds that the disability rating criteria for a 30 percent disability rating are met. 

Although the Board notes that the April 2023 VA examination reflects normal range of motion of the cervical spine, as well as no flare-ups, notably, this examination appears inconsistent with the other examinations of record regarding the Veteran's disability having no impact on his range of motion as well as his ability to exhibit range of motion without pain. Thus, the Board finds that this examination is inconsistent with the other evidence of record, and hence it is not entitled to great probative value. As such, the Board will resolve all doubt in favor of the Veteran and find that the disability picture for his cervical spine disability more nearly approximates flexion limited to 15 degrees or less. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7,4,40, 4.45, 4.59 (2018); DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202. 

However, the Board notes that a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's cervical spine disability is not warranted for the period on appeal. There is simply no evidence of record of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine or the entire spine to warrant an increased disability rating at any point during the appeal period, even when considering additional limitations due to pain and during flare-ups. As the Veteran does not present with unfavorable ankylosis of the cervical spine, an increased evaluation is not warranted, even when considering additional functional loss. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (5) (defining ankylosis when the entire cervical spine is fixed in flexion or extension); see also Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992) (ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, surgical procedure").

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's statements regarding the severity of his cervical spine disability. To that end, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran, in advancing this appeal, believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects, and the Board finds an increase to 30 percent is warranted. Moreover, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms such as pain and limitation of motion. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). However, considering the Veteran's lay statements and noted functional impairment, the Veteran's disability does not result in symptoms that more nearly approximate unfavorable ankylosis to warrant a higher rating. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, with any form of arthritis, actually painful joints are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating. See also Petite v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 415, 425 (2015) ("Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, the trigger for a minimum disability rating is an 'actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joint'"). In this case, however, the Veteran has already been assigned at least the minimum compensable ratings for neck disability for the entire period on appeal. See Petitti, 27 Vet. App. at 425. As such, a rating for arthritis is not warranted.

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that for the period on appeal, a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's cervical spine disability, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

10. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for elevated transaminases- fatty liver disease is denied. 

The Veteran contends generally that he is entitled to a disability rating for his fatty liver disease higher than what is currently assigned.  

In a July 2019 rating decision, service connection for elevated transaminases, fatty liver disease, was originally granted and assigned a noncompensable disability rating. The Veteran did not file a notice of disagreement contesting the initial rating. The Veteran filed the current claim for increased on February 1, 2023. 

Given that compensation already has been established, and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Therefore, the relevant temporal focus for this disability is one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim; thus, the review period begins on February 1, 2022. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The Veteran's fatty liver disease is rated under DC 7399-7345. Hyphenated DCs are used when a rating under one code requires use of an additional DC to identify the basis for the rating, with the first code generally used to represent the underlying condition and the second code used to represent its residuals. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. Additionally, when an unlisted disease, injury, or residual condition is encountered, rating by analogy is required; the diagnostic code number is "built up" with the first two digits being selected from that part of the schedule most closely identifying the part, and the last two digits being "99" for an unlisted condition. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27.

Here, the disability of fatty liver disease is not specifically listed in the rating schedule. As such, the hyphenated diagnostic code indicates that the fatty liver disease is rated as a disability of the digestive system most closely analogous to chronic liver disease without cirrhosis under DC 7345.

The Veteran's fatty liver disease is rated with a noncompensable rating for the entire period on appeal. Under DC 7345, presentation without compensable symptoms is assigned a 0 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7345.

A 10 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of intermittent fatigue, malaise, and anorexia; or, of incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least one week, but less than two weeks, during the past 12-month period. See id.

A 20 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia (without weight loss or hepatomegaly), requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication; or, of incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, during the past 12-month period. See id.

A 40 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with minor weight loss and hepatomegaly; or, with incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, during the past 12-month period. See id.

A 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with substantial weight loss (or other indication of malnutrition), and hepatomegaly; or, with incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12-month period, but not occurring constantly. See id.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of near-constant debilitating symptoms (such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain). See id.

Note (2) provides that, for purposes of evaluation under this DC, "incapacitating episode" means a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require bed rest and treatment by a physician.

The Board notes initially that there are no VA examinations of record for the Veteran's liver disease for the period on appeal, to include the one-year look back period. 

Generally, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect no evidence of fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, right upper quadrant pain, weight loss, hepatomegaly, or incapacitating episodes due to his symptoms. The Veteran has consistently denied these symptoms at various times throughout the VA treatment records for the period on appeal. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's fatty liver disease symptoms most strongly resemble the diagnostic criteria for, and degree of disability contemplated by, the noncompensable disability rating presently assigned.

Importantly, at no point during the period on appeal has the Veteran been found to exhibit, experience, or manifest any of the symptoms associated with a higher rating under the relevant DC as a result of his liver disease. Consistently, the treatment records associated with the claims file for the period on appeal indicate that the Veteran experienced no symptomatic fatigue (related to his liver disease), malaise, weight loss, right upper quadrant pain, hepatomegaly, jaundice, or other signs or symptoms associated with liver disabilities.

Critically, the Board notes that the record indicates that the Veteran has had a long-standing diagnosis of fatty liver disease with an equally long-standing absence of associated symptoms since prior to the period on appeal, such that the Veteran's disability has clearly remained unchanged throughout.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against the Veteran's entitlement to a compensable rating for fatty liver disease. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt is not for application, and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

REASONS FOR REMAND 

1. Entitlement to service connection for splenomegaly is remanded. 

As a preliminary matter, although the January 2024 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted, the Board finds that the AOJ made the implicit finding that such new and relevant evidence had in fact been submitted, as it readjudicated the merits of the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the Board will proceed with a discussion of the merits.

The Veteran generally contends that he has a spleen condition that is related to his service-connected residuals of mononucleosis. 

Upon review of the record, the Veteran's STRs indicate that during service the Veteran complained of irritation in his throat, swelling, pain in his spleen, as well as a feeling of malaise. The provider noted that the Veteran had a history of several episodes of mononucleosis with a chronic positive rapid monospot test. The Veteran was assessed, and the provider indicated that he "could not appreciate any splenomegaly." See February 2, 1977, sick call note. Additionally, VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran underwent an echogram of his abdomen in August 2000, and it was noted that there was borderline enlargement of the spleen. The Veteran was assessed with mild splenomegaly. See August 16, 2000, VA echogram abdomen report. Further, the Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for residuals of mononucleosis. 

While the Veteran is not competent to opine as to whether his current spleen condition relates back to his in-service reports of pain in his abdomen and spleen, or his service-connected mononucleosis, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports as to onset and continuity, as well as the evidence of record (which raises the theory of secondary service connection) have met the low threshold under McLendon, and therefore a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred to the extent that the Veteran was not provided a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his claimed condition prior to the claim being adjudicated by the AOJ. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). 

As such, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a remand here to correct such error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a vision disability (claimed as visual disturbances) is remanded. 

The Veteran contends generally that service connection is warranted for a current vision disability and asserts that it may be secondary to his service connected TBI.

The Veteran initially claimed service connection for visual disturbances. However, the scope of the claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the Veteran's description of the claims, reported symptoms, and the other information of record. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). Therefore, the Board has expanded the Veteran's claim to include any eye disability raised by the record.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination to evaluate residuals of his TBI in February 2022. During the examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a TBI as well as cervicogenic headaches, both of which are now service connected. The Veteran reported that he experiences tearing, a feeling of fullness/pressure in his eyes, sensitivity to light, and blurry vision. The examiner noted and confirmed that the Veteran experiences blurry vision and sensitivity to light. However, to date, no examiner has opined as to whether the Veteran's blurry vision and sensitivity to light are caused or aggravated by his service connected TBI.  

A VA examination is necessary where there is (i) competent evidence of a current disability (ii) an in-service injury or event (iii) the disability may be associated with service and (iv) there is insufficient medical evidence to decide on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Ultimately, while the Board notes that the McLendon threshold for requiring a VA examination is low. The RO committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in denying his claim for visual disturbances prior to conducting a VA examination or providing an opinion.

The Veteran reports blurry vision and sensitivity to light as a symptom due to his now service-connected TBI as well as due to his now service-connected cervicogenic headaches. An etiology opinion concerning the symptoms of photophobia and blurry vision must be obtained in order to determine whether the symptom should be evaluated as part of service-connected disability. Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991). 

Upon remand, an addendum opinion must be obtained as to whether the Veteran's photophobia and/or blurry vision is a symptom of his service connected TBI and headache disabilities, or if it is a separate impairment. 

Accordingly, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As mentioned above, VA has not yet obtained a medical opinion in this matter, and one is necessary for adjudication of the Veteran's claim. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his spleen condition. Following the examination and upon review of the evidence for the period on appeal, to include this remand, the VA examiner is requested to opine as to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current spleen condition (diagnosed as mild splenomegaly) was incurred during service, or is otherwise related to service, to include as due to his in-service complaints of pain in his spleen, and in-service diagnosis of mononucleosis? See VBMS, document labeled STR - Medical, receipt date 03/05/2015, pages 16-17 of 44.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's current spleen condition is at least as likely as not due to, or aggravated by, his service-connected mononucleosis residuals. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed vision disability. The claims file should be reviewed, including a copy of this Remand. The clinician is asked to address the following: 

(a.) 	Identify all current, diagnosed eye or vision disorders, to include whether the Veteran has photophobia and blurry vision.

(b.) For each eye disorder or disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the currently diagnosed disorder had its onset during service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service, to include whether it is caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service connected TBI and associated residuals, or the Veteran's service-connected cervicogenic headaches. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. M. Lowman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.