Citation Nr: A25031930
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231231-405068
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bruxism/teeth grinding is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a tooth injury, left bottom tooth, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bloody stools is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for dyspnea/trouble breathing is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left calf pain and strain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right calf pain and strain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left hamstring strain and pain is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right hamstring strain and pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left ear pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right ear pain is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for painful urination is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for recurrent cough post COVID is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of heat exhaustion and heat sensitivity is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for folliculitis is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for hepatitis B is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for scar, left fourth finger, is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for unspecified insomnia disorder is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral plantar fasciitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left wrist condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist condition is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle tendonitis is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right hip strain, limitation of flexion, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip strain, thigh impairment, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a dental disability for VA compensation purposes.

2. The Veteran did not have a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis or other similar sinus condition at any point in the appeal period.

3. The Veteran did not have a diagnosed condition related to his reported bloody stools at any point in the appeal period.

4. The Veteran did not have a diagnosed condition related to his reported dyspnea or trouble breathing at any point in the appeal period.

5. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed left calf conditions at any point in the appeal period.

6. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed right calf conditions at any point in the appeal period.

7. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed left hamstring conditions at any point in the appeal period.

8. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed right hamstring conditions at any point in the appeal period.

9. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed left ear conditions at any point in the appeal period.

10. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed right ear conditions at any point in the appeal period.

11. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed conditions related to his reported painful urination at any point in the appeal period.

12. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed respiratory conditions at any point during the appeal period.

13. The Veteran did not have any diagnosed residuals related to his claimed heat exhaustion at any point in the appeal period.

14. The Veteran did not have a diagnosis of sleep apnea at any point in the appeal period.

15. The Veteran's folliculitis was treated with no more than topical therapy over the past twelve months with characteristic lesions involving less than five percent of the entire body area or exposed area being affected.

16. The Veteran did not have any symptoms related to his hepatitis B at any point in the appeal period.

17. The Veteran's left fourth finger scar has an area of 0.1 centimeters squared and is neither painful nor unstable.

18. The Veteran's insomnia is manifest by chronic sleep impairment that is not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

19. The Veteran has not had any surgical treatment for his bilateral plantar fasciitis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for bruxism/teeth grinding have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1712, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.381, 17.161.

2. The criteria for service connection for residuals of a tooth injury, left bottom tooth, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1712, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.381, 17.161.

3. The criteria for service connection for allergic rhinitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for bloody stools have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for dyspnea/trouble breathing have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for left calf pain and strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for service connection for right calf pain and strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for service connection for left hamstring strain and pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for service connection for right hamstring strain and pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

10. The criteria for service connection for left ear pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

11. The criteria for service connection for right ear pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

12. The criteria for service connection for painful urination have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

13. The criteria for service connection for recurrent cough post COVID have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

14. The criteria for service connection for residuals of heat exhaustion and heat sensitivity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

15. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

16. The criteria for a compensable rating for folliculitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7820.

17. The criteria for a compensable rating for hepatitis B have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.20, 4.27, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7345.

18. The criteria for a compensable rating for scar, left 4th finger, have not been met. U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802.

The criteria for a compensable rating for unspecified insomnia disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9499-9423.

19. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral plantar fasciitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5269.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army from August 2019 to November 2023.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left ankle, left hip, bilateral knee, and bilateral wrist conditions, as well as claims for increased ratings for lumbosacral strain, headaches, cervical strain, right ankle, and right hip conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence in the record demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms experienced. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). However, he is not considered competent to medically attribute such symptoms to any particular disability because such is a complicated medical issue that requires medical knowledge and expertise that the Veteran has not been shown to possess. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428. 435 (2011); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (2006).

38 U.S.C. § 1154(a) requires that VA give "due consideration" to "all pertinent medical and lay evidence" in evaluating a claim for disability or death benefits. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Specifically, "[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional." Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

1. Entitlement to service connection for bruxism/teeth grinding is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a tooth injury, left bottom tooth, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has bruxism and residuals from a lower tooth injury that are related to his service.

As an initial matter, in its July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran's pre-discharge filing of a claim constitutes lay evidence of in-service complaints related to bruxism. Additionally, the AOJ found the Veteran's service treatment records show that his tooth number 9 was fixed using a porcelain or ceramic crown in March 2023. While the AOJ did not explicitly label this as a favorable finding because it is not a condition typically eligible for service connection, the Board will construe this to be a favorable finding regarding in-service dental treatment. Because these are favorable findings by the AOJ, the Board will not disturb these findings. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

VA compensation is only awarded for dental disabilities in specific circumstances. Specifically, treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses and periodontal disease will be considered service-connected solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment, but not for purposes of compensation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a). Rather, dental disabilities that may be awarded compensable disability ratings are set forth under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, and include chronic osteomyelitis or osteoradionecrosis of the maxilla or mandible, loss of the mandible, nonunion or malunion of the mandible, loss of the maxilla, nonunion or malunion of the maxilla, limited temporomandibular motion, loss of the ramus, loss of the condyloid or coronoid processes, loss of the hard palate, and loss of teeth due to the loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible without loss of continuity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Codes 9900-9916. Compensation is only available for loss of teeth where the lost masticatory surface cannot be restored by suitable prosthesis, if such is due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible, but only if such bone loss is due to trauma or osteomyelitis, and not to the loss of the alveolar process as a result of periodontal disease, as such loss is not considered disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current dental disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2023, at which time the Veteran reported his claimed bruxism, which the examiner noted was self-diagnosed, began two years earlier. The Veteran reported no additional dental complaints. However, the examiner found the Veteran had no current diagnosed dental conditions. As for the examiner's finding that the Veteran had a tumor or neoplasm, they determined this was not related to any of the diagnoses in the diagnosis section. 

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of bruxism or residuals of a tooth injury, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence. Additionally, regardless of whether the Veteran had a current diagnosis of bruxism, this does not constitute a dental condition that is eligible for service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a). As for the claimed residuals from a tooth injury, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran received a crown to treat a preexisting tooth condition with no indication of any residuals, let alone those that meet the qualifications for service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a). Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a currently diagnosed dental condition that is eligible for service connection.

Accordingly, as there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and the claims for service connection for bruxism and for residuals of a left lower tooth injury are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is denied. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for bloody stools is denied. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for dyspnea/trouble breathing is denied.

6. Entitlement to service connection for left calf pain and strain is denied.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right calf pain and strain is denied. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for left hamstring strain and pain is denied. 

9. Entitlement to service connection for right hamstring strain and pain is denied. 

10. Entitlement to service connection for left ear pain is denied. 

11. Entitlement to service connection for right ear pain is denied.

12. Entitlement to service connection for painful urination is denied. 

13. Entitlement to service connection for recurrent cough post COVID is denied. 

14. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of heat exhaustion and heat sensitivity is denied.

15. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, and sleep apnea, all of which are related to his service. 

As an initial matter, in its July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran's pre-discharge filing of a claim constitutes lay evidence of in-service complaints related to the above-listed conditions. This is a favorable finding by the AOJ, and the Board will not disturb this finding. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has current disabilities that began during service or are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, or sleep apnea and has not had a diagnosis of any of these conditions at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran underwent multiple VA examinations addressing his claimed issues of allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, and sleep apnea.

In the October 2023 sinusitis and rhinitis examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms began in 2020, stating he had a history of allergies with symptoms of a runny nose and intermittent cough. However, the examiner concluded that the objective examination and available evidence did not support a diagnosis of sinusitis, rhinitis, or any other condition of the nose or throat. 

In the October 2023 VA rectum and anus examination, the Veteran reported a history of blood in his stools that began during basic training. He denied pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, as well as any changes to his bowel habits. However, he reported experiencing "just a little" blood when wiping. The Veteran reported no history of hemorrhoids. The examiner opined that the available evidence of record and objective findings do not support a diagnosis of any condition related to the Veteran's bloody stools.

In the October 2023 VA muscle injuries examination, the Veteran reported a history of right calf pain after being hit in the leg with a weight during training. He stated he was treated with a boot for his right leg, crutches, and physical therapy and reported experiencing continued calf pain. He also reported a history of bilateral hamstring pain that began in2022 and developed after he fell during a ruck march. The Veteran again stated he received physical therapy for his hamstring pain, and he continues to experience bilateral hamstring pain. The examiner noted the history of injury to the Veteran's right calf and bilateral hamstrings, with occasional fatigue and pain associated with both muscle groups. However, the examiner ultimately found that the objective findings and available evidence did not support any currently diagnosed muscle injuries, noting that the right calf contusion from September 2021 was considered resolved.

In the October 2023 VA ear conditions examination, the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent bilateral ear pain with a pulling sensation during service. The examiner noted the Veteran was evaluated and treated during service for a mild otitis externa and eustachian tube dysfunction. The Veteran stated that he still experiences intermittent bilateral ear pain. However, the examiner ultimately determined the objective findings and available evidence did not support a current diagnosis of any ear condition.

In the October 2023 VA urinary tract examination, the Veteran reported experiencing a burning sensation during urination, intermittent blood in his urin, and lower abdomen pain during urination that began during service. He denied a prior history of sexually transmitted diseases. The examiner noted the urinalysis testing performed on October 5, 2023, was within normal limits. While the examiner referred the Veteran to his primary care physician regarding his reported symptoms, they concluded that, as of the examination, the objective examination and available evidence did not support a current diagnosis of a urinary tract condition. 

In the October 2023 VA respiratory examination, the Veteran reported experiencing residuals of shortness of breath and dyspnea following having COVID-19. He also stated he had heat stroke and his reported symptoms worsened after. The Veteran denied a history of evaluation or treatment for shortness of breath and dyspnea, as well as current treatment. The examiner noted the Veteran had scars due to pulmonary conditions, and they conducted pulmonary function tests. However, the examiner ultimately concluded the evidence of record did not support a currently diagnosed chronic respiratory condition. 

In the October 2023 VA sleep apnea examination, the Veteran reported waking throughout the night, being told he snores, and daytime hypersomnolence. The Veteran underwent an HSAT sleep study in October 2023. While the examiner indicated that the Veteran should follow up with his primary care physician due to the results of the HSAT, they ultimately found that the testing did not confirm the presence of obstructive sleep apnea. 

While the Veteran believes there are current diagnoses related to his reported allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, and sleep apnea, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. These issues are medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

The Board has considered Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), in which the Federal Circuit held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-69. However, the evidence of record has not shown that the Veteran experiences pain associated with any of his claimed conditions that impacts his ability to work. Thus, none of the above-claimed conditions meet the Saunders standard to be considered a current disability.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding the Veteran has current diagnoses related to his reported allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, or sleep apnea, and thus his claims for service connection for these conditions fail to meet the first element of service connection.  Because the evidence of record is not in approximate balance, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable, and the claims for service connection for allergic rhinitis, bloody stools, dyspnea/trouble breathing, bilateral calf pain, bilateral hamstring strain and pain, bilateral ear pain, painful urination, recurrent cough, residuals due to heat exhaustion, and sleep apnea must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Board should consider only those factors contained in the rating criteria. Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204 (1994).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Board will also consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Nevertheless, where the evidence contains factual findings that show a change in the severity of symptoms during the course of the rating period on appeal, assignment of staged ratings would be permissible. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

16. Entitlement to a compensable rating for folliculitis is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his folliculitis.

The Veteran's folliculitis is rated under Diagnostic Code 7820, which states that infections of the skin not listed elsewhere (including bacterial, fungal, viral, treponemal, and parasitic diseases) are to be evaluated under the General Rating Formula for the Skin. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7820. Under the General Rating Formula for the Skin, a noncompensable rating is assigned for no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12- month period.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.  A 60 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period.  Or rate as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck (DC 7800) or scars (DC's 7801, 7802, 7803, 7804, or 7805), depending on the predominant disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating for the Skin for DCs 7806, 7809, 7813-7816, 7820-7822, and 7824.

VA regulations explicitly state that systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route other than the skin, and topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118(a).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, at which time the Veteran reported he continued to have a "rash" on his buttocks since first developing his folliculitis in 2019. The Veteran reported using a cream when he was first diagnosed, but he had not used any medications in the previous twelve months to treat his skin condition. The examiner found the Veteran's folliculitis resulted in scattered papules and pustules with erythema on his buttocks that covered less than 5 percent of his total body area and 0 percent of his exposed body area.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable evaluation because the Veteran's folliculitis does not more nearly approximate (1) characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or (2) at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or (3) intermittent systemic therapy(1) characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or (2) at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or (3) intermittent systemic therapy required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12- month period. As shown in the October 2023 examination, the Veteran is not currently using any medication to treat his condition, nor does his condition affect at least 5 percent of either his total body area or his exposed body area.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, to include a recurrent rash on his buttocks, and these reports are credible.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, the medical treatment records do not show, that the Veteran's folliculitis more nearly approximates the criteria in the next higher rating. 

The Board has considered whether any other Diagnostic Codes related to disabilities of the skin would provide for a higher disability evaluation.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the folliculitis would warrant a higher rating under a different diagnostic code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for folliculitis.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

17. Entitlement to a compensable rating for hepatitis B is denied.

The Veteran contends that his hepatitis B warrants a compensable rating.

The Veteran's hepatitis B is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 7345, which pertains to chronic liver diseases without cirrhosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

The Board notes that 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 was amended, effective May 19, 2024. See 89 Fed. Reg. 19735, 19748 (March 20, 2024). Relevant to the instant matter are changes to Diagnostic Code 7345.

VA's General Counsel has held that where a law or regulation changes during the pendency of a claim for a higher rating, the Board must first determine whether the revised version is more favorable to the veteran. In so doing, it may be necessary for the Board to apply both the old and new versions of the regulation. If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the retroactive reach of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. The Board must apply both the former and the revised versions of the regulation for the period prior and subsequent to the regulatory change, but an effective date based on the revised criteria may be no earlier than the date of the change. VA thus must consider the claim pursuant to the former and revised regulations during the course of this appeal. See VAOPGCPREC 3-2000, 65 Fed. Reg. 33,422 (2000); DeSousa v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 461, 467 (1997).

Under the version of Diagnostic Code 7345 in effect prior to May 19, 2024, chronic liver disease that is non symptomatic is rated as noncompensable (i.e., 0 percent disabling). A 10 percent rating is warranted for intermittent fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, or incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least one week, but less than two weeks, during the past 12-month period. A 20 percent rating contemplates daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia (without weight loss or hepatomegaly), requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, during the past 12- month period. A 40 percent rating is assigned in cases of daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with minor weight loss and hepatomegaly or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, during the past 12-month period. A 60 percent rating is warranted for daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with substantial weight loss (or other indication of malnutrition), and hepatomegaly or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12-month period, but not occurring constantly. A 100 percent rating is assigned in cases of near-constant debilitating symptoms (such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain). Id.

Note (1) to Diagnostic Code 7345 provides that sequelae, such as cirrhosis or malignancy of the liver, are to be evaluated under an appropriate diagnostic code but not using the same signs and symptoms as the basis for evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7354 and under a diagnostic code for sequelae. (See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, VA's anti-pyramiding regulation.). Note (2) to Diagnostic Code 7345 indicates that an "incapacitating episode" means a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require bed rest and treatment by a physician. Also, Note (3) to Diagnostic Code 7345 indicates that hepatitis B infection must be confirmed by serologic testing in order to evaluate it under Diagnostic Code 7345.

Under the version of Diagnostic Code 7345 in effect since May 19, 2024, previous history of liver disease, currently asymptomatic, is rated as noncompensable (0 percent). Chronic liver disease with at least one of the following: (1) intermittent fatigue, (2) malaise, (3) anorexia, (4) hepatomegaly, or (5) pruritus is rated as 20 percent disabling. Progressive chronic liver disease requiring continuous medication and causing minor weight loss and at least two of the following: (1) daily fatigue, (2) malaise, (3) anorexia, (4) hepatomegaly, (5) pruritus, and (6) arthralgia is rated as 40 percent disabling. Progressive chronic liver disease requiring continuous medication and causing substantial weight loss and at least two of the following: (1) daily fatigue, (2) malaise, (3) anorexia, (4) hepatomegaly, (5) pruritus, and (6) arthralgia is rated as 60 percent disabling. Chronic liver disease without cirrhosis: Progressive chronic liver disease requiring use of both parenteral antiviral therapy (direct antiviral agents), and parenteral immunomodulatory therapy (interferon and other); and for six months following discontinuance of treatment is rated as 100 percent disabling.

Note (1) states that a 100% evaluation shall continue for six months following discontinuance of parenteral antiviral therapy and administration of parenteral immunomodulatory drugs. Six months after discontinuance of parenteral antiviral therapy and parenteral immunomodulatory drugs, determine the appropriate disability rating by mandatory VA exam. Apply the provisions of § 3.105(e) of this chapter to any change in evaluation based upon that or any subsequent examination. Note (2) states that, for individuals for whom physicians recommend both parenteral antiviral therapy and parenteral immunomodulatory drugs, but for whom treatment is medically contraindicated, rate according to DC 7312 (Cirrhosis of the liver). Note (3) indicates that this diagnostic code includes hepatitis B (confirmed by serologic testing), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), autoimmune liver disease, Wilson's disease, Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, hemochromatosis, drug-induced hepatitis, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Track hepatitis C (or non-A, non-B hepatitis) under Diagnostic Code 7354 but evaluate it using the criteria in this entry. Note (4) directs the rater to evaluate sequelae, such as cirrhosis or malignancy of the liver, under an appropriate diagnostic code, but do not use the same signs and symptoms as the basis for evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7354 and under a diagnostic code for sequelae. (See § 4.14).

The Board finds that the revised version of the regulation is no more or less favorable than the version in effect prior to May 19, 2024, in the instant matter because the evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran's hepatitis B is, and has been, entirely asymptomatic during the period on appeal.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, at which time he reported that he has had negative hepatitis B tests since the initial infection. He continues to be monitored every six months. Additionally, he reported experiencing no current symptoms and requiring no current treatment after the initial infection resolved. The examiner noted the Veteran had no current symptoms related to hepatitis B, nor was he currently taking any medications to treat an infection or residuals. Additionally, the Veteran has not experienced any incapacitating episodes in the previous 12 months.

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a compensable rating for the Veteran's hepatitis B. As noted above, the October 2023 examination shows the Veteran has no signs or symptoms attributable to any chronic or infectious liver diseases, and he has not experienced any incapacitating episodes in the previous 12 months. The Veteran also stated that he has experienced no symptoms, receives no treatment, and is merely monitored every six months to ensure he continues to test negative. Seeing as the Veteran's hepatitis B is completely asymptomatic, he does not meet the 10 percent rating criteria. 

As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, for the reasons above, the Board finds that a compensable rating for hepatitis B is not warranted.

18. Entitlement to a compensable rating for scar, left fourth finger, is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his left fourth finger scar.

The Veteran's left fourth finger scar is rated under Diagnostic Code 7802.

Diagnostic Code 7802 is for burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118. Under Diagnostic Code 7802, these scars warrant a 10 percent rating if they have an area or areas of 144 square inches (629 sq. cm.) or greater.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, at which time the examiner noted the Veteran had a scar on his left fourth finger that was 1 cm by 0.1 cm, for a total area of 0.1 cm squared. The examiner noted the scar was not unstable, tender to the touch, nor had any underlying soft tissue damage.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7802 because the Veteran's left fourth finger scar is not manifest by an area of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or greater.

The Board has also considered the other Diagnostic Codes pertaining to scars. However, the Veteran's left fourth finger scar is not of the head, face, or neck, is not deep and non-linear, and is not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  Moreover, the Veteran's left fourth finger scar is not unstable or painful.  Therefore, Diagnostic Codes 7800, 7801, and 7804 are inapplicable.  Finally, the evidence of record shows there are no other disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under Diagnostic Codes 7800-04 as contemplated under Diagnostic Code 7805. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects.  However, the Veteran does not assert, and medical treatment records do not show, that the Veteran's left fourth finger scar is manifest by an area of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or greater. 

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for a left fourth finger scar. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

19. Entitlement to a compensable rating for unspecified insomnia disorder is denied.

The Veteran contends that his insomnia symptoms warrant a compensable rating.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 10 percent or higher.

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, at which time the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified insomnia. The Veteran reported taking 30 to 60 minutes to fall asleep, as well as some difficulty staying asleep if a nightmare wakes him up. He also reported sleeping between six and seven hours every 24-hour period, and he did not have problems during the day due to his sleep issues. The examiner found the Veteran had chronic sleep impairment, with moderate problems falling asleep and mild problems staying asleep. The examiner determined that the Veteran's insomnia was formally diagnosed, but his symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a noncompensable rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 10 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  While the Veteran experiences chronic sleep impairment, which is noted under the 30 percent rating criteria, this is the only symptom the Veteran experiences, and the evidence of record does not support finding this symptom, alone, interferes with the Veteran's ability to function in both occupational and social environments. 

The Board also finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a noncompensable rating.  As noted in the October 2023 examination, the Veteran's unspecified insomnia may be formally diagnosed, but his symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication. Thus, his insomnia is most closely approximated by the noncompensable rating criteria.

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 10 percent rating.  The criteria for a compensable rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

20. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his bilateral plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5269.  Under Diagnostic Code 5269, a 10 percent rating is warranted for plantar fasciitis, otherwise, unilateral or bilateral.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for unilateral plantar fasciitis with no relief from both non-surgical and surgical treatment.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for bilateral plantar fasciitis with no relief from both non-surgical and surgical treatment.

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint, even in the absence of arthritis, to include in situations where the disability at issue is not evaluated based on range of motion measurements.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011); Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, at which time the Veteran reported he experienced pain in both feet that is worse with weightbearing activity. He uses orthotics and takes ibuprofen to alleviate his pain. The examiner noted the Veteran experiences pain in the ball of his foot that radiates to his heels, with the pain being sharp in nature with intermittent numbness in the feet and toes. The examiner noted that non-surgical treatment has been unsuccessful, and the Veteran experiences functional loss in both feet related to running, walking, and standing. The Veteran has not had any surgical treatment for his condition.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for plantar fasciitis because the evidence of record shows that he has not had any surgical treatment for this condition in either foot.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain that impacts his ability to walk, run, and stand. However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by these statements would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating unilateral plantar fasciitis with no relief from both non-surgical and surgical treatment.

The Board has also considered the other Diagnostic Codes pertaining to the foot.  Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptomatology for a disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of any other disability.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); see also Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).  In Scott v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit expressly adopted the Court's holding that disabilities specifically listed in the rating schedule may only be rated under Diagnostic Codes which specifically pertain to them.  Scott v. Wilkie, 920 F.3d 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (citing Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336 (2015)).  The Federal Circuit also expressly adopted the Court's holding that unlisted conditions may be rated by analogy to Diagnostic Codes that may not describe the unlisted disability but addresses disabilities that may be productive of similar symptoms.  Scott, 920 F.3d 1375 (citing Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484, 493 (2016).  Finally, the Federal Circuit concluded that the Board must also consider assigning separate ratings under analogous Diagnostic Codes, when rating an unlisted service-connected foot disability exhibiting distinct manifestations, even when service connection has also been granted for one of the eight conditions listed in the rating schedule.  Id.   

Here, the Veteran's disability is specifically listed under the rating schedule and therefore cannot be rated under a different Diagnostic Code.  Additionally, the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has any other service-connected foot disabilities that would warrant a separate rating under a different Diagnostic Code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for plantar fasciitis.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left hip pain is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left wrist condition is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for right wrist condition is remanded.

7. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

8. Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches is remanded.

9. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is remanded.

10. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle tendonitis is remanded.

11. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right hip strain, limitation of flexion, is remanded.

12. Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip strain, thigh impairment, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has left ankle, left hip, bilateral knee, and bilateral wrist conditions that are all related to his service. Additionally, he contends that his lumbosacral strain, headaches, cervical strain, right ankle, and right hip conditions are all manifest by symptoms that warrant higher ratings. 

The October 2023 hip, back, neck, ankle, knee, and wrist examinations all note that the Veteran reports experiencing pain that he treats using over-the-counter ibuprofen. However, while the examiners noted the use of ibuprofen for pain, they did not discuss the impact of the ameliorative effects of medication on the Veteran's conditions, mainly whether the Veteran's ranges of motion would be less if he was not taking ibuprofen to alleviate his reported painful movement. Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (when the relevant diagnostic code does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and of each disability).

Regarding the Veteran's increased ratings claims for lumbosacral strain, cervical strain, right ankle strain, and right hip limitation of flexion and thigh impingement, because the use of ibuprofen may enable the Veteran more movement than he would have when not taking the medication, remand is necessary in order to determine whether the Veteran's use of ibuprofen impacts his recorded range of motion measurements and, if so, estimated ranges of motion that disregard the alleviating effects of medication must be provided.

Additionally, with respect to the Veteran's lumbosacral and cervical strains, the Board notes that the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent numbness and tingling in his bilateral lower extremities and bilateral upper extremities during the October 2023 back and neck examinations. However, while the examiners noted these symptoms, they concluded the Veteran had no radicular symptoms. The examiners failed to address why the Veteran's reports of numbness and tingling did not constitute radicular symptoms. Thus, the Board finds that remand is also necessary in order to address these symptoms.

Moreover, in Bennett v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 365, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims determined that its recent holding in Ingram regarding the discussion of ameliorative effects of medication must also be addressed in the context of ratings for migraines and other headache conditions. Seeing as the Veteran endorsed using ibuprofen to help treat his migraine symptoms in the October 2023 examination, the Board finds that remand is necessary in order to discuss the impacts of ibuprofen on the Veteran's migraine symptoms.

As for the issues of service connection for left ankle, left hip, bilateral knee, and bilateral wrist conditions, the Board finds that the ameliorative effects of medication must also be taken into consideration here. In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the Federal Circuit held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-69. Here, the October 2023 examinations for the above conditions all note the Veteran does not have diagnosed left ankle, left hip, bilateral knee, or bilateral wrist conditions. However, without considering the potential alleviating effects of the Veteran's use of ibuprofen, the Board cannot determine whether the Veteran's reported pain results in functional impairment of his earning capacity. Thus, remand is necessary in order to address this question.

Furthermore, with respect to the Veteran's claim for service connection for a bilateral wrist condition, the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent numbness in his wrists during the October 2023 examination. However, the examiner failed to address whether this wrist numbness constituted a wrist disability that was related to the Veteran's service. Therefore, remand is necessary in order to address these symptoms.

Accordingly, these matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle condition. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his left ankle. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's left ankle condition when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left hip condition. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his left hip. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's left hip condition when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

3.  Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee condition. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his bilateral knees. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's bilateral knee condition when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

4. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral wrist condition. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's reported bilateral wrist numbness is related to his service.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his bilateral wrists. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's bilateral wrist condition when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

5. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and severity of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address the following:

(a.) In the October 2023 examination, the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent numbness and tingling in his bilateral lower extremities. However, the examiner found these reports did not constitute radicular symptoms. Determine whether the Veteran's reported numbness and tingling constitutes radicular symptoms and provide rationale supporting all conclusions made.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his lumbar spine. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

6. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and severity of the Veteran's migraines. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts the severity of his reported migraine symptoms. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated symptom severity that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's migraines when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

7. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and severity of the Veteran's cervical strain. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address the following:

(a.) In the October 2023 examination, the Veteran reported experiencing intermittent numbness and tingling in his bilateral upper extremities. However, the examiner found these reports did not constitute radicular symptoms. Determine whether the Veteran's reported numbness and tingling constitutes radicular symptoms and provide rationale supporting all conclusions made.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his cervical spine. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's cervical strain when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

8. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and severity of the Veteran's right ankle condition. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his right ankle. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's right ankle condition when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

9. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner addressing the nature and severity of the Veteran's right hip conditions. If the examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary, one must be scheduled.

The examiner is to address whether the Veteran's reported use of ibuprofen for pain management impacts his ranges of motion for his right hip. If so, the examiner is to provide estimated ranges of motion measurements that disregard the ameliorative effects of medication, as well as the functional impacts of the Veteran's right hip conditions when not taking medication.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ongies, Gabrielle L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.