Citation Nr: A25031482
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240529-444554
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1989 to August 1992.  For his service, he was awarded the National Defense Service Medal and Southwest Asia Service Medal, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  Therefore, this matter is adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R.§ 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the October 2023 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, or if the Veteran would like to submit any new and relevant evidence, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, since the Board is remanding the claims any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudicating the matter.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has pain in his back that radiates down his legs, which is related to his Navy service.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, absent clear and unmistakable error.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 3.104(c).  Therefore, the issues for the Board to determine are (1) whether the Veteran has a current disability, and if so, (2) whether presumptive service connection applies, or (3) whether the condition manifest in service, was aggravated in service, manifest within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service.

Here, the VA afforded the Veteran both a Peripheral Nerves Condition Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) examination and a Back Conditions DBQ examination on August 16, 2023.  See September 2023 Peripheral Nerves Condition DBQ; September 2023 Back Conditions DBQ.  

At the Peripheral Nerves Condition DBQ examination the Veteran reported a date of onset of the radicular pain in 1988.  The history provided by the Veteran was that his boots [military steel toe] caused his feet to hurt and that he had foot pain and numbness.  He told the VA examiner that it was not back related, and there was no radiating pain.  The reported functional impact was pain while walking.  The diagnosis was bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, which was attributable to a peripheral nerve condition.  However, the VA examiner does not discuss or explain the medical rationale for diagnosing neuropathy, as opposed to Veteran's claimed bilateral radiculopathy.  The medical analysis fails to consider the entirety of the Veteran's medical history, or consideration of the Veteran's statements and symptoms.   Accordingly, the Board finds this VA examination inadequate.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231 (2012).

At the Back Conditions DBQ examination, the same clinician noted the Veteran stated that he had no radicular pain in Section VIII, despite noting the Veteran reported radiculopathy in the Peripheral Nerves DBQ conducted the same day.  Additionally, in the Section XVII-Remarks of her report that the abnormal findings were due to Bilateral Lower Extremity Neuropathy, which she had diagnosed and evaluated on the Peripheral Nerve DBQ.  See September 2023 Back Conditions DBQ.  Again, the VA examiner fails to provide a medical explanation and discussion of the reason for the diagnosis of neuropathy, as opposed to radiculopathy.  The VA examiner does not provide comments as to the significance of this Veteran's medical history or past medical treatment in relation to his current complaints.  Therefore, the Board finds this VA examination inadequate.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra; Horn v. Shinseki, supra.

In addition to the VA examinations, a VA Medical Opinion DBQ was obtained in August 2023 to provide medical opinions regarding the Veteran's claimed radiculopathy and back conditions, among others.  The VA clinician reports in Section IV that there is bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, but it is not related to the Veteran's 1990 back pain.  See September 2023 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  However,  the clinician does not reconcile the claimed 1990 back pain/radicular pain noted from the 1988 onset noted in the Peripheral Nerves DBQ and does not explain why she cites radiculopathy symptoms in this opinion as opposed to the neuropathy she diagnosed in that same nerves exam.  For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds the VA medical opinion inadequate for determining service connection of the claimed lower extremity radiculopathy.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97 (2012); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).

The Service Treatment Records and VA Medical Treatment Records do not show a diagnosis of radiculopathy.  However, on November 18, 1991, while in service the Veteran reported neck pain, with pain in his leg, when pressure was applied.  See April 2001 Service Treatment Records; January 2022 Military Personnel Record; May 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records; July 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records.

No adequate examination or opinion provides probative evidence of the nature and etiology of the claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the RO for failing to obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinion.  See 38 U.S.C.§ 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  While the Board regrets the additional delay this remand causes, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error and to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical examination and opinion.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he injured his lower back while in service.  He stated that he was lifting heavy items and incurred his back injury in 1990.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; September 2023 VA Back Conditions DBQ.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability based on the August 2023 diagnosis of lumbar strain.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, absent clear and unmistakable error.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 3.104(c).  Therefore, the issues to be determined by the Board are (1) whether there was an in-service event, injury, or disease, and (2) whether there is a causal connection between the current disability and the Veteran's service.

As an initial matter, the Board has considered and notes the Veteran's pre-service, in-service, and post-service back complaints and treatment.  The Veteran had a pre-existing back injury noted during his enlistment examination on March 24, 1989.  The physician stated that the Veteran was injured in March 1989 and received treatment.  Additionally, on the medical history for the entrance examination, the Veteran marked "yes" for recurrent back pain and stated that he was under the care of a chiropractor for his low back injury on March 6, 1989.  See April 2001 Service Treatment Records; January 2022 Military Personnel Records.

Continuing with a chronological review of the treatment records, the Board notes that the Service Treatment Records (STRs) report a consult with a physician on March 30, 1989, for the Veteran's back strain.  The report states that the Veteran was injured four weeks ago while lifting heavy objects.  He saw a chiropractor but had no physical limitations.  The examiner noted no spondylolisthesis, no spasm, no tenderness, negative straight leg raises, and normal strength testing.  See April 2001 Service Treatment Records.

The Board notes that the Veteran's DD214 states that he entered active-duty service on August 7, 1989. Thereafter, on August 9, 1989, the STRs note that the Veteran's pre-existing heart murmur was addressed and an "eval" was requested for the Veteran's lower lumbar strain.  It was reported that he had been seen by a doctor who instructed him to stay on light duty.  He had been given pain meds.  See April 2001 Service Treatment Records; January 2022 Military Personnel Records.

Continuing with the review of the in-service treatment records, it is noted that there are no additional notations of a back injury or back complaints.  On November 18, 1991, the Veteran stated that he had neck pain and pain in his leg, and the Veteran was placed on light duty with no flight deck duties for three days.  See April 2001 Service Treatment Records.  At discharge, the Veteran stated he was in good health.  He checked "no" for recurrent back pain on the medical history. The physician reported a normal examination on separation from service on June 25, 1992.  See January 2022 Military Personnel Records.

After separation from service, the Veteran was treated at the VA.  In March 2015, the VA treatment record states that the Veteran has suffered bilateral foot pain for several years.  In June 2022, the Veteran reports that his feet hurt, and he has lower back pain.  In April 2023, the VA treatment records show complaints of chronic back pain.  See May 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records; July 2023 VA Medical Treatment Records.

Moving now to the medical examinations and opinions obtained in connection with this claim, the Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA Back Conditions DBQ examination.  The Veteran reported to the VA examiner that he was going up and down and picking up towbars when he incurred back pain in 1990.   As noted above, the STRs do not report a 1990 back injury, but do show a March 1989 back injury, prior to the Veteran entering service.

In addition to the back examination, the VA afforded the Veteran a Medical Opinion DBQ.  See August 2023, Medical Opinion DBQ.  The VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion stating that there was no history of back pain in the medical records.  Since this was an inaccurate history by the VA examiner, the RO requested an addendum to the Medical Opinion DBQ.  In the October 2023 Addendum the VA examiner again provided a negative causation opinion.  The VA examiner stated that there was no continuity of care and that given the passage of time, and the absence of care, no link could be found between the current diagnosis and the back injury and treatment in 1989.  Confusingly, here the same examiner noted the Veteran's "current radiculopathy" despite her previous August 2023 diagnosis of neuropathy.

The Board finds that the August 2023 initial Medical Opinion DBQ and the Addendum Medical Opinion DBQ in October 2023 are inadequate.  The VA clinicians fail to address the complete medical history and the entirety of the Veteran's complaints and treatment, including pre-service, in-service, and post- service.  The VA clinicians do not address the Veteran's 1989 and 1991 complaints, or the 2015, 2022, and 2023 complaints and treatment.  There is no medical opinion addressing the issue of whether the Veteran's pre-existing back injury increased in severity or was aggravated during service or considering all possible causes for the current lumbosacral sprain disability and whether it is related to his service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231 (2012).  The only explanation for the medical opinion of no link between the current August 2023 diagnosis and the treatment in 1989, is the passage of time without records of care.  The VA clinician provides no comments or medical analysis as to this Veteran's specific medical history or this Veteran's lay statements regarding his back condition.  Accordingly, the Board finds the medical rationale and analysis are lacking, and the August 2023 and October 2023 VA medical opinions are inadequate.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).

When the Secretary provides the Veteran with a medical opinion, he must provide an adequate one.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Here, the medical opinions are not adequate, and this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, the deficiencies in the medical opinions must be corrected before the claim can be decided.  On remand, the Veteran will be afforded additional and adequate VA medical opinions.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please request a medical examination and medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  The clinician should address the following:

(a.) Identify the Veteran's current diagnosis.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed condition (claimed as bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy) began during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider all potential causes for the diagnosed condition (claimed as bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy), and consider the Veteran's toxic exposure risk, including:

(1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments;

(2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran; and

(3) the Veteran's lay statements.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the clinician is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed condition (claimed as bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy) manifested to a compensable degree within one year of the Veteran's August 1992 discharge from service.  Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

2. Please request a medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted to provide the requested opinions, one should be provided.

The clinician should address the following:

(a.) During service, was the Veteran's pre-existing back injury increased in severity or aggravated?

Consistent with Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238 (1994), the clinician is advised that a temporary or intermittent flare-up is not sufficient to be considered aggravation unless the underlying condition worsened.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain began during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the clinician is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

In rendering the above opinions regarding the Veteran's claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and lumbosacral stain, the clinicians should consider and include an analysis of the relevant medical records, as well as specifically address the Veteran's contention that his claimed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and lumbosacral strain were incurred during service.  The clinicians should consider all appropriate theories of causation.

The clinicians are to consider the Veteran's reports of his symptoms, as well as address the back complaints, pain in his legs, and reported symptoms in the medical treatment records, covering the time periods prior to, during, and after service.  If the clinicians reject the Veteran's lay statements, they should provide a reason for doing so.

A complete rationale for any opinions rendered must be provided.  If it is not possible for the clinicians to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate such, and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

 

 

Coleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, Linda L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.