Citation Nr: A25031184
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240609-446008
DATE:  April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, claimed as shortness of breath, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his sleep apnea had its onset during active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from June 2007 to September 2007 and from July 2008 to May 2009, with additional service in the Guard and Reserves. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the February 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, claimed as shortness of breath, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection - Sleep Apnea 

The Veteran asserts his sleep apnea had its onset during active service or is otherwise etiologically related to service. 

As to current disability, the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. See January 2024 VA sleep apnea examination.

As to in-service event, service personnel records reflect that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, and December 2022 and January 2023 VA Memoranda confirm that the Veteran had at least one qualifying deployment satisfying the criteria for presumptive toxic exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1119 and designation as a Persian Gulf Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1117. These records show that the Veteran served in Iraq and Kuwait from September 2008 to December 2008, and the Veteran's DD Form 214 notes the Veteran had service in Iraq from August 2008 to April 2009. 

The Veteran's active service treatment records (STRs) contain an April 2009 post-deployment health assessment, which reflects the Veteran reported problems sleeping or still feeling tired after sleeping. The Veteran's post discharge Guard and Reserve STRs reflect the Veteran continued to report sleep difficulties. A June 2010 STR reflects the Veteran reported excessive daytime sleepiness, hypnagogic hallucinations, and possible cataplexy. The provider assessed the Veteran as having excessive daytime sleepiness, report of narcolepsy, and possible dysthymia. The provider put the Veteran on profile for a sleep disorder. August 2012 and August 2013 periodic health assessments reflect the Veteran continued to report trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, or sleeping too much. 

While the STRs do not contain any diagnosis or treatment for sleep apnea, they do support the Veteran's statements that he first experienced symptoms associated with his later diagnosis of sleep apnea while he was in active service, and that they have continued since that time. Moreover, the Board finds the Veteran competent to report such symptoms, and that he is credible in that regard. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991). 

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA sleep apnea examination. The Veteran reported his condition started in 2009 after he returned from Iraq. The Veteran described his symptoms at that time as shortness of breath at night when trying to sleep, snoring, and episodes witnessed by his roommate where he would stop breathing in his sleep. The Veteran reported the symptoms had remained the same since onset and had also been witnessed by his fiancé. In December 2023, a sleep study was performed in conjunction with the Veteran's VA examination, and the study revealed obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner opined the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the examiner stated there were no documented instances of sleep issues during active service in the record, and the first documented sleep issues were in June 2010, which was after the Veteran was discharged from active service in May 2009. 

The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, and relied on an inaccurate factual premise, i.e. no documented instances of sleep issues prior to discharge from active service. See April 2009 post deployment health assessment; See also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993). Further, the examiner's rationale lacks a sufficient level of detail to adequately support the negative conclusion reached. As the VA medical opinion is inadequate, it cannot serve as the basis of a denial of entitlement to service connection. 

The Board notes that lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In this case, as noted above, the Veteran is competent to report when his symptoms started and that they have continued since that time and the Board has found him credible in that regard. Further, the probative medical evidence of record supports the Veteran's statements.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence for and against the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is in approximate balance. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Respiratory Disability 

The Veteran asserts he has a respiratory condition, which he described as shortness of breath, that had its onset during active service or is otherwise etiologically related to service. Specifically, the Veteran claims his respiratory condition is related to his exposure to thick clouds of black smoke and burning trash during deployment. 

The Veteran's STRs are silent for any complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis of any shortness of breath or respiratory conditions. However, as noted above the Veteran had service in Iraq and Kuwait during 2008 and 2009. 

Post discharge private treatment records contain one report of shortness of breath in April 2015, and reflect the Veteran was diagnosed with acute bronchitis.

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA respiratory conditions examination. The Veteran reported that sometimes at night he felt like he could not breath. He reported it did not occur very often, and had maybe occurred one time in the last year. He also stated he sometimes got short of breath with any semi-strenuous activity such as lifting or carrying. The examiner noted the Veteran's 2015 diagnosis of acute bronchitis, but found the records were silent for diagnoses of any other respiratory conditions. The examiner further noted shortness of breath was a symptom, not a diagnosis. The examiner performed a chest X-ray in conjunction with the examination, which revealed no acute process, and pulmonary function testing (PFT) that revealed moderate obstructive lung defect. The PFT interpretation noted more detailed pulmonary function testing could be useful, if clinically indicated. The examiner noted the claimed condition as asthma, bronchial and opined it was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. However, as rationale, the examiner stated the Veteran's shortness of breath was a symptom, not a diagnosis, and noted the Veteran had reported that he had never been diagnosed with asthma or any other breathing problem. Therefore, there were no records to support the Veteran's claim.

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted an October 2023 private treatment record reflecting the Veteran had sought further evaluation based on the PFT results from his September 2023 VA examination. The record notes the Veteran reported he had experienced shortness of breath for the past few years, which had worsened over time and tended to be worse with exertion and better with rest. Based on a physical examination and review of the PFT results, the provider diagnosed the Veteran with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

The Board finds the September 2023 VA examination and medical opinion are inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the examiner provided a conflicting opinion and rationale, and failed to obtain further evaluation based on the Veteran's PFT results prior to opining the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of any respiratory disability. As the examination and medical opinion are inadequate for adjudication purposes, they cannot serve as the basis of a denial of entitlement to service connection.

As the VA examination and medical opinion obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal are inadequate for consideration of the Veteran's claim and the other evidence of record is insufficient to support the Veteran's claim, remand for corrective action is required. 

In addition, remand is required to obtain a medical examination and/or opinion pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act). See 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The PACT Act requires VA to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). Furthermore, the VA examiner must consider: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran. Id. 

A memorandum dated September 2023 indicates that the Veteran participated in a TERA during service due to having service in Kuwait and Iraq in 2008. As noted above, treatment records confirm competent evidence of a disability. 

Because the Board is unable to grant the claim at this time, and because the requirements to obtain a medical opinion compliant with 38 U.S.C. § 1168 are met, but such opinion has not yet been obtained, a remand is also needed for VA to obtain one.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed respiratory disability, described as shortness of breath. The claims folder must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. All indicated tests and studies must be performed.

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed respiratory disability, described as shortness of breath, had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to service, to include in-service exposures (i.e. TERA). In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

In providing this opinion, the examiner must consider and discuss: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner is advised that the fact that a disability is not presumed related to a particular TERA is an insufficient rationale to support a negative opinion regarding direct service connection. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.