Citation Nr: A25031415
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458367
DATE:  April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for cervical stenosis (claimed as nerve damage) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record does not establish that the Veteran's cervical stenosis is related to treatment or lack of treatment rendered by a VA Medical Center; was proximately due to carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault by VA in furnishing reasonable care; or, that the additional disability was due to an event not reasonably foreseeable in furnishing the Veteran's referral for surgical treatment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for compensation under 38 USC 1151 for cervical stenosis (claimed as nerve damage) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1151, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.361.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1975 to May 1978.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2024 rating decisions issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Compensation Under § 1151

The Veteran seeks entitlement to compensation under § 1151 for cervical stenosis. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his cervical stenosis, claimed as nerve damage, is a direct result of surgery he underwent at University Hospital in Ohio after being referred by VA. See Appellate Brief dated September 26, 2024.

A Veteran who suffers a disability resulting from hospital care or medical or surgical treatment provided by a VA employee or in a VA facility is entitled to compensation for the additional disability in the same manner as if such additional disability were service-connected if the additional disability was not the result of willful misconduct and was proximately caused by carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing that treatment, or an event not reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a)(1)(A), (B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(a)-(d); Viegas v. Shinseki, 705 F.3d 1374, 1377-78 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The purpose of the statute is to award benefits to those Veterans who were disabled as a result of VA treatment or vocational rehabilitation. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a).

First, there must be evidence of additional disability, as shown by comparing the Veteran's condition before and after the VA medical care in question. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(b). To determine whether a Veteran has an additional disability, VA compares the Veteran's condition immediately before the beginning of the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, examination, training and rehabilitation services, or compensated work therapy (CWT) program upon which the claim is based to the Veteran's condition after such care, treatment, examination, services, or program has stopped. VA considers each body part or system separately. The additional disability must not be the result of the Veteran's willful misconduct. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.301(c)(3).

Second, the additional disability must be caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, examination, training and rehabilitation services, or CWT program furnished the Veteran by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c). In order for additional disability to be compensable under 38 U.S.C. § 1151, the additional disability must have been actually caused by, and not merely coincidental to, hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or medical examination furnished by a VA employee or in a VA facility. Merely showing that a Veteran received care, treatment, or examination and that the Veteran has an additional disability does not establish cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(1). The Federal Circuit has held that the causation element of section 1151 is satisfied not only when an injury is "directly" or "actually" caused by the actions of VA employees, but also where an injury occurs in a VA facility resulting from VA's negligence. Viegas, 705 F.3d at 1378.

Hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination cannot cause the continuance or natural progress of a disease of injury for which the care or treatment was furnished unless VA's failure to timely diagnose and properly treat the disease or injury proximately caused the continuance or natural progress. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(2). The factual elements necessary to support a claim under section 1151 based on failure to diagnose or treat a preexisting condition may vary with the facts of each case and the nature of the particular injury and cause alleged by the claimant. As a general matter, however, entitlement to benefits based on such claims would ordinarily require a determination that: (1) VA failed to diagnose and/or treat a preexisting disease or injury; (2) a physician exercising the degree of skill and care ordinarily required of the medical profession reasonably should have diagnosed the condition and rendered treatment; and (3) the Veteran suffered disability or death which probably would have been avoided if proper diagnosis and treatment had been rendered. See Vet. Aff. Op. Gen. Couns. Prec. 5-2001 (Feb. 5, 2001); see also Roberson v. Shinseki, 607 F.3d 809, 817 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Moreover, additional disability caused by a Veteran's failure to follow properly given medical instructions is not caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(3).

Third, the proximate cause of the disability, as opposed to a remote contributing cause, must be: (1) carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination; or (2) an event that was not reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d).

Regarding carelessness or negligence, to establish that carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA's part in furnishing hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination was the proximate cause of a Veteran's additional disability or death, it must be shown that the hospital care or medical or surgical treatment caused the additional disability or death; and (i) VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider; or (ii) VA furnished the hospital care or medical or surgical treatment without the Veteran's informed consent. Determinations of whether there was informed consent involve consideration of whether the health care providers substantially complied with the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 17.32. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d)(1).

Regarding reasonable foreseeability, whether the proximate cause of a Veteran's additional disability or death was an event not reasonably foreseeable is in each claim to be determined based on what a reasonable health care provider would have foreseen. The event need not be completely unforeseeable or unimaginable but must be one that a reasonable health care provider would not have considered to be an ordinary risk of the treatment provided. In determining whether an event was reasonably foreseeable, VA will consider whether the risk of that event was the type of risk that a reasonable health care provider would have foreseen or disclosed in connection with the informed consent procedures of 38 C.F.R. § 17.32. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d)(2); Schertz v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 362, 367-69 (2013).

Thus, section 1151 contains two causation elements; a Veteran's additional disability must not only be caused by the hospital care or medical treatment he or she received from VA, but also must be proximately caused by the VA's fault or an unforeseen event. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a)(1).

Where a Veteran is referred for non-VA treatment or outside-care, as in this case, the private physician does not act as an agent of VA. However, the referral itself may constitute an event not reasonably foreseeable. See Ollis v. Shulkin, 857 F.3d 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2017). The question is whether (1) VA medical care proximately causes the medical treatment or care during which the unforeseeable event occurred, and (2) the unforeseeable event proximately caused disability or death.

Turning to the evidence, VA diagnosed the Veteran with cervical myelopathy and spinal cord compression after an MRI was conducted in December 2017. The VA physician recommended surgery; however, the Veteran wished to seek a second opinion and did not immediately undergo surgery. Instead, the Veteran waited 8 months and underwent surgery on August 10, 2018, at University Hospital in Ohio.

In relation to his claim, the Veteran received an in-person VA examination in January 2024 to assess the nature and etiology of his claimed nerve damage of the neck. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with several forms of peripheral neuropathy and bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome but did not immediately render a § 1151 medical opinion. In February 2024, VA requested clarification to which the examiner responded by stating that there was insufficient evidence for the examiner to determine if there was carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of an attending VA personnel. The matter, in the examiner's opinion, needs to be an internal investigation where both sides can be evaluated/interviewed. The examiner gathered the evidence and subjective findings of one person involved in the matter that they have little to no evidence regarding. The examiner completed the assessment/opinion to the best of their ability but could not rule if there was negligence on any other provider's behalf. The examiner stated that it was their medical opinion that this matter be determined by the findings of another non-biased individual that can have more evidence and findings from both parties involved in this situation. As a third-party provider, the examiner would recommend and/or request a specialists' opinion. 

The Board notes that the above opinion is inadequate as to decide the claim as it fails to render an opinion. Rather, the VA examiner provides mere conclusory and overly speculative opinions. This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight. 

In response to the above, the claims file was sent to a second VA examiner for review and opinion in May 2024. The May 2024 VA examiner opined that it is less as likely than not the claimed condition was caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment, additional disability from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel or additional disability resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, and/or failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress. As rationale, the examiner explained that the VA diagnosis and treatment was appropriate and timely, accepted appropriate protocols were followed, and the standard of care was met. 

The examiner further explained that a report of medical history dated March 27, 1978, less than two months prior to the Veteran's discharge from service, reported no issues with his neck. Instead, the examiner explained, the Veteran has a degenerative disease of the spine that occurs with age such that he had developed severe spinal stenosis with changes at the C4-5 level of the spinal cord. Rather than pursue immediate surgery when recommended by the VA neurosurgeon and neurologist, the Veteran delayed treatment by seeking a second opinion which in turn delayed his surgery until August 2018. Nevertheless, the examiner stated that even if more immediate treatment had been pursued, the Veteran may still have not made a full recovery because there were changes in the cervical spinal cord itself that do not necessarily improve after surgery. 

Additionally, the examiner explained that the Veteran has confounding factors including diabetic peripheral neuropathy, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and bilateral ulnar neuropathy which can make the diagnosis of cervical stenosis more difficult. The examiner saw no evidence that the claimed disability of nerve damage of the neck was caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment at issue; nor that the additional disability resulted from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel; nor that the additional disability resulted from an event that could have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider; nor that there was failure on the part of the VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability that allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress.

The Board finds the May 2024 VA opinion to be probative. In this regard, the VA examiner reviewed the medical evidence and provided adequate supporting rationale for the conclusions reached when attributing the onset of his symptoms when rendering the opinions. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). In addition, the May 2024 VA examiner also provided clear conclusions and supporting data, as well as reasoned medical explanations that the Veteran's claimed residual neck pain or nerve damage was less likely than not due to the treatment received by VA medical providers, or by the referral to University Hospital and resultant surgery. In doing so, the VA examiner noted a thorough review of the evidence, to include the treatment and follow-ups for his reported neck pain. The May 2024 VA examiner also noted that the Veteran's reported symptoms would not breach the standard of care for treatment, diagnosis, or follow-up. 

Accordingly, the May 2024 VA examiner concluded it was less likely than not that any claimed condition was caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment, additional disability from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the VA personnel or additional diagnosis resulted from an even that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, including the referral for surgery.

The Board assigns great probative weight to the May 2024 VA opinion. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical history and claims file, and offered a medical opinion supported by a clear and concise rationale that addressed the pertinent questions at issue. See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (the probative value of a physician's statement is dependent, in part, upon the extent to which it reflects "clinical data or other rationale to support his opinion"); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, supra. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

In light of the foregoing, the weight of the evidence is against finding that the Veteran incurred nerve damage as a result of the treatment performed at a University Hospital in Ohio when referred by VA. 

In this regard, the May 2024 VA examine opined that the Veteran's residual neck pain was less likely than not the result of the treatment or lack of treatment performed at a VA Medical Center or through the referral to University Hospital.

Additionally, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim cannot prevail under the remaining criteria set forth under 38 U.S.C. § 1151. The most probative evidence of record fails to establish that the Veteran incurred nerve damage from the treatment or lack of treatment performed at a VA medical center, or through the referral as a result of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA. As noted above, the Board finds the medical opinion of the VA examiner of significant probative value. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that there was a causal relationship between the VA medical treatment or referral provided and the Veteran's claimed nerve damage/residual neck pain, and competent medical evidence established that there was no fault on the part of VA in the treatment provided. The threshold (and dispositive in this case) factor is the lack of a nexus between the VA treatment provided, VA's referral for surgery, and the Veteran's claimed disability. 

In fact, the May 2024 VA examiner opined that the medical conditions from which the Veteran experiences, those being several forms of peripheral neuropathy, are less likely than not to have been caused by carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment or similar instance of fault on the part of VA. This opinion is by a medical professional competent to provide such an opinion, cited supporting factual data, and explained the underlying rationale which cites to current medical knowledge; hence, it is probative evidence in this matter. The Board finds the examiner's opinion probative as it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. There is no contrary probative opinion of record.

The Board considered the Veteran's statements made in support of his claim. In certain instances, lay statements may serve to support findings related to the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability, or symptoms of disability, susceptible of lay observation. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis). However, the Veteran is not competent to state that any residual neck condition is etiologically related to any VA carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA's part during treatment or lack of treatment. It is not shown that the Veteran is otherwise qualified through specialized education, training, or experience to offer a medical etiological opinion. Thus, the Veteran's assertions are outweighed by the May 2024 VA opinion. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991) (holding that the Board is prohibited from substituting its own medical judgment in place of the pinions of competent medical professionals). There is no other medical evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a residual neck condition or nerve damage that was caused by VA treatment, and the Board may not accept unsupported lay speculation with regard to medical issues.

The Board notes that the Veteran, as a lay person, is not competent to offer a medical opinion as to whether the standards of medical care were met. Therefore, his statements are given less probative weight than the findings of the May 2024 VA examiner. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim.

For the reasons and bases set forth above, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, and he is not entitled to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a prostate disorder. Accordingly, the appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Schulte

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.