Citation Nr: A25031716
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-465385
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1990 to February 1994 and January 2009 to January 2010, with additional service in the Navy Reserve.  He was awarded a Joint Service Achievement Medal and Southwest Asia Service Medal, among others.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)'s decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the AMA framework.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

In the Veteran's August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), he selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.  

As the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its February 1, 2024 rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  However, as a remand of these matters is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that: 1) the Veteran had a diagnosed disability, specifically the September 18, 2023 VA examination showed a diagnosis chronic post-traumatic headaches, 2) the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service as a February 2009 service treatment record (STR) showed a complaint of a headache; and 3) participation in toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) was conceded as the Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) showed exposure to asbestos in service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations.

The September 2023 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's headaches were less likely than not caused by his TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effects of all TERA of the Veteran.  However, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's headaches are directly related to his service, to include his headache during service.  The Board finds this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the Veteran contended that his headaches are related to service on a direct basis and a February 2009 STR shows headaches during service.  See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  Accordingly, a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion regarding direct service connection.

Additionally, at the September 2023 VA examination, the Veteran stated that he was involved in a vehicle accident while in active duty in the Navy Reserve on October 13, 2019 and that he was diagnosed with post-concussive trauma.  He stated that he continued to struggle with headaches.  He also contended that his headaches started after he had covid in 2020, when he came home from a seven to eight-day drill.  See September 2023 VA examination report.  The claims file does not contain service records from 2019 or 2020.  The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to request the Veteran's service records from his time in the Navy Reserve is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  These records must be requested on remand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his GERD is related to service on a direct and secondary basis (though he does not specify what service-connected condition his claimed GERD might be secondary to).  See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  Regardless, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim of entitlement to service connection for GERD.  In light of the Veteran's contention that he suffers from GERD and his Southwest Asia service, the Board finds that the low threshold of McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) has been met and a VA examination should have been obtained prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain a VA examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error; and a remand is warranted to correct this error and obtain a VA examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please contact appropriate sources to verify the Veteran's dates of service in the Navy Reserve and obtain service treatment and personnel records for any such service.  If any service treatment or personnel records cannot be obtained, notify the Veteran and his representative and allow an opportunity to respond or provide the records. Verify all active duty, active duty for training and inactive duty training dates for the Veteran's service in the Navy Reserve, including for the period from 2019-2020.  All efforts to obtain these records should be fully documented in the claims file. 

2. After completing Directive #1, please forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate VA clinician to provide a medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headaches.  The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted in order to provide the requested opinion, one should be provided.  

The clinician is requested to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal) that the Veteran's headaches had their onset in, were caused by, or are otherwise related to his service, to include his active-duty service in the Navy Reserve and the noted vehicle accident as well as his TERA exposure.

In rendering this opinion, the clinician must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs involving the Veteran.  

The clinician should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate VA clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's GERD.  The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.  All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.  Thereafter, the clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following: 

a.) Diagnose all gastrointestinal conditions, to include GERD.

b.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal) that any gastrointestinal condition, to include GERD, had its onset in, was caused by, or are otherwise related to the Veteran's service, to include his active-duty service in the Navy Reserve and his TERA exposure.

In rendering this opinion, the clinician must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs involving the Veteran.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The clinician should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Samuelson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.