Citation Nr: A25031852
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230127-318001
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of whether the character of the Veteran's discharge from service for the period from January 2019 to June 2021 constitutes a bar to the award of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) monetary and healthcare benefits is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably from January 2018 to December 2018.  He also served on active duty with the U.S. Army from January 2019 to June 2021 and was discharged under other than honorable conditions by reason of resignation by an officer for the good of the service in lieu of trial by general court martial. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an appeal of a January 2023 administrative decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The issue of whether the character of the Veteran's discharge from service for the period from January 2019 to June 2021 constitutes a bar to the award of VA monetary and healthcare benefits is remanded.

The Veteran essentially seeks entitlement to compensation and healthcare benefits for his period of service from January 2019 to June 2021.  He contends that his service was honorable. 

Review of the record reveals that during his second period of service the Veteran was accused of sexual assault.  Following a roughly seven to eight months investigation in 2020 during which the Veteran contends his Command was trying to provoke him into stating the incident was his fault, the Veteran, a commissioned officer, requested a discharge for the good of the service in lieu of trial by general court martial.  See February 2022 Statement; See also August 2020 Recommendation for Removal from Service; August 2020 Memorandum for the Record (Veteran's request for discharge); DD 214 (dated June 10, 2021). 

Service treatment records detailed that the Veteran was accused of sexual assault due to a trainee saying she felt she couldn't say no due to the Veteran's rank.  He started experiencing depression and anxiety as a result of the on-going investigation by the Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID), the loss of friends, and concerns of how this would impact his career and life.  See March 2020 ST (psychiatric intake examination).  He was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct.  No duty restrictions necessitating a profile was warranted and the Veteran met retention standards for medical purposes. 

In his August 2020 request for a discharge, the Veteran contended that he had disgraced his family, unit, and his rank.  He said that he had spent a considerable amount of time thinking about the choices he had made and how he ended up in this situation.  He indicated that prior to the incident he was a platoon leader.  Following his misconduct he was reassigned.  Although this was a difficult time in his life, he continued to work hard.  Additionally, since the incident he has sought help from the Brigade's Chaplain, his Major, and from behavioral health services.  He specifically asserted that he was not "offering any excuses nor blaming anyone else for [his] actions. [He] was placed in a position of trust...and [he] violated that trust."

In his August 2022 Request for higher-level review request, the Veteran alleged that he was coerced into giving up my phone without a warrant and that documents were altered to gain favor to the accuser.  Also, the accusations against him were never proven through a court hearing.

Following a review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  While the Board appreciates the AOJ's extensive efforts to obtain the Veteran's complete military personnel record, the record remains incomplete.  In this regard, STRs indicate that the investigation into the Veteran's misconduct was conducted by the Army CID.  There is no indication that the AOJ attempted to obtain records from the Army CID.  Furthermore, it is unclear if the AOJ received a response from the September 2021 requests for information from the Staff Judge Advocate and the Military Police Battalion.  See June 2022 Correspondence (indicating only that the Records Management Center was unable to obtain records); July 2022 Correspondence (HRC response; DPRIS response); August 2022 Correspondence (HRC response).

As records detailing the investigation by the Army CID and the Veteran's separation from service could materially impact the adjudication of the character of discharge claim, a remand is necessary to determine whether such documents are available. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should contact the appropriate organization in order to obtain any missing Army personnel records.

Specifically, the AOJ should attempt to obtain any records of general court martial related documents, reports of the investigation conducted by military law enforcement into the Veteran's misconduct, and the Veteran's separation records, from the following repositories (but not limited to):

-	The Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID), 

-	Office of the Staff Judge Advocate,

-	Military Police Battalion, 

-	The Army Crime Records Center.

All reasonable attempts to obtain such records should be made and documented.  If VA attempts to obtain any outstanding records which are unavailable, the Veteran and his representative should be notified. 

2.  Issue an administrative decision regarding the issue of character of discharge.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(3).

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Kaufer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.