Citation Nr: A25031880
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-469986
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder (MDD) with generalized anxiety disorder, as secondary to service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his MDD with generalized anxiety disorder is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for MDD with generalized anxiety disorder, as secondary to service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b) (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1987 to August 1990, and January 1991 to February 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on an appeal of a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and requested Direct Review of the July 2024 rating decision.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  

If the Veteran would like the VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, the VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Notably, denial of due process may include issuing a Board decision prior to the expiration of the one-year period for a claimant to request a docket change.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  The Veteran was notified of the rating decision on appeal on July 24, 2024.  While the one-year period to request a docket change has not yet expired, since the Board is granting the appealed matter in full, the Veteran's due process rights are not adversely affected by not waiting.

Entitlement to service connection for MDD with generalized anxiety disorder

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for his initially claimed "mixed personality disorder" or, in the alternative, for his later diagnosed major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder as secondary to bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.  See March 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ; September 2022 VA Form 20-0995.

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things:  (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

With chronic disease shown as such in service (or within the presumptive period under § 3.307), so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  To show a chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity is required, as is sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  However, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), applies to only those chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); 38 U.S.C. § 1101.

Service connection may also be granted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a) and (b).  See also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). 

In order to establish entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis, there must be evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Id.

Service connection on a secondary basis may not be granted without medical evidence of a current disability and evidence of a nexus between the current disability and a service-connected disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 51214 (1998).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  See also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

At the outset, the Board notes that the AOJ made the following favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal:

You have been diagnosed with a disability, as the medical evidence shows you have a diagnosis of major depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder, per VA examination dated August 23, 2022.

The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service, as your service treatment records show you were treated for Motrin overdose and diagnosed with adjustment reaction to adult life with depressed mood.

The claimed disability is service-connected, as you are service connected for hearing loss and tinnitus.  See July 2024 Rating Decision.  The Board is bound by such favorable findings by the AOJ absent evidence identifying a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Therefore, the first and second element of direct service connection is met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Likewise, the first element of secondary service connection is met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's current MDD with generalized anxiety is related to his military service directly or as secondary to his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for mental disorders in September 2021.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with MDD, moderate with atypical features of suspiciousness of motivation of others, and opined the condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As to rationale, the examiner indicated that the Veteran was not diagnosed with a mixed personality disorder at this examination, as he was during service.  The Veteran's current symptoms were noted as depressed mood, suspiciousness, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The examiner remarked that the Veteran has anger issues, gets mentally frustrated, and endorsed chronic failures in relationships.  The Veteran also reported his medical problems cause him to suffer and he felt people generally cannot tolerate him and try to take advantage of him.

In October 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and indicated the hearing loss impacted the Veteran's ordinary conditions of life, including ability to work.  The Veteran specifically reported "he gets angry by having to ask people to report or tell them he didn't hear what they say" and "Co workers make fun of him."  The examiner also diagnosed the Veteran with recurrent tinnitus, noting he was exposed to excessive noise during service as indicated by conceded noise on active duty.  The examiner also noted the Veteran's hearing loss may be a contributing factor to the tinnitus, which the examiner opined was at least as likely as not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.

In February 2022, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss and opined the hearing loss was at least as likely as not caused by or a result of his hazardous noise exposure in the service.  As to rationale, the examiner noted the Veteran's military duties involving loud noises, indicated that repeated exposures to loud noise can lead to permanent tinnitus and/or hearing loss, and that per "OSHA 2018":  Loud noise can create physical and psychological stress, reduce productivity, interfere with communication and concentration, and contribute to workplace accidents and injuries by making it difficult to hear warning signals. The effects of noise induced hearing loss can be profound, limiting your ability to hear high frequency sounds, understand speech, and seriously impairing your ability to communicate.  See February 2022 C&P Exam.  

The examiner also noted that the Veteran was already service-connected for tinnitus, which had onset in service, progressively worsened since, and now involved constant ringing in both ears that impacted the Veteran in his ordinary conditions of daily like, including the ability to work, in that it effected his focus and concentration, and made it harder from him to hear and understand.  Id.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Board Certified Psychiatrist, J.M., dated August 23, 2022,who, after interviewing the Veteran face-to-face and reviewing his private records, patient-copy of VA claims file, service medical records, and numerous medical resources, concluded that, based on his medical knowledge and experience, the Veteran's diagnosed MDD and anxiety disorder were more likely than not a direct result of his ongoing and severe tinnitus and moderately severe hearing loss.  As to rationale, Dr. J.M. noted the Veteran's clinical history showed that anxiety symptoms occurred as an integral part of his overall MDD, noting the Veteran's difficulty in thinking and concentration due to his MDD as well as his tinnitus cause him anxiety.  Dr. J.M. cited to numerous medical treatises in support of his conclusion, particularly noting that it was well established in those treatises that patients with chronic tinnitus and hearing loss have higher levels of anxiety and depression, opining that, in the Veteran's case, his significant military-related intense noise exposure resulting in hearing loss and tinnitus impacted all areas of his professional life, which caused chronic anxiety and depression.  See Medical Opinion, associated 09/02/2022.

Dr. J.M. also completed a Mental Disorder Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) noting the Veteran 's diagnoses as MDD and generalized anxiety disorder and indicating the symptoms of each have "significant overlap" and therefore cannot be differentiated. The Veteran's symptoms were noted to be depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (i.e., forgetting names, directions, or recent events), flattened affect, difficulty in understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like settings, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and impaired impulse control (i.e., unproved irritability with periods of violence).  Dr. J.M. concluded that the Veteran's mental health condition produced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood.  See DBQ-Veteran Provided, associated 09/02/2022.

In May 2023, a VA examination Addendum/Medical Opinion based on records-only review concluded that the Veteran's claimed MDD and generalized anxiety disorder was less likely than not incurred in or cause by claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As to rationale, the examiner noted there is no overwhelming evidence of record to suggest that the Veteran's diagnosed MDD is the result or a progression of the adjustment disorder, depressed mood, and other mental conditions diagnosed in the service following his psychiatric stay in 1988 as a result of extreme marital conflict wherein his wife tried to kill him and then he tried to kill himself with pills and wrist cutting.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's MDD is not likely related to his adjustment reaction in service, as adjustment disorders are temporary and resolve once the stressor is over or progress into a chronic condition.  The examiner concluded that, here, "[g]iven there is no evidence of progression after his initial diagnosis or in the years following his military service, it is not possible to link his treatment for depression and anxiety (MDD) in the last ten (approx.) years to the adjustment disorder in 1988 without resorting to speculation."

On review, the Board concludes that the evidence of record does not adequately support service connection on a direct basis but does adequately support service connection as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.  Specifically, the 2021 and 2023 VA examiners provided a negative nexus opinion, concluding the Veteran's current mental health disorder was not a result of or progression of the psychiatric event he experienced while in service.  The Board finds their well-reasoned opinions competent, supported by the record, and highly probative.  Regarding secondary service connection, the VA hearing loss examination in 2021 documented the Veteran's reports of anger, aggravation, and ridicule due to his hearing loss, themes of which were echoed in the 2021 VA mental disorders examination noting the Veteran's anger issues, suspiciousness of motives of others, and avoidance of social connections.  Moreover, Dr. J.M.'s opinion that the Veteran's current mental health disorders resulted from his hearing loss and tinnitus was further supported by the 2022 VA examiner's findings that the Veteran hearing loss was at least as likely as not caused by or a result of hazardous noise exposure in the service, with referenced cites to OSHA literature noting loud noise can create physical and psychological stress, and that the effects of noise induced hearing loss can be profound.  The Board likewise finds Dr. J.M.'s well-reasoned opinion competent, supported by the record, and highly probative.  

Accordingly, and resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively supports service connection for the Veteran's MDD with generalized anxiety disorder as secondary to his service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.  Therefore, the claim is granted.

  

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Picard

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.