Citation Nr: A25031162
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240318-424929
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, is dismissed. 

REMANDED

Service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time the Veteran filed the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, there was already a pending Board appeal regarding the issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

2. At the time the Veteran filed the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, there was already a pending Board appeal regarding the issue of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(b), 20.205.

2. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(b), 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 2003 to August 2003, June 2005 to July 2005, April 2006 to May 2006, and April 2008 to May 2008, with additional service in the Air National Guard, including from May 1980 to August 1980. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the February 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Sleep apnea

Left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur

Unfortunately, the Veteran's appeal of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, must be dismissed due to a procedural defect. See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021); 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500.

Under the AMA, a claimant may elect administrative review of an AOJ decision by requesting one of three review options, or lanes: (i) Higher-Level Review by the AOJ; (ii) Supplemental Claim; or (iii) appeal to the Board. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(1). Once a claimant has filed for review under one of these options, he or she may not choose another lane of review with respect to the same claim or same issue contained within the claim until the higher-level review, supplemental claim, or notice of disagreement is adjudicated; or until the request for higher-level review, supplemental claim, or notice of disagreement is withdrawn. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b). In other words, concurrent election, or electing multiple review options simultaneously for the same claim, is prohibited. See id. A claimant may change the review option selected by withdrawing the original request and filing the appropriate application for the requested review option within one year from the date on which VA issued notice of a decision on an issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(e)(1).

As the procedural course of the Veteran's claim is at issue in this appeal, a brief history is provided, including review of the Veteran's two concurrent appeals before the Board. In a September 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur. In January 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application, seeking entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur. In a May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, in conjunction with the January 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application. In May 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, disagreeing with the May 2023 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur.

In February 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review, requesting review of the September 2022 rating decision. In a May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ identified a duty to assist error during the higher-level review. In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur. In March 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur. In March 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, disagreeing with March 2024 rating decision and selected the Direct Review docket. 

The May 2023 VA Form 10182 is the contested initial decision and is pending final adjudication. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. Thus, the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, as indicated in the March 2024 VA Form 10182, represents a later concurrent appeal before the Board. As the Board lacks jurisdiction to hear the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a left knee condition, to include surgery and bone spur, the claims are rendered moot. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.104. Accordingly, the claims must be dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Chronic fatigue syndrome

The Veteran asserts that his claimed chronic fatigue syndrome was the result of his time in active service. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

In an October 2022 private medical opinion, the physician diagnosed the Veteran with chronic fatigue syndrome as described by the 2015 diagnostic criteria of the Institute of Medicine. The physician noted the Veteran had experienced multiple complaints which were characteristic of chronic fatigue syndrome for several years. The physician noted these symptoms impacted his day-to-day life and inhibited the Veteran's ability to live an active and fulfilling retirement. The Veteran asserted that prior to his deployments, he never experienced these symptoms or suffered from having difficulty with his memory or cognition. The physician noted the Veteran's symptoms included cognitive impairment, generalized exhaustion, waking feeling unrefreshed, and recurrent musculoskeletal pain. The physician opined that the Veteran met all the criteria for a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. 

The Board finds the October 2022 private medical opinion to be inadequate as the physician used the 2015 diagnostic criteria of the Institute of Medicine to determine the Veteran's diagnosis. A diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome for VA purposes requires (1) new onset of debilitating fatigue severe enough to reduce daily activity to less than 50 percent of the usual level for at least six months; and (2) the exclusion, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, of all other clinical conditions that may produce similar symptoms; and (3) six or more of the following: (i) acute onset of the condition, (ii) low grade fever, (iii) nonexudative pharyngitis, (iv) palpable or tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes, (v) generalized muscle aches or weakness, (vi) fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise, (vii) headaches (of a type, severity, or pattern that is different from headaches in the pre-morbid state), (viii) migratory joint pains, (ix) neuropsychologic symptoms, and (x) sleep disturbance. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.88a. Additionally, the physician did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed chronic fatigue syndrome was the result of the Veteran's time in active service, specifically his deployments to the Southwest Asia theater of operations. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2022. The VA examiner noted the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome for VA purposes. The Veteran asserted that he was diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome in October 2022, but that he had been suffering from symptoms since 2017. The VA examiner did not provide a nexus opinion as to whether the Veteran's claimed chronic fatigue syndrome was related to his active service because the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. 

The Veteran was afforded a General Medical Gulf War VA examination in December 2022. The VA examiner noted the Veteran complained of symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome. The VA examiner noted the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea and that his symptoms were more consistent with obstructive sleep apnea than chronic fatigue syndrome. The VA examiner noted there was a correlation between obstructive sleep apnea and chronic fatigue syndrome, but it is difficult to differentiate between the two. The VA examiner additionally noted that studies have shown that chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain is seen in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's complaint of muscle and joint pain was consistent with his obstructive sleep apnea according to medical literature. Additionally, the VA examiner noted the medical literature linked morning headaches and obstructive sleep apnea. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was due to other causes and not due to the Veteran's deployment to the Southwest Asia theater of operations. 

The Board finds the December 2022 VA examinations to be inadequate. The VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he suffered from symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome beginning in 2017. As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service injury and symptoms thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician(s), to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed chronic fatigue syndrome.  

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner(s) prior to the examinations. The examiner(s) must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file has been reviewed. 

The examiner(s) should elicit a full history from the Veteran. The examinations should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation. All pertinent symptomatology should be reported in detail. 

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has chronic fatigue syndrome that manifested in or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology therein.

Additionally, if direct service connection is not found, provide the Veteran an examination addressing the Veteran's presumed environmental toxin exposures with a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's chronic fatigue. The examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed chronic fatigue is due to presumed in-service toxic exposure. 

Under the PACT Act, the Veteran has established a TERA, and the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service and conduct a synergistic and combined effect analysis of all toxic exposure risk activities that may provide a basis to service connect the claimed disability.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.