Citation Nr: A25031750
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230912-377467
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for pes planus is granted. 

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD) is denied. 

An effective date of August 1, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome with scoliosis and spondylosis (hereinafter "back disability") is granted, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards.

An effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for FSAD is granted, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards. 

An effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, for the award of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on loss of use of creative organ is granted, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating for individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

Entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance or housebound status is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's pes planus was caused by service-connected back disability and PTSD, with obesity as an intermediate step.

2. The Veteran's FSAD is rated at the maximum schedular rating permitted for that disorder.

3. Service connection for back disability was denied in a January 2012 rating decision; the Veteran did not appeal that decision and new and material evidence was not received within a year of issuance of that decision. 

4. Following the January 2012 rating decision, no further communication, formal or informal, seeking service connection for back disability was received until August 1, 2022; on that date, VA received an Intent to File, and on September 25, 2022, VA received a supplemental claim application seeking service connection for back disability.

5. The Veteran appealed the initial rating assigned his PTSD, which was effective October 30, 2019, and continually pursued that claim; that claim reasonably raised service connection for FSAD.

6. The Veteran met basic eligibility for SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ on October 30, 2019, the date she has been awarded service connection for FSAD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for pes planus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310; VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for FSAD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.116, Diagnostic Code 7632. 

3. The criteria for an effective date of August 1, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for a back disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

4. The criteria for the assignment of an earlier effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for FSAD have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

5. The criteria for an effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, for the award of SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108, 5110, 7104; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1997 to December 2003.

Regarding the claims related to FSAD, a back disability, pes planus, and SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, in the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 and March 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for increased rating for the back disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Regarding the left knee claim, in November 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2022 decision. In February 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2022 decision.  

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Lastly, when evidence of unemployability is submitted during the course of an appeal from an assigned rating, a claim for TDIU will be considered part and parcel of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 App. 447, 453-54 (2009). However, under the modernized AMA system, mere submission of evidence of unemployability is not necessarily sufficient to bring entitlement to TDIU within the Board's jurisdiction. In order for the Board to take jurisdiction of a claim for TDIU under the AMA, the evidence of unemployability must be submitted prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. Here, medical evidence suggests the Veteran's back disability impacts her ability to work. As such, the Board finds that TDIU has been raised by the record under Rice and is part of the appeal before the Board.

Service Connection

Service connection for pes planus is granted. 

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to service connection for pes planus. As service connection is being awarded on a secondary basis, the Board will not discuss other theories of entitlement. 

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the current disability and an in-service precipitating disease, injury, or event. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence of (1) a current chronic disability for which service connection is sought; (2) an already service-connected disability; and (3) that the disability for which service connection is sought was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by the already service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, the record reflects that, in a March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found the Veteran had a current diagnosis of bilateral pes planus. The Board is bound by this favorable finding and, therefore, concludes the first element for establishing secondary service connection has been established. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Additionally, the record shows the Veteran has been awarded service connection for a back disability and PTSD. See March 2020 and November 2022 rating decisions. Thus, the remaining issue is whether there is a link between the Veteran's current pes planus and her service-connected PTSD and/or back disability.

In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a private opinion provided by H.C., Physician Assistant. In the opinion, H.C. opined that it is more likely than not the Veteran's pes planus is secondary to her back disability and PTSD, including as a resultant weight gain as an intermediary step. H.C. explained that obesity is a significant risk factor for developing pes planus as an adult, noting that obesity often leads to dysfunction of the posterior tibial tendon, which is a slow progressive process eventually causing pes planus, and that our arches bear our body's weight and serve as our body's shock absorbers so anything that counteracts these important biomechanical functions can increase the risk of creating or worsening flat feet. 

H.C. noted that the Veteran reported a lack of motivation and inability to physically exercise due to her chronic worsening low back pain and PTSD/depression, compensatory prior heavy alcohol use, and intake of high caloric comfort foods in an effort to cope with her service-connected PTSD, which H.C. indicated likely contributed to her worsening obesity. Moreover, H.C. noted that the Veteran's traumatic PTSD events and lumbar pain began on active duty and likely played a role in the initial onset of weight gain as outlined in her service treatment records. H.C. also indicated that the Veteran reported that she often suppressed her emotions with comfort eating, that her lower back and mental health disabilities have caused significant functional limitations and much hardship over the years, that her back conditions have dramatically worsened over time further restricting her ability to routinely exercise, and that the medical evidence shows her weight has increased as her mental health and lumbar disabilities have progressed. It was also noted that the Veteran continues to lack motivation for a healthy lifestyle and admits to ongoing compensatory "comfort eating habits," due to her PTSD with depression that prevents weight loss.

H.C. further indicated that research has shown that chronic activation of stress hormones from mental health conditions have been associated with physiologic changes affecting both the central and peripheral nervous systems and contribute to dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system and neuroendocrine functioning, which ultimately leads to weight gain. Similarly, she noted, studies have revealed that PTSD/depression can alter the leptin hormone that suppresses appetite, which contributes to weight gain as well, and chronic pain causes depression and fear of movement that then leads to a vicious cycle of pain-inactivity-obesity-compensatory eating habits. While weight gain is often multifactorial, medical research further supports that a lack of exercise is a major contributing factor for weight gain. Physical activity has also been researched as an important component of weight maintenance after weight loss and a lack of physical activity can preclude weight loss for many individuals. 

Therefore, H.C. concluded, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and back disabilities have more likely than not contributed to her substantial periods of weight gain and worsening obesity since her time on active duty. She noted that the Veteran has no other known risk factors believed to have precipitated her acquired pes planus, noting that the evidence is clear that the Veteran enlisted with normal foot morphology and has since developed pes planus following the progression of her obesity. In addition, she noted that the Veteran's lay statements, when viewed alongside her medical history, medical records, and the pertinent medical literature, suggest that her pes planus would not have occurred but for the precipitation of weight gain due to her service-connected PTSD with depression and lumbar disabilities. 

In December 2022, a VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not the Veteran's pes planus was caused by her service-connected PTSD, noting only that it is medically known that PTSD or other mental disorders do not have an impact on the feet. The examiner also opined that the Veteran's pes planus was not caused by her service-connected back disability, noting that it is medically known that disorders of the back do not cause pes planus in adults; that the most common risk factors and causes of flat feet are injury to the feet, hereditary, and other specific medical conditions; and that there is no indication that back conditions cause pes planus. 

After review of the record, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's pes planus is proximately due to her obesity, which is due to her service-connected PTSD and back disability. The Board finds the private opinion from H.C. persuasive and supportive of a finding that the Veteran's pes planus is caused and/or aggravated by her service-connected PTSD and back disability. Further, VA has found that obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017). Specifically, VA's General Counsel has concluded that in order for service connection to be warranted on this basis, the evidence would have to show that the service-connected PTSD and/or back disability caused the Veteran to become obese, that such obesity was a substantial factor in causing the pes planus, and that the pes planus would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected PTSD and/or back disability. Here, the November 2022 private opinion speaks to these questions and provides persuasive evidence that the Veteran's PTSD and back disability caused her obesity, which was a substantial factor in causing her pes planus, and that her pes planus would not have occurred if she had not become obese as a result of her PTSD and back disability. The Board acknowledges the negative nexus opinion provided by the December 2022 VA examiner but finds the opinion inadequate as it was not supported by an adequate rationale. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and back disability contributed to her obesity, which in turn caused her pes planus. Therefore, service connection for pes planus is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Increased Rating

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for FSAD is denied. 

The Veteran generally contends that she is entitled to an increased rating for her service-connected FSAD. 

Generally, disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide used in the evaluation of disabilities encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

A Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). The Board acknowledges that with respect to a claim for an increased rating for an already service-connected disability, a Veteran may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). The following analysis is therefore undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

The Veteran's FSAD has been assigned a noncompensable (0 percent) rating under Diagnostic Code 7632. Under Diagnostic Code 7632, a noncompensable disability rating is warranted for FSAD. 38 C.F.R. § 4.116. The maximum schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 7632 is zero percent. 

A footnote to Diagnostic Code 7632 further instructs that VA should consider assigment of special monthly compensation for loss of use of a creative organ under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a). 

The record reflects that the Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2022. She was diagnosed with FSAD. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have any symptoms and had not undergone any treatment for her condition. It was also noted that she did not have any conditions of the vulva, clitoris, vagina, cervix, fallopian tubes, or ovaries. There also was no urinary incontinence/leakage, fistulae, or endometriosis. The examiner opined that the condition had no impact on her ability to work. 

In November 2022, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. During the examination, she reported that she is unable to accomplish and/or maintain ample lubrication-swelling reaction during sexual intercourse without medication or treatment and that she has not had a desire for sex since 2019. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have any current symptoms and that she was not undergoing any treatment. It was also noted that she did not have any condition of the vulva, vagina, cervix, fallopian tubes, or ovaries. Furthermore, she did not report urinary incontinence and there was no evidence of fistulae or endometriosis. The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition had no impact on her ability to work.  

After review, the Board finds the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran is entitled to an increased rating for her service-connected FSAD. The rating schedule does not allow for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 7632; thus, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 7632. In addition, the Veteran has already been awarded SMC for loss of use of a creative organ. 

The Board has considered whether the Veteran is entitled to an increased or separate rating under another Diagnostic Code. First, however, the Board points out that there is a diagnostic code specific to the disorder at issue, and therefore resort to another diagnostic code is inappropriate.  Second, the medical evidence of record does not show the Veteran has been diagnosed with a condition of the vulva, clitoris, vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, or ovaries; endometriosis; or any fistula. In other words, there is nothing to rate on a secondary basis.  Therefore, there is no other alternative criterion warranting assignment of a compensable disability rating.

Accordingly, the claim is denied.

Effective Date

General Legal Criteria

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall be no earlier than the date of receipt of the application therefor. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a). The statutory provision is implemented by regulation, which provides that the effective date for an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

In regard to the date of entitlement, the term "date entitlement arose" is not defined in the current statue or regulation. However, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has interpreted it as the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought. This is determined on a "facts found" basis. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); see also McGrath v. Gober; 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000). It is important to note that an effective date generally can be no earlier than the facts found. DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45 (2011). For instance, if a claimant filed a claim for benefits for a disability before he actually had the disability, the effective date for benefits can be no earlier than the date the disability first manifested. Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008).

Regulations defining a "claim" were revised, effective March 24, 2015. See 79 Fed. Reg. 57,660 (Sept. 25, 2014). The revision eliminated informal claims and required claims on specific forms.

Prior to March 24, 2015, a specific claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary was necessary for disability benefits to be paid to any individual under the laws administered by VA. 38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.151. For VA compensation purposes, a "claim" was defined as a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement, or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p). An informal claim was any communication or action indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits, and identifying the benefit sought from a claimant, his or her authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of a claimant who is not sui juris. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(a). Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim had not been filed, an application form would be forwarded to the claimant for execution. If received within one year after the date it was sent to the claimant, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

Thus, the essential elements for any claim prior to March 24, 2015, whether formal or informal, are (1) an intent to apply for benefits, (2) an identification of the benefits sought, and (3) a communication in writing. Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2009). VA must look to all communications from a claimant that may be interpreted as an application or claim for benefits and is required to identify and act on informal claims for benefits. See Servello v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 196, 198 (1992).

From March 24, 2015, a specific claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary is necessary for disability benefits to be paid to any individual under the laws administered by VA. 38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.151. For VA compensation purposes, a "claim" is defined as "a written communication requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a specific benefit under the laws administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs submitted on an application form prescribed by the Secretary." 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p).

A claimant, his or her duly authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of claimant who is not of full age or capacity may indicate a claimant's desire to file a claim for benefits by submitting an intent to file a claim to VA. An intent to file a claim must provide sufficient identifiable or biographical information to identify the claimant. Upon receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will furnish the claimant with the appropriate application form prescribed by the Secretary. If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by the Secretary appropriate to the benefit sought within 1 year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155(b), 3.160.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, all reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Back Disability

The Veteran and her attorney contend that the Veteran is entitled to an effective date earlier than August 14, 2022 for the award of service connection for her back disability.  Their theory is not clear.

The record reflects that the Veteran first filed a claim seeking service connection for a back disability in March 2011. In a January 2012 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim. The Veteran was notified of this decision and her appellate rights in a January 2012 letter. The Veteran did not appeal that decision or submit new and material evidence within a year following notice of the decision; therefore, the January 2012 rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 19.20, 19.21, 19.52, 20.1103.

No claim, formal or informal, seeking service connection for a back disorder was received by VA until August 2022.

On August 1, 2022, VA received an Intent to File. On September 25, 2022, VA received VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application, seeking service connection for a back disability.  

In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for a back disability. A 20 percent rating, effective August 14, 2022, was assigned.

After review of the evidence, the Board concludes that an effective date of August 1, 2022, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for the back disability is warranted. The Board finds the Intent to File received by VA on August 1, 2022 constitutes the date of application to readjudicate the claim as the September 2022 Supplemental Claim was received within a year of receipt of the Intent to File. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b) (stating VA may recognize the receipt date of the intent to file a claim as the date of claim so long as VA receives the successfully completed claim form within a year). The exact date on which entitlement arose need not be ascertained in order to conclude that August 1, 2022 is the earliest possible effective date here. If entitlement arose prior to August 1, 2022, then the date of claim would be the later of the two dates, and hence the correct effective date as provided by 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500.

The Board, however, finds that an effective date stemming from the March 2011 claim is not warranted. In this regard, the Board notes that an application that had been previously denied cannot preserve an effective date for a later grant of benefits based on a new application. See Wright v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 343, 346-47 (1997); see also Washington v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 391, 393 (1997) ("The fact that the appellant had previously submitted claim applications, which had been denied, is not relevant to the assignment of an effective date based on a current application."). "The statutory framework simply does not allow for the Board to reach back to the date of the original claim as a possible effective date for an award of service-connected benefits that is predicated upon a reopened claim." Sears v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 244, 248 (2002). Thus, the effective date of an award of service connection is not based on the earliest medical evidence showing a causal connection, but on the date that the application upon which service connection was eventually awarded was filed with VA. Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999).

Once a rating decision is final, only a request for a revision premised on clear and unmistakable error (CUE) can result in the assignment of an earlier effective date. See Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 296 (2006); see also Leonard v. Nicholson, 405 F.3d 1333, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2005) ("[A]bsent a showing of clear and unmistakable error, [the veteran] cannot receive disability payments for a time frame earlier than the application date of his claim to reopen, even with new evidence supporting an earlier disability date."); Flash v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 332, 340 (1995) ("[W]hen a claim to reopen is successful and the benefit sought is awarded upon readjudication, the effective date is the date of the claim to reopen."); Bingham v. Nicholson, 421 F.3d 1346 (Fed. Cir. 2005).

Here, as noted above, the January 2012 rating decision is final and, because the decision is final, the claim by which the Veteran was granted service connection was a claim to readjudicate a previously denied claim. As the Veteran's supplemental claim was filed more than one year after the January 2012 rating decision, the effective date can be no earlier than the date of receipt of the supplemental claim, or, in this instance, the intent to file a claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.2500(h)(2). Furthermore, the Veteran has not alleged CUE with the January 2012 decision.  Nor have they established that the January 2012 rating action somehow never became final.

Accordingly, an effective date of August 1, 2022, but no earlier, is warranted for the award of service connection for a back disability.

2. FSAD 

The Veteran and her attorney generally contend that the Veteran is entitled to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for FSAD.  Their theory on this is unclear.

The record shows the Veteran was awarded service connection for FSAD as secondary to her service-connected PTSD. See November 7, 2022, rating decision.

The Court has determined that VA is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for an increased rating for the primary service-connected disability pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2). Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 191 (2021). Secondary service connection is granted for a "disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury." 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) provides that once VA receives a complete claim, it must adjudicate as part of the claim entitlement to any ancillary benefits and additional benefits for complications of the claimed disability, including those identified by the Rating Schedule. 

The effective date can also be no earlier than the date of the claim for service connection on a secondary basis. See Ellington v. Nicholson, 22 Vet. App. 141, 145 (2007) (finding that the effective date for a grant of service connection for diabetes and hypertension as secondary to leukemia was the date of the claim for secondary service connection, not the date of the claim of service connection for leukemia), aff'd sub nom; Ellington v. Peake, 541 F,3d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Ross v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 528, 532-33 (2008) (holding that the effective date for a grant of secondary service connection for depression with anxiety was the date of the secondary service connection claim, not the date of the claim for service connection for the primary heart condition).

By way of history, the record reflects that the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD in October 2019. In a March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. A 50 percent rating, effective October 30, 2019, was assigned.

In March 2020, VA received VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, requesting review of the March 2020 rating decision.

In an August 2020 higher-level review decision, the AOJ continued the 50 percent disability rating assigned for the PTSD. The Veteran was notified of this decision and her appellate rights in an August 2020 letter.

On December 1, 2020, VA received VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application, requesting review of the March 2020 rating decision. 

On the same day, VA also received a lay statement from the Veteran, in which she indicated that her sex drive fluctuates because of her MST.

In a March 2021 rating decision, the AOJ continued the 50 percent disability rating assigned for the Veteran's PTSD. 

In April 2021, VA received VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, requesting review of the March 2021 rating decision.

In the June 2021 higher-level review decision, the AOJ again continued the 50 percent disability rating assigned for the PTSD. The Veteran was notified of this decision and her appellate rights in a June 2021 letter.

On August 1, 2022, VA received VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), requesting service connection for FSAD. On the form, the Veteran claimed her FSAD was secondary to her service-connected PTSD.

In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection for FSAD as secondary to the service-connected PTSD. A noncompensable (0 percent) rating was assigned effective August 1, 2022 (the date of receipt of the claim). 

After review of the evidence and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that an effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, is warranted for the award of service connection for FSAD. This is commensurate with the date of service connection for the primary disorder, namely PTSD. In this regard, the record shows the Veteran continuously pursued her appeal of the initial rating assigned the PTSD through the date of service connection for FSAD, and that it was during this continuous pursuit that the Veteran identified the symptoms that were separately service-connected as FSAD. While the Veteran did not specifically mention a sexual arousal disorder until after service connection for PTSD was granted, pursuant to Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 198 (2021), the Board finds the sexual arousal symptoms were present as part of a panoply of psychiatric symptoms experienced by the Veteran at the time of her October 2019 claim for service connection for PTSD, and that therefore the claim for FSAD is effectively the same as that for PTSD, or October 30, 2019.  

As for an even earlier effective date, this is not supported by the record.  The record contains no claim for FSAD itself prior to October 30, 2019.  Moreover, the date of service connection based on a secondary basis may not be earlier than the date of service connection for the primary disorder.

Accordingly, an effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, for the award of service connection for FSAD is granted.

3. SMC for loss of use of creative organ

The AOJ assigned an effective date of August 1, 2022 for the award of SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, which is the same date the Veteran was initially awarded service connection for FSAD. As discussed above, the Board is awarding an earlier effective date of October 30, 2019, for the award of service connection for FSAD. Accordingly, the Board concludes an effective date of October 30, 2019, but no earlier, is warranted for the award of SMC based upon loss of use of a creative organ.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

In October 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. On the report, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported experiencing flare ups that "renders her frozen in position; she feels stuck and cannot move quickly." Later in the report, it was noted that the Veteran did not have ankylosis. The Board, however, finds the examiner did not adequately address the Veteran's statement and whether the statement is indicative of ankylosis or the functional equivalent of ankylosis. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand for correction of this error is necessary.

Additionally, the Board notes that the evidence is unclear with respect to whether the Veteran has a neurological disability associated with her service-connected back disability. Specifically, a September 2022 VA treatment record shows the Veteran experienced back pain with radicular features, including numbness and tingling in the legs and feet. Additionally, during the October 2022 VA examination, she reported sharp pain in her back that shoots to her buttocks as well as numbness and a pins and needles sensation that travels from her hips to her feet. However, the October 2022 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have signs and symptoms of radiculopathy or radicular pain. In light of the inconsistencies, clarification regarding whether the Veteran has radiculopathy should have been obtained prior to issuance of the decision on appeal. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand for correction of this error is necessary.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

In October 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, and was diagnosed with osteoarthritis. The examiner then provided a negative nexus opinion, indicating that the Veteran's left knee disability is less likely than not related to her active service as there is no evidence of significant injury or medical care during service. 

However, the Board finds the opinion inadequate as the examiner failed to address pertinent evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements that her left knee pain onset during her service and continued after her separation from service and that her left knee disability was related to physical training and marching during service. In addition, the examiner did not address service treatment records documenting the Veteran's left knee complaints during service. 

An adequate opinion should have been obtained prior to issuance of the decision on appeal. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand for correction of this error is necessary.

3. Entitlement to TDIU is remanded.

As noted above, a TDIU claim has been raised by the record as part of the Veteran's claim for an increased disability rating for her back disability. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). However, the claim was never adjudicated, and remand to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error is therefore warranted. 

4. Entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance or housebound status is remanded.

SMC is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b). Here, during the October 2022 VA Back examination, the Veteran reported that her back pain can prevent her from performing activities of daily living (ADLs) and going to work. This evidence indicates that the Veteran may be in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person due to her service-connected back disability and has raised the matter of whether entitlement to SMC is warranted. This issue should have been addressed prior to issuance of the decision on appeal; therefore, remand to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error is necessary. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate clinician for addendum medical opinions concerning her service-connected back disability and her left knee disability. An examination should only be scheduled if the examiner deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinion.

Back Disability

The examiner is asked to review the Veteran's claims file, to specifically include the October 2022 VA examination report. 

Following a review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: 

(a) Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's report that her flare ups "renders her frozen in position" and that she feels "stuck and cannot move quickly" indicates that she has ankylosis or the functional equivalent of ankylosis.

(b) Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran has a neurological disability, to include radiculopathy, associated with her service-connected back disability.

In providing the opinion, the examiner is asked to consider a September 2022 VA treatment record that shows the Veteran experienced back pain with radicular features, including numbness and tingling in the legs and feet as well as her reports during the October 2022 VA examination that she experienced a sharp pain in her back that shoots to her buttocks and numbness and a pins and needles sensation that travels from her hips to her feet.

Left Knee Disability

Provide an opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis onset during, or is otherwise related to, her active service.

In providing this opinion, the examiner is asked to consider the following: (i) service treatment records showing left knee complaints; (ii) lay statements that her left knee disability is due to physical training and marching during service; and (iii) lay statements that her left knee pain onset during service and continued after separation from service and that she experienced homelessness for a period after service and was unable to seek care. 

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided. If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. In so doing, the examiner must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.	

2. Provide any needed notice and complete any development required on the claim for TDIU and adjudicate the matter of entitlement to a TDIU rating.

3. Complete any necessary development for the matter of entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance or housebound status. After completing any development, adjudicate the claim.

	 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S.J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.