Citation Nr: A25031741
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230817-369815
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cardiac sarcoidosis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is not related to service, to include toxic exposure risk activities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1154, 1168, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1980 to September 1980, with service in the Army National Guard. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023 (sarcoidosis) and May 2023 (obstructive sleep apnea) rating decisions from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran timely appealed, submitting the VA Form 10182 in October 2023 and selecting the Direct Review docket. In the Direct Review docket, the Board reviews the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision on appeal for each issue. Accordingly, no additional evidence after the March 2023 and May 2023 rating decisions, respectively, may be considered. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. However, because the Board is remanding the cardiac sarcoidosis claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). Of note, the Board honored the Veteran's request to switch her docket from the Hearing Lane to the Direct Review Lane, via her October 2023 VA Form 10182.

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the claimed in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) requires VA to provide an examination and obtain a medical opinion in connection with a veteran's claim for service connection when there is evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). A February 2, 2023 TERA memorandum shows that the Veteran participated in a TERA and notes she had exposure while working at Ground Zero during the September 11, 2001 period. In May 2023, the AOJ obtained VA examinations and opinions in compliance with 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Here, the Veteran is currently diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. See May 2023 VA examination. Thus, element one of service connection is met. 

Turning to the second element, in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not identify any complaints, treatment for, or diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. However, an injury in the form of toxic exposure risk activity is conceded based on service in support of the federal declaration of emergency following terrorist attacks in the New York State disaster counties. See May 2023 Rating decision: Favorable Findings. Therefore, element two is also met.

Regarding the last element, nexus, the only competent opinion of record is against the claim. The examiner noted that sleep apnea is a prevalent condition for which there are many risk factors and that after having reviewed the medical literature, it did not demonstrate a definitive causal relationship between potential toxic risk exposure activities experienced by the Veteran and the development of her condition. Based on the foregoing, the examiner ultimately opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not related to service by way of exposure to toxins, even after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

To the extent the Veteran's representative disagrees with the examiner's methodology of arriving at her opinion, the Board finds the examiner competent to provide an examination and render an opinion on this matter. See March 2025 Informal Hearing Presentation. There is no indication of record that the medical professional is incompetent to do so, being that she has received the requisite training and experience. Further, the Board finds that this is only an assertion of the Veteran's representative and there is no indication the representative requested or reviewed the examiner's qualifications before questioning the examiner's competence. Id. Also, to the extent that the Veteran's representative believes the opinion itself to be "neither diligent nor competent", the Board finds the examiner's opinion competent as the she offered a sound rationale for her conclusions based on the entirety of the Veteran's claims folder, to include review of the Veteran's service and post-service treatment records.

Critically, there is no competent opinion to the contrary. To the extent that the Veteran asserts that her obstructive sleep apnea is the result of service, the Board finds that she is not competent to do so, as the determination as to the etiology of such conditions is a complex medical question that is beyond the ken of a layperson. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Accordingly, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is inapplicable, and service connection must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Significantly, the Veteran's only assertion during the evidentiary window she has made is that her obstructive sleep apnea is related to her exposure during the September 11, 2001 Ground Zero period. If the Veteran wishes to make a different assertion or theory of entitlement to service connection, she is encouraged to file a Supplemental Claim.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for cardiac sarcoidosis is remanded.

The Veteran presented for a VA examination in October 2022 where a diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis was confirmed. VA opinions were submitted in October 2022 and February 2023. The Board finds that these opinions are inadequate as there is some confusion between when the Veteran actually started experiencing any symptoms of cardiac sarcoidosis and if this was during a period of active duty or its equivalent. Additionally, the opinions rely on general conclusions and generalities without adequate consideration of the particular facts and circumstances of the Veteran's circumstances. 

The AOJ's reliance on these inadequate opinions and not seeking to obtain an addendum opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring another opinion on remand to correct the same. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 310-11 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an examiner other than the October 2022 and February 2023 VA examiners that addresses the etiology of the Veteran's cardiac sarcoidosis. The claims file, to include a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner for review. No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary, unless the examiner determines otherwise.

Following review of the claims file, the examiner should opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed cardiac sarcoidosis:

(a.) had its onset in or is otherwise related to active service;

(b.) is the result of her participation in any TERA during active duty, including her conceded exposures to toxins.

The VA medical opinion provider should consider:

i.	the total potential exposure through all military deployments; and

ii.	the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

A complete rationale for the examiner's opinion should be provided, citing to specific evidence of record, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. J. Rogers, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.