Citation Nr: A25031719
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240611-449592
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), to include as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2005 to May 2010.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 supplemental claim rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Board notes that the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received in support of the Veteran's claim, and the Board finds no reason to disturb the favorable finding.    

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD, to include as secondary to service-connected PTSD, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his GERD is secondary to his service-connected PTSD, to include obesity as an intermediate step.  March 2023 Statement in Support of Claim; June 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  The Board finds remand is necessary as the record does not contain an adequate medical opinion for adjudication purposes, a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes to provide a medical examination or opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).      

At the outset, the Board notes that it has been conceded that the Veteran is a Persian Gulf Veteran with participation in toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  Furthermore, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD and is service connected for PTSD.  January 2024 Rating Decision; April 2023 VA Examination; May 2015 Rating Decision.

The Veteran's July 2005 entrance examination notes that the Veteran weighed 223 pounds at the time he entered service.  In July 2007, the Veteran complained of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, adding that he had a history of blood in his stool for seven months.  Additionally, the Veteran began complaining of feeling depressed due to low back pain in September 2007.  The Veteran weighed 226 pounds at the time.  September 2007 Service Treatment Record.  In October 2007, the Veteran was diagnosed with atypical depressive disorder and subsequently underwent an overweight screening in November 2007 wherein the Veteran was then noted to weigh 239 pounds.  

In November 2007, the Veteran complained of abdominal epigastric pain with heartburn radiating up his throat and that the pain had been more severe over the previous month.  The Veteran again reported blood in his stool over the previous three days.  November 2007 Service Treatment Record.  In December 2007, the Veteran's weight was noted to have decreased to 210 pounds.  

A June 2009 post deployment health assessment noted depression and post-traumatic stress disorder with nightmares, intrusive thoughts, and feelings of detachment.  The Veteran was noted to weigh 252 pounds at the time.  June 2009 Service Treatment Record.  An October 2009 service treatment record notes that the Veteran reported acid reflux at the time with a significant medical history. The Veteran's weight was noted to have decreased to 230 pounds in October 2009.

The Veteran's 2010 separation examination notes the Veteran weighed 259 pounds, and the Veteran denied frequent indigestion or heartburn in the corresponding report of medical history.  Post service treatment records in January 2016 and January 2017 note a history of GERD with the Veteran weighing 241 pounds in January 2016 and 259 pounds in January 2017.            

The Veteran was afforded an April 2023 VA TERA examination and opinion wherein the Veteran was diagnosed with GERD.  The Veteran reported at the time that he started noticing heartburn during active service in 2009 or 2010 and that his condition had worsened since that time.  An April 2023 VA TERA medical opinion determined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  The VA examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service treatment record is silent for evaluation or treatment of GERD and that the Veteran reported no concern for GERD or GI issues in his separation examination in 2010.  The April 2023 examiner further noted that obesity is a risk factor for GERD as increasing body mass index was associated with a significant increase in the frequency of GERD symptoms.  The April 2023 examiner, however, failed to address the Veteran's reported symptomatology of heartburn and reflux during service, the Veteran's weight during service, to include obesity, and the Veteran's post service records indicating a history of GERD in 2016 and 2017.  Accordingly, the Board finds the opinion is inadequate for adjudication as it does not appear to be based on consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history.  See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994) (adequate medical examination is one that is based on consideration of veteran's prior medical history and describes his or her condition with a level of detail sufficient to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision on the relevant medical question).

The Veteran provided an August 2023 private opinion determining that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current GERD condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  The August 2023 opinion outlined various medical literature regarding the pathophysiology of GERD and mental health conditions.  Notably, the opinion summarized a significant amount of medical literature regarding obesity to include the pathophysiology of obesity related to PTSD, sleep disturbance and obesity, and pathophysiology of obesity in relation to GERD.  The studies noted an increased risk of obesity in those with PTSD and sleep disturbances and that obesity increases intra-gastric pressure which facilitates the development of GERD.  As it applies to the Veteran's case, the opinion states that the Veteran's current diagnosis of GERD chronologically developed, manifested, and was diagnosed after the Veteran's mental health condition with sleep disturbance and that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD has resulted in emotional stress and sleep disturbances as per the Veteran's March 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.  The opinion then summarized that the medical literature supports that the pathophysiological mechanisms and processes that occur directly from PTSD include improper stress responses and impaired sleep which result in prolonged oxygen and nutrient deprivation to the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), decreased pressure of the LES, and increased intra-gastric pressure subsequently causing the development of GERD, or at least a contributing factor.  

The August 2023 private opinion, however, appears to have similarly failed to have considered the Veteran's prior medical history.  Despite relying on numerous medical studies outlining an increased risk of obesity due to mental health conditions, the August 2023 private opinion fails to provide any discussion of the Veteran's specific weight history to include whether the Veteran's increased weight is due to his service-connected PTSD.  The only mention of the Veteran's weight in the August 2023 opinion comes from the March 2023 statement wherein the Veteran posits that he weighed 260 pounds upon entry into service and that he currently weighed 268 pounds.  Therefore, the Board also finds the August 2023 private opinion to be inadequate.  See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994).  

Additional VA medical opinions in September 2023 and January 2024 rendered negative nexus opinions.  The September 2023 opinion determined that the medical literature does no support PTSD as being causative of GERD and that the Veteran's risk factors include, but are not limited to, obesity, tobacco use, and alcohol use.  The January 2024 opinion stated that no medical literature was found to connect GERD to military service or toxic environments and that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is a more likely etiology.  These opinions also do not appear to be based on the Veteran's medical history as they similarly fail to address the Veteran's weight during service, to include obesity, his reported symptomatology of heartburn and reflux during service, and the Veteran's post service records indicating a history of GERD in 2016 and 2017.  

Based on the forgoing, remand is required to secure an adequate medical opinion prior to adjudicating the Veteran's claim.  

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's GERD.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner is then asked to:

(a.) Determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's GERD is etiologically related to the Veteran's active service, to include the Veteran's lay statements and in-service symptoms of heartburn and reflux. 

(b.) Alternatively, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD 1) was caused by service-connected PTSD, or treatment therefor; or 2) was aggravated beyond natural progression by service-connected PTSD, or treatment therefor.

NOTE: It is "but for" causation or aggravation that is required, not proximate cause.

Specifically, would the Veteran have developed GERD, or would his GERD have been less severe but for the service-connected PTSD, either because there is an etiological link or because the service-connected disabilities resulted in the inability to treat PTSD?  

(c.) Alternatively, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and/or treatment related thereto, caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity and, if so:

(i.) Whether the obesity was a substantial factor in causing GERD; and, if so

(ii.) Whether his GERD would not have occurred but for the obesity aggravated by his service-connected PTSD or treatment related thereto.

NOTE: The examiner is directed to address and consider the Veteran's service treatment records (to include weight fluctuations therein); post-service treatment records (to include weight fluctuations therein); and VA examinations regarding the Veteran's PTSD disability.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, he/she should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2.  After the above development, and any other development deemed necessary, readjudicate the claim.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Knopp, Derek A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.