Citation Nr: A25031915
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458068
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is proximately due or aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service connected right lower extremity radiculopathy; left lower extremity radiculopathy, common peroneal and superficial peroneal nerves; left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, femoral nerve; eczema; left knee degenerative arthritis; and degenerative arthritis of the spine.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force from July 1991 to July 2017. 

In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for OSA.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection shall be granted for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Also, any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the physician reaches. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007). In order for a medical opinion to be given weight, it must be: (1) based upon sufficient facts or data; (2) the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; and (3) the expert witness has applied the principles and methods reliable to the facts of the case. Nieves-Rodríguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). Other factors that may be considered in assessing the probative value of a medical opinion include a physician's access to the claims file or pertinent evidence, the thoroughness and detail of the opinion, the accuracy of the factual premise underlying the opinion, the scope of examination, the rationale for the opinion offered, the degree of certainty provided, and the qualifications and expertise of the examiner. Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000). Also, in terms of adequacy, failure to discuss both aspects of causation and aggravation in an opinion addressing secondary service connection renders the medical opinion inadequate. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). A report of a medical examination administered by a private physician that is provided by a claimant in support of a claim for benefits may be accepted without a requirement for confirmation by an examination by a physician employed by the Veterans Health Administration if the report is sufficiently complete to be adequate for the purpose of adjudicating such claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5125.

In circumstances when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). More precisely, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is in "approximate balance", which can be interpreted as evidence that is "nearly equal". Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

As a procedural starting point, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a fully developed claim for OSA.

In April 2023, The Veteran indicated that her musculoskeletal service connected conditions prevent her from exercising. Also, the Veteran commented that she has taken medications for these conditions. Moreover, the Veteran attested that her musculoskeletal conditions prevent her from being able to sleep on her side and makes it difficult to fall and stay asleep.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a March 2023, private medical opinion. The private examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current OSA is related to and/or aggravated by her service connected: left lower extremity radiculopathy external cutaneous nerve eczema; left knee degenerative arthritis; left lower extremity radiculopathy femoral nerve; right lower extremity radiculopathy; left lower extremity radiculopathy common peroneal and superficial CARL nerve; and thoracolumbar spine degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome. The private examiner cited a medical study that documents that chronic musculoskeletal pain causes sleep disturbances such as difficulty falling and staying asleep and less restful sleep. Also, the private examiner indicated that evidence suggests that pain and sleep exist in a bidirectional relationship in which pain causes sleep disturbance and sleep disturbance intensifies pain. The private examiner highlighted another medical study which demonstrates that patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain, sleep not only significantly less but with inferior sleep quality. In addition, this study showed that the patient's REM sleep is also less in duration and its onset is delayed. 

Separately, the private examiner remarked that the Veteran takes nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) medications to include Ibuprofen and Motrin. The private examiner noted that research has shown that fluid retention, such as that caused by chronic NSAID use is a cause of OSA. Thus, the private examiner concluded that the Veteran's medications for her chronic pain has the potential for fluid retention and postural fluid shift and night and, at the very least, aggravated her OSA.

In May 2023, the Veteran underwent a sleep apnea VA examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis for OSA. During the examination the Veteran reported that her condition began with tiredness, fatigue, and sleepiness at work throughout her military career.

In July 2023, the VA examiner opined that the claimed condition of OSA is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition of left knee degenerative arthritis. The VA examiner explained that no medical literature supports that left knee degenerative arthritis can cause sleep apnea.

In August 2023, the VA examiner issued an addendum opinion. The VA examiner indicated that no medical literature supports that left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, femoral nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, common peroneal and superficial peroneal nerves; and thoracolumbar spine degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome cause sleep apnea.

In August 2023, the AOJ in its rating decision denied service connection for OSA. The AOJ indicated that the evidence does not show that OSA is related to the service connected condition of left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve, nor that there is any evidence of this disability during military service. As favorable findings, the AOJ noted that the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA. Also, the AOJ highlighted that the Veteran's primary disabilities of arthritis and neuropathy are service connected.

In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to right lower extremity radiculopathy; left lower extremity radiculopathy, common peroneal and superficial peroneal nerves; left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, femoral nerve; eczema; left knee degenerative arthritis; and degenerative arthritis of the spine, is warranted. First, it is important to discuss that there are two medical opinions with contrasting conclusions, one positive and one negative in terms of the Veteran's service connection claim. Also, both medical opinions have different rationales, particularly, as to the effect of the Veteran's service connected conditions on his diagnosed OSA. The July 2023 VA medical opinion and its August 2023 addendum concluded that the Veteran's OSA is less likely as not proximately due or the result of the above mentioned service connected conditions. However, this opinion is inadequate for VA purposes. Even though the opinion did discuss and conclude that the Veteran's OSA is less likely as not proximately due to or the result of his service connected conditions, the VA examiner did not discuss whether the Veteran's service connected conditions could be aggravating the Veteran's diagnosed OSA. Thus, the failure to discuss both aspects of causation and aggravation in an opinion addressing secondary service connection render the July 2023 VA medical opinion and its addendum inadequate. See, El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra.

On the other hand, it is important to highlight that in the March 2023 private medical opinion, the private examiner cited a medical study which documents that chronic musculoskeletal pain causes sleep disturbances such as difficulty falling and staying asleep and less restful sleep. Moreover, the private examiner indicated that the medical evidence suggests that pain and sleep exist in a bidirectional relationship in which pain causes sleep disturbance and sleep disturbance intensifies pain. Also, the private examiner highlighted a medical study that demonstrated that patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain have inferior sleep quality and affects their REM cycle. Thus, the private examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA is more likely than not related to and/or aggravated by his service connected musculoskeletal conditions. This medical evidence is consistent with the Veteran's lay statements regarding her difficulty of being able to sleep on her side and stay asleep because of her musculoskeletal conditions. This medical opinion is highly persuasive and is based on a review of the record, applied reliable principles, and is supported by a reasonable rationale.

Given the foregoing and taking into consideration the discrepancy between the March 2023 private medical opinion and the July 2023 VA medical opinion and its August 2023 addendum in terms of the effects of the Veteran's service connected conditions of right lower extremity radiculopathy; left lower extremity radiculopathy, common peroneal and superficial peroneal nerves; left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, femoral nerve; eczema; left knee degenerative arthritis; and degenerative arthritis of the spine to his diagnosed OSA, the Board adheres to the rule that the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance. See Lynch v. McDonough, supra. Thus, the Board finds that the claim must be granted and that all doubt can be resolved in the Veteran's favor to find that it is at least likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is caused and/or aggravated by his service connected conditions of right lower extremity radiculopathy; left lower extremity radiculopathy, common peroneal and superficial peroneal nerves; left lower extremity radiculopathy, external cutaneous nerve; left lower extremity radiculopathy, femoral nerve; eczema; left knee degenerative arthritis; and degenerative arthritis of the spine. 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Colon, Ivan M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.