Citation Nr: A25031295
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473204
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1980 to February 1984. 

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, most recently addressed in an April 2017 rating decision. 

In August 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received, and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

In that regard, the Board notes that in a September 2024 informal hearing presentation (IHP), the Veteran's representative requested the Board remand this claim so that a VA examiner could consider a new theory of entitlement that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is caused or aggravated by his service-connected sleep apnea and/or major depressive disorder, to include medications used to treat the disorders, as this theory is supported by medical research.

As there is no pre-decisional error pertaining to these theories of entitlement, the Board cannot remand for development of such.  However, because the Board is presently remanding this claim for other reasons, as detailed below, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

As a last preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision of Williams v. McDonough regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has elapsed.  However, since the Board is not adjudicating the claim herein, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding before this time period expires.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction

The Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals.  See April 2024 VA Form 20-0995 supplemental claim application.

The record raised an additional theory of entitlement to include erectile dysfunction as due to the Veteran's conceded exposure to Camp Lejeune water contaminants.  See document labeled as Other, toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum dated December 20, 2023.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2024 to determine the nature and etiology of his erectile dysfunction.  The Veteran reported difficulty achieving and maintaining an erection which began in 2008, for which he had been treated with Viagra.  He reported improvement with medication.  The condition has stayed the same since onset.  The examiner diagnosed erectile dysfunction and provided a negative nexus to the Veteran's service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals.  The examiner explained that the etiology of erectile dysfunction may involve the vascular, neurological, and/or hormonal systems.  While there is no known direct causal correlation between hydrocelectomy and erectile dysfunction, the examiner stated that correlating the erectile dysfunction to any one particular cause without further urologic work-up would be entirely speculative.  Nevertheless, the examiner also concluded that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was less likely than not due to his service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals.

In August 2024, a TERA opinion was associated with the record in which the same examiner opined that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA.  As rationale, the examiner stated that he found no available medical or scientific evidence which indicates a relationship between the development of erectile dysfunction and TERA exposures.  The examiner reiterated that as there are multiple potential causes for erectile dysfunction (generally and in the Veteran's case), he was unable to determine the cause in an objective manner.  

The Board finds the June 2024 and August 2024 VA nexus opinions insufficient for adjudicative purposes.

In the June 2024 secondary service connection opinion, the VA examiner indicated that further urologic work-up was necessary before an etiology opinion could be provided without speculation.  An opinion has no probative value when it is based on a factually inaccurate or incomplete premise.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  The June 2024 opinion also did not address whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was aggravated by his service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals.  A medical opinion regarding secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation.  See El Amin v. Shinseki, 26?Vet. App.?140 (2013). 

The August 2024 TERA nexus opinion is insufficient as it did not address the specific facts of the Veteran's case and impermissibly relied solely on the lack of general medical literature.  See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018).

The failure to provide an adequate VA examination and opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand for a new examination and opinion is appropriate.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). 

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination with an examiner other than the VA examiner who performed the June 2024 VA examination, to assess the nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction.  The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination.  The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and document the Veteran's reported history in the examination report.  All necessary diagnostic testing and evaluation should be performed, and all clinical findings reported in detail. 

The examiner should then provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following: 

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed erectile dysfunction was incurred in or otherwise etiologically related to his service, to include his conceded in-service exposure to Camp Lejeune water contaminants?

(b.) In providing an opinion regarding the relationship of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction to his TERAs, the examiner is asked to consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment(s) and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran, to include conceded in-service exposure to Camp Lejeune water contaminants (perchloroethylene, trichloroethylene, vinyl chloride, and benzene).

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed erectile dysfunction was caused by the Veteran's service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals?  

(d.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed erectile dysfunction was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right testicle hydrocelectomy residuals? 

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed.  If the examiner is unable to reach an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain the reasons for this inability and comment on whether any further tests, evidence or information would be useful in rendering an opinion.  

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Horan, Deborah E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.