Citation Nr: A25031219
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 241206-496077
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for loss of teeth is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for herniated discs in the low back (herniated discs) is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for spinal stenosis in the back (spinal stenosis) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a current dental disorder that qualifies for VA disability compensation purposes stemming from service, as loss of teeth is not a disability for which compensation benefits are payable. 

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's herniated discs began during active service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's spinal stenosis began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

4. The Veteran is not currently diagnosed with PTSD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a dental disability for compensation purposes, claimed as loss of teeth, have not been met. 38 U.S.C.    §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310, 3.381, 4.150, 17.161.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for herniated discs have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for spinal stenosis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 4.125(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1964 to January 1966.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2024 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In December 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) appealing the November 2024 rating decision. The Veteran selected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the December 2024 VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

The Veteran also seeks to appeal the November 2024 rating decision that proposed to decrease the Veteran's disability rating for bilateral hearing loss from 40 to 0 percent. The Veteran's appeal of this issue is premature as the November 2024 rating decision did not reduce the rating assigned; thus, it was not a final decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a), see also Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458 (2011).  As the November 2024 rating decision did not constitute a final decision as to this issue, the November 2024 proposed rating reduction for bilateral hearing loss is not in appellate status properly before the Board. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from an injury or disease contracted in the line of duty, or for aggravation of a pre-existing injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, in the active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

1. Entitlement to service connection for loss of teeth.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for loss of teeth as he was sucker punched and attacked from behind fulfilling his military police duties while in service. See July 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. 

In the VA benefits system, dental disabilities are treated differently from medical disabilities. Dental disabilities that may be awarded compensable disability ratings include chronic osteomyelitis or osteoradionecrosis of the maxilla or mandible, loss of the mandible, nonunion or malunion of the mandible, loss of the maxilla, nonunion or malunion of the maxilla, limited temporomandibular motion, loss of the ramus, loss of the condyloid or coronoid processes, loss of the hard palate, and loss of teeth due to the loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible without loss of continuity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Codes 9900-9916.

Compensation is only available for loss of teeth where the lost masticatory surface cannot be restored by suitable prosthesis, if such is due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible, but only if such bone loss is due to trauma or osteomyelitis, and not to the loss of the alveolar process as a result of periodontal disease, as such loss is not considered disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913.

Alternatively, treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses and periodontal disease will be considered service-connected solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment, but not for purposes of compensation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381(a). The Veteran may be entitled to service connection for the purpose of receiving VA outpatient dental treatment if he is eligible under one of the distinct eligibility categories set forth by statute and regulation. 38 U.S.C. § 1712; 38 C.F.R. § 17.161.

The AOJ found that the Veteran had a dental condition that was treated during the first 180 days of service and that the Veteran had been diagnosed with the disabilities of dental caries and edentulous lower ridge. See November 2024 Rating Decision. Therefore, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R.      § 3.104(c). 

In an October 2024 VA examination report, the Veteran reported that he got knocked around and punched in the face during service due to the military environment of fights breaking out. Also, the Veteran reported that approximately six months post-service, he had some teeth taken out because they were loose and infected. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's November 1965 dental history that showed existing teeth (numbered 1-15 and 20-31), restorable teeth (numbered 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25), and non-restorable teeth (numbered 20 and 32) with multiple teeth that needed fillings. Also, the examiner reviewed a 2023 dental x-ray that showed existing teeth (numbered 6, 8, 9, 12 and 13) with a large span bridge and an implant (numbered 5) with all lower teeth missing. At the time of the October 2024 examination, the Veteran had multiple missing teeth (numbered 1-5, 7, 10, 14-32).

The October 2024 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with dental caries since 1964 and edentulous lower ridge since 2023. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of osteomyelitis or osteoradionecrosis of the mandible. The examiner explained that the Veteran had a history of high caries risk when he was in the service and had most of his teeth during the service. The examiner considered the Veteran's lay statement that he was punched in the face and concluded that the Veteran's teeth were not traumatically knocked out, but instead the Veteran had a natural progression of carious disease which was a major contributor to tooth loss and edentulism. As such, the examiner opined that the loss of teeth was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

The examination was performed by a general dentist, and the Board finds that it is adequate and probative. The Veteran's diagnoses are specifically excluded from dental disabilities for which VA can provide compensation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381.

The Board takes note of the Veteran's contention that he experienced dental trauma in service when he was sucker punched while performing his military police duties. A January 1965 dental service treatment record showed that the Veteran's teeth were extracted (numbered 17 and 18) due to subsequent disease and abnormality. Unfortunately, the Veteran's service treatment records do not show evidence of an incurrence, event, or injury for the extraction or loss of teeth due to trauma or osteomyelitis. Additionally, treatable carious teeth and replaceable missing teeth are not compensable disabilities per 38 C.F.R. § 3.381(b).

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current dental disorder for loss of teeth that qualifies for VA disability compensation purposes that is due to his period of active duty.

As the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a showing of a qualifying dental disability for VA compensation purposes at any time during the claim period, there is no separate and underlying disability that can be related to service. There is no legal entitlement to compensation benefits predicated upon service connection for the Veteran's claimed or diagnosed dental disability of loss of teeth, including caries and edentulous of the lower ridge. Where the law and not the evidence is dispositive, the claim should be denied because of the lack of legal merit or the lack of entitlement under the law. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994). Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for loss of teeth is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for herniated discs.

3. Entitlement to service connection for spinal stenosis. 

Factual Background 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for herniated discs and spinal stenosis due to his military police duties while in service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that he experienced back injuries fulfilling his military police duties, to include numerous altercations with intoxicated military personnel. See July 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. The Veteran's DD-214 confirmed his military occupational specialty (MOS) as military police.  

The AOJ found that the Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease, low back, intervertebral disc syndrome, spinal stenosis, dextroscoliosis of the lumbosacral spine, and lumbar radiculopathy of bilateral lower extremities. See November 2024 Rating Decision. Therefore, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his herniated discs and spinal stenosis in September 2024. The examiner explained that the Veteran's service entrance examination, separation examination, and service treatment records were silent for a spine condition. The examiner noted that the Veteran's post-service records showed that the Veteran had chronic low back pain that was due to a 1993 work-related accident in which an MRI showed herniated discs at the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar levels.  The examiner indicated that medical literature explained that spinal stenosis was a condition characterized by the compression of the nerve roots which could be congenital or acquired etiologies from trauma. Further, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's 1993 work injury was considered to be a more likely etiology of the Veteran's back conditions. Moreover, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's back conditions were not directly related to military service as there was a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the herniated discs and spinal stenosis conditions and service. As such, the examiner opined the Veteran's herniated discs and spinal stenosis were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

An October 1998 VA treatment record noted the Veteran's 1993 work-related accident in which an MRI showed herniated discs at the cervical (3 discs), thoracic (2 discs), and lumbar (2 discs) levels.  The Veteran sought chiropractic treatment for his back pain. The record does not contain any other medical evidence suggesting that the Veteran's back condition for herniated discs was related to his military police duties. 

Analysis

The Board takes note of the Veteran's contention that he experienced back injuries while in service fulfilling his military police duties; however, there was no other medical evidence of any back condition prior to the Veteran's 1993 work injury accident.

The Board finds the September 2023 VA medical opinion is the most probative evidence of record because the examiner opined that the 1993 back trauma was the more likely cause of the Veteran's herniated discs and spinal stenosis. Further, this opinion aligns with the Veteran's statement at the September 2023 VA examination that his back pain started after the 1993 accident. 

There is no indication that the Veteran experienced symptomology or chronicity related to his back during or shortly after service. The record does not contain any other medical evidence suggesting that the Veteran's back condition for herniated discs and spinal stenosis were related to his military police duties. Accordingly, the claims for entitlement to service connection for herniated discs and spinal stenosis must be denied.

Since the evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's herniated discs and spinal stenosis are related to service, entitlement to service connection for these conditions must be denied. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, here, it is not applicable because there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

4.  Entitlement service connection for PTSD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for PTSD as he was attacked from behind fulling his military police duties while in service. See July 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. 

Additionally, the Veteran contends that non-commissioned officers (NOCs) taught him to drink alcohol and smoke during service; as a result, he became a smoker and an alcoholic to relieve tensions, which then contributed to a heart attack and atrial fibrillation which compromised his ability to do physical work. See July 2024 VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD. 

In October 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his PTSD claim. The examination report indicated that the Veteran reported that his memory was shot from alcohol and a heart attack, but the Veteran could not think of any terrible, terrifying, traumatic events or any events in his past that weighed on his conscience. The examiner noted the Veteran's MOS as military police. The examiner explained that there was no evidence to support a diagnosis of PTSD or other mental health disorders from the Veteran's medical records or during the examination. The examiner explained that the Veteran did not exhibits avoidance, emotional distress or other criterion of PTSD or other disorders as result of an in-service stressor or event. The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis for PTSD using the criteria in the 5th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-5).  As such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's claim for PTSD was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

A September 2024 VA treatment record showed that the Veteran was screened for PTSD and the result was negative for a PTSD diagnosis. The Veteran indicated that he had experiences that were frightening, horrible, or traumatic, however the Veteran did not indicate that those experiences were due to an in-service event. There are no other relevant records to show that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of PTSD.  

The Board finds that at no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a current disability of PTSD, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the filing of a claim. Thus, service connection for PTSD is not warranted.

In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim and service connection cannot be granted. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1333 (1997) (holding that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation)

While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that he believes he has PTSD due to his military service, the record lacks the necessary medical evidence to confirm a PTSD diagnosis.  Since the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has PTSD, entitlement to service connection for this condition must be denied. 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Ruberto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.