Citation Nr: A25031807
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230705-359213
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a hypothyroid condition is remanded.

Service connection for diabetes is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army Reserves on active duty for training, for less than five months, from July to November 1969.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was scheduled for December 5, 2024, however, on November 27, 2024, the Veteran, through his representative, submitted a written statement requesting to cancel the scheduled hearing.  See November 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  Accordingly, the hearing is considered withdrawn.  38 C.F.R. § 20.704(e).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran within 90 days following receipt of the hearing withdrawal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claims for a hypothyroid condition and diabetes, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for a hypothyroid condition is remanded.

2. Service connection for diabetes is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has a hypothyroid condition and diabetes that is causally related to his active-duty service.  See April 2005 Correspondence - Veteran's Statement.

The VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when it is necessary to decide a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  Such development is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but (1) contains competent evidence of diagnosed disability or symptoms of disability, (2) establishes that the Veteran suffered an event, injury or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) (noting that the third element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and active service, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence of continuity of symptomatology).

In this case, the AOJ scheduled the Veteran for VA examinations in April 2023 to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed hypothyroid condition and diabetes.  However, the Veteran failed to report to the examinations.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b), when a claimant fails to report, without good cause, for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  When the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a supplemental claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.

However, in March 2023, the Veteran, through his representative, submitted a written statement informing the AOJ the Veteran was at the time housebound and unable to attend the examinations.  See March 2023 Third Party Correspondence.  As such, the Board finds that good cause has been shown as to why the Veteran did not report to the April 2023 VA examinations.  The Veteran's attorney requested the Board proceed with deciding the claim, noting that if her client's condition improved, she would inform the VA.  The Board acknowledges the attorney's request to proceed, however the Board is forced to remand this matter out of necessity.  The Board has determined there is not sufficient evidence to grant the benefits sought by the Veteran without further development.

In addition, the Veteran is advised that it is his responsibility to report for any scheduled examination, if he is able to do so, and to cooperate in the development of the case, and that the consequences of failing to report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of his claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Without a medical examination into the presence and etiology of the Veteran's claimed hypothyroid condition and diabetes, the Board is unable to grant or deny the Veteran's claim.  As the Veteran did not complete a VA examination in connection with these service connection claims prior to the rating decision on appeal, remand based on this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted to obtain VA examinations and opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for VA examination of his claimed hypothyroid condition to determine the presence and etiology of such.  The examiner must review the entire claims file in conjunction with the examination, including, but not limited to, medical treatment records, lay statements, and a copy of this Board remand.

(a)  The examiner must determine whether the Veteran has a current hypothyroid disability.

(b)  If there is a diagnosed current hypothyroid disability, the examiner must provide a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced, or nearly equal if not higher) that the Veteran's disability is causally related to his service.

2.  Schedule the Veteran for VA examination of his claimed diabetes to determine the presence and etiology of such.  The examiner must review the entire claims file in conjunction with the examination, including, but not limited to, medical treatment records, lay statements, and a copy of this Board remand.

(a)  The examiner must determine whether the Veteran has a current diabetes disability.

(b)  If there is a diagnosed current diabetes disability, the examiner must provide a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced, or nearly equal if not higher) that the Veteran's disability is causally related to his service. 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.C.M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.