Citation Nr: A25031905
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240327-428879
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for residuals of liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant, claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver is denied.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed.

Service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is dismissed.

Service connection for tinnitus is dismissed.

REMANDED

Service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded.

Service connection for plantar fasciitis, claimed as left foot pain is remanded.

Service connection for disability characterized by right foot pain is remanded.

Service connection for disability characterized by left ankle pain is remanded.

Service connection for a cervical spine musculoskeletal condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that residuals of liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant, claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver is related to his toxic exposure activities during service.

2. The March 27, 2024, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) was not timely filed as to the January 2020 rating decision denying PTSD and tinnitus, or the November 2014 rating decision denying service connection for COPD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for residuals of liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant, claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1168, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.309.

2. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for service connection for PTSD are met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

3. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for service connection for COPD are met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

4. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal for service connection for tinnitus are met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Navy from May 1977 to November 1980, from November 1980 to October 1984, and from July 1985 to October  1989.  See DD Forms 214.

As the evidence supports the Veteran's contention that he is terminally ill, the Motion for Advancement on the Docket is granted herein.  38 U.S.C. § 7107(b); 38 CFR § 20.902(c).  See July 2, 2024, Email Correspondence; see also Palo Alto VA Medical Center (VAMC) records, received July  2014 in CAPRI (showing home hospice criteria met ).  

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  See March 27, 2024, Notice of Disagreement.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) March 4, 2024, notification of decision regarding left ankle, plantar fasciitis, and liver cancer and cirrhosis, and December 29, 2023 notification of decision regarding cervical spine and right foot pain, and July 25, 2023 notification of decision regarding major depressive disorder on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301; see March 4, 2024, December 29, 2023, and July 25, 2023 Notification Letters.  The NOD as to the January 2020 and November 2014 rating decisions, was not timely as to these issues, which are discussed in the dismissal.  See January 22, 2020, Notification Letter and November 5, 2014, Rating Decision.  Any evidence submitted after the respective AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).  Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Service connection for liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver is remanded.

Additional Applicable Law

TERA

In August 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 ("PACT Act") was enacted by Congress.  Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (August 10, 2022).  This law expanded the list of conditions presumed to be related to herbicide exposure.

Under the PACT Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  A Veteran can establish participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly: through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure; through records showing participation in a TERA; when VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim or the file has a claim attributed to toxic exposure; or when a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure; when medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as VHA exposure screening; or, any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures.

Chronic Disease

Additionally, for certain chronic diseases, including cirrhosis of the liver, a presumption of service connection arises if the disease is manifested to a degree of 10 percent within one year following discharge from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  For those listed chronic diseases, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection when the requirements for application of the presumption are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Pertinent Facts

Here, the Veteran contends that his liver transplant with history of hepatocellular carcinoma claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver is due to direct exposure to fire retardant, lead paint, and solvents.  See August 8, 2023, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; see VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  A December 2023 TERA memorandum noted that the Veteran had exposure to include to unnamed toxic chemicals, asbestos, red lead paints, fire retardants, and solvents, and as such, had participated in a TERA activity during service.  See Memorandum.

Service treatment records show that the Veteran struggled with a history of alcohol and drug abuse, but did not have a history of hepatitis/jaundice.  See STR-Medical.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in which it was noted that he underwent a liver transplant in April 2018, having been diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma status post liver transplant in 2017.  See February 28, 2024, VA Examination Hepatitis, Cirrhosis and Other Liver conditions DBQ.  The Veteran took daily medications to reduce the risk of organ transplant failure.  Specifically, he took mycophenolate, and cyclosporine.  The Veteran had been diagnosed as having hepatitis C, although his risk factors were unknown.  He did not have signs or symptoms attributable to cirrhosis of the liver, biliary cirrhosis or cirrhotic phase of sclerosing cholangitis.  He also did not have any signs or symptoms attributable to chronic or infectious liver disease.  The Veteran had primary malignant neoplasm in remission, without any residuals or complications, for which "watchful waiting" was the approach.  Imaging showed postsurgical changes of the liver transplant, with no evidence of hepatocellular carcinoma.  The lab studies were reviewed.  There was no functional impact of the liver condition. 

There was a scar related to the liver transplant on the anterior (not due to burns).  See February 28, 2024, VA Examination Scars/Disfigurement DBQ.  It was not painful, or unstable.  It measured 45 by.5 centimeters.  There was no underlying tissue damage.  There was no effect on ability to work.  

In February 2024 the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by indicated toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployment of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposures risk activities of the Veteran.  See Medical Opinions DBQ.  Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran claimed his cancer of the liver, and cirrhosis of the liver was caused by or related to toxic exposure while serving in the military.  Review of the available TERA memo dated December 28, 2023, failed to show a history or record of specific deployment related exposure events that had been identified as causative of the claimed cancer or cirrhosis of the liver.  Id.  Additionally, there was no evidence of significant non-deployment related exposure including military occupational specialty, other military duties, and or garrison exposures that had been identified as causative of the claimed cancer or cirrhosis of the liver.  Id.  Therefore, the claimed condition (liver cancer and cirrhosis) was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Id.

Analysis

Here, the Veteran has claimed that his cancer and cirrhosis of the liver was caused by or related to toxic exposures while serving in the military.  See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  

After a review of the record, the Board concludes that entitlement to service connection for residuals of liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis of the liver is not warranted.

Here, as to the first element of service connection, the AOJ has confirmed that the Veteran has a current disability, noting that a VA examiner documented a diagnosis of liver transplant with history of hepatocellular carcinoma status post liver transplant on February 28, 2024.  See March 2024 Rating Decision.  

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.801, any findings favorable to the claimant, as identified by the AOJ, are binding on the Board of Veterans' Appeals adjudicators unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  The Board finds no evidence of error and notes that the Veteran's liver condition was also confirmed during his February 2024 VA examination.  See February 2024 Hepatitis, Cirrhosis and Other Liver Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).

As to the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence, there is a favorable finding of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity, based on the TERA Memorandum dated July 24, 2023, that conceded toxic exposure.  Thus, this is sufficient to satisfy this element of service connection.  See March 2024 Rating Decision-Narrative.  However, the probative evidence of record does not demonstrate a nexus between the disability and service.

Specifically, evidence in favor of a nexus is the Veteran's general assertions provided in furtherance of his claim and at various medical examinations that his disability is related to service as provided.  However,  while the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms as well as the onset and progression of symptomatology, there is no indication that he possesses the medical training or expertise required to provide opinions on complex medical questions such as the etiology of any residuals of a liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  As such, his opinion regarding the etiology of such is not competent and is not afforded probative value.  See e.g., Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011).

On the other hand, weighing against the claim, the February 2024 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not the disability was due to the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  Essentially, the probative evidence does not show that the Veteran's liver cirrhosis or liver cancer were related to his active military service or that a chronic disability was incurred in service.  His service treatment records are silent for pertinent documentation, and no abnormalities were found on his service separation examination.  Indeed, the evidence reflects that the cirrhosis of the liver and liver cancer were not shown until decades after service discharge.

As such, the Veteran's claim for service connection for liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis fails.  The Veteran's diagnosed disorder cannot be attributed to his active service.  The Federal Circuit has made clear that "a Veteran seeking disability benefits must establish... the existence of a disability [and] a connection between the Veteran's service and the disability."  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  This has not been demonstrated.

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis is related to his TERA exposure during active-duty service.

In conclusion, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply as the evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal."  Accordingly, service connection for residuals of liver transplant with a history of hepatocellular carcinoma status-post liver transplant claimed as liver cancer and cirrhosis is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Dismissal

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD, Tinnitus and COPD is dismissed

In March 2024 the Veteran filed an NOD, electing the Direct Review docket for several decisions, to include a January 2020 decision denying service connection for PTSD and tinnitus, and a November 2014 decision denying service connection for COPD.  See March 27, 2024, Notice of Disagreement.  

The Board may dismiss the appeal due to non-jurisdictional reasons, such as a procedural defect, where the claimant did not substantially comply with proper claims processing rules.  See Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024) (stating VA can require a claimant to fill out a particular form and can dismiss nonconforming or untimely filings, but a failure to follow claims processing rules does not affect the Board's jurisdiction); see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333 (2021) (the Board may not dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction but may consider dismissing it for other non-jurisdictional reasons such as a procedural defect).

In essence, the Veteran has attempted to challenge the prior denial of service connection for COPD by rating decision issued in 2014, under the legacy system, and PTSD and tinnitus by rating decision issued in 2020 under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, which became effective February 19, 2019.  

Under the AMA framework, for legacy claims for which a veteran received notification of decision prior to the February 19, 2019, the AMA framework applies where: (1) the claimant with a legacy appeal elects to opt-in to the modernized review system on or after November 1, 2017, as part of a program authorized by the Secretary pursuant to Section 4 of Public Law 115-55 ; or; (2) a claimant with a legacy appeal elects to opt-in to the modernized review system, following issuance, on or after the effective date of the modernized system, of a VA SOC or Supplemental Statement of the Case (SSOC), by filing for a review option under the new system in accordance with § 3.2500 on a form prescribed by the Secretary within the time allowed for filing a substantive appeal under 38 C.F.R. § 19.52(b) and other applicable provisions in Part 19 of this chapter.

Governing law and regulation for legacy claims provide claimants with one year in which to contest a denial decision.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.200, 20.302 (2015).  Although the legal procedures and the form for filing an NOD have been amended since 2015, the one-year time period has remained in force.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203 (2019).

Generally, an NOD must be filed within one year of the date of notification of a decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.  Here, the NOD was filed more than one year after the 2014 rating decision denying service connection for COPD, and more than a year after the 2020 rating decision denying service connection for PTSD and tinnitus.  See January 22, 2020, Notification Letter and November 5, 2014, Rating Decision.  A request for extension of the one-year period for filing an NOD was not received.  Additionally, there was not an opt-in of the claim for service connection for COPD into the AMA system.

In this case there is a clear procedural defect for claims processing rules because the VA Form 10182 NOD was not timely as to the 2014 legacy or 2020 AMA decisions for which an appeal is sought.  As such, because the Board finds that the March 2024 NOD was not timely filed as to these claims, it was procedurally defective, and the appeal for entitlement to service connection for PTSD, tinnitus, and COPD is dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand.  However, based on a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to allow the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran is notified that under the modernized appeal system, remands do not automatically return to the Board for additional adjudication.  Should the AOJ deny the claim in whole or in part and the Veteran wishes to continue his appeal before the Board, the Veteran must file an appropriate NOD (VA Form 10182) within the applicable appeal period after the AOJ's readjudication of the claim.

Service Connection

In addition to the laws discussed above regarding service connection on a direct basis, the Board notes that in order to prevail under a theory of secondary service connection, there must be: (1) evidence of a current disorder; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and, (3) medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disorder.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

1. Service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded.

In April 2023 the Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder.  See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).  He reported that the condition was documented during service, and due to an event.  Id.  

The first element of service connection is satisfied in that there is a favorable finding of a diagnosis of a current disability, namely, major depressive disorder as found in the May 2023 VA examination report.  See Rating Decision.  

VA treatment records show that the Veteran reported witnessing traumatic events such as two aircraft crashes while in service, and that these caused restless sleep discussed in combination with depressed feelings.  See Palo Alto VA Medical Center treatment records received July 20, 2023 in CAPRI.

The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition of depression was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by in-service injury, event or illness.  See May 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  

As noted, the Veteran reported in-service stressors of witnessing at least two plane crashes, one of an A6 blowing up over the USS Enterprise and the other crash occurring near the USS Carl Vinson, prior to the rating decision on appeal, yet there has not yet been an attempt to verify these incidents.  See also VA 21-00781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD received October 2019.

It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ to not attempt to verify these reported stressors, such that remand is necessary to attempt to verify them.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

2. Service connection for plantar fasciitis claimed as left foot pain is remanded; and,

3. Service connection for disability characterized by right foot pain is remanded.

The Veteran has noted that he was awarded for one ankle and questioned why not the other for his left foot and right foot.  See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  Indeed, the right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is service connected, and the Veteran appears to raise a secondary service-connection claim.

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was evaluated and treated for a left foot contusion in 1982.  See STR-Medical.  Service treatment records show that the Veteran experienced right foot swelling in June 1977.  See STR-Medical.

Treatment records show that the Veteran walked on the lateral border of his inverted foot, especially on the right foot and toes.  See Palo Alto VA Medical Center treatment records received December 27, 2023, in CAPRI.  Further the Veteran had an ataxic gait pattern with his right foot hitting his left foot during the swing phase, a narrow base, and no LOD.  Id.  

VA treatment records show the Veteran reported discomfort walking, getting in and out of a car, with his balance described as off, such that he used a cane on uneven surfaces (referencing leg length discrepancy), and was referred to podiatry for a shoe lift.  See Martinez VA Medical Center treatment records received December 28, 2023, in CAPRI.

A February 2024 VA examination was provided to the Veteran, and the examiner indicated that it was less likely the diagnosed plantar fasciitis was due to service as there was a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between his current foot condition and military service.  See February 28, 2024, VA Examination Medical Opinion DBQ.  The Veteran reported that he experienced a contusion on his left foot when an engine fell on it in 1982, and he had intermittent pain since the injury, evident on weight bearing, with no flare ups or functional loss.  See February 28, 2024, VA Examination Foot Conditions, Including Flatfoot (Pes Planus) DBQ.  The examiner commented that he did not have treatment for a foot condition until more than thirty years after service, and without chronicity, a post-service event or illness was the more likely etiology.  See February 28, 2024, VA Examination Medical Opinion DBQ.  

Here, the Board finds the VA opinion is inconsistent in that the Veteran reported chronicity in that he indicated he had intermittent pain since the injury, and yet the examiner's negative nexus reasoning relied on a lack of chronicity due to lack of treatment.  The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report that he experienced foot pain since service.  Further, the medical evidence of record has shown an ataxic gait, and the right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is service connected, such that a secondary opinion should have been sought.  

As such, another VA opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the right and left pain is necessary and should also include consideration of secondary service connection.  As such, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

4. Service connection for disability characterized by left ankle pain is remanded.

The Veteran has noted that he was awarded for one ankle and questioned why not the other for his left ankle.  See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  Indeed, the right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is service connected, and the Veteran appears to raise a secondary service-connection claim.

October 2023 imaging showed mild degenerative changes to both ankles.  See El Protal Imaging at Los Banos.

Medical treatment notes indicate that the Veteran had an ataxic gait, used a cane if he needed to walk a lot, and had experienced falls and a twisted ankle (unclear which ankle).  See Palo Alto VA Medical Center treatment records received December 27, 2023.  As noted, the Veteran reported discomfort walking, getting in and out of a car, with his balance described as off, such that he used a cane on uneven surfaces (referencing leg length discrepancy), and was referred to podiatry for a shoe lift.  See Martinez VA Medical Center treatment records received December 28, 2023, in CAPRI.

A December 2023 VA examination for the right lateral collateral ligament sprain, chronic, recurrent, also included the Veteran's reports that his left ankle ached, just not as badly.  See VA Examination Ankle Conditions DBQ.  A December 2023 nexus opinion directly associated bilateral ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain, chronic, recurrent with in-service activities, such as reported carrying heavy hoses and long hours of standing.  See VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner, however, then submitted a February 1, 2024, addendum opinion stating that for the claimed condition of bilateral ankle pain the diagnosis was right ankle pain, and the left ankle had been negative for pain on the day of the examination.  See Exam Addendum.  The examiner then provided a positive nexus only for the right ankle, without discussion of the left ankle.  

The Board finds that this opinion with addendum is inadequate, where the examiner based finding no diagnosis on the left ankle on the absence of pain on the day of examination.  Essentially, the opinion was conclusory.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  The Board must remand for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain an adequate VA examination.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

5. Service connection for neck/upper back (cervical spine) musculoskeletal condition is remanded.

The Veteran has reported that he carried heavy cables (approximately 75 pounds) across flight decks and carried equipment up and down stairs and ladders on-board ship, suggesting that this led to his neck condition.  See August 8, 2023, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; see VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's intervertebral disc syndrome with degenerative arthritis (claimed as low back pain and condition) is service connected.  

The Board notes that the AOJ denied service connection for the neck finding that there was no disability.  See Rating Decision-Narrative.  

VA treatment records however show mild asymmetry of the right level 2 compared to the left level two of the neck.  See Palo Alto VA Medical Center treatment records received December 27, 2023, in CAPRI.  Further, neck pain was consistently listed in the medical history.  See Palo Alto VA Medical Center treatment records received December 28, 2023 in CAPRI.  He was at one time treated with Tramadol, Tylenol and Oxycodone for neck and back pain at a nine on a scale of ten.  Id.  Imaging in 2014 showed mid and lower cervical spine, ventrolateral spurring most prominent at C5-6.  Id.  X-ray showed mild signs of arthritis.  Id.  In 2013 the record showed cervicalgia.  As such, it appears that there are symptoms involving the neck, and an opinion regarding the nature and etiology of any cervical spine disability is necessary.  

A medical examination is necessary when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing an in-service event, injury, or disease, and (3) an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient medical evidence of record for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Accordingly, here, where there was evidence of symptomatology of the cervical spine, and competent reports of in-service activities that may have resulted in disability, as well as service connection for a closely related and possibly connected low back disorder, the low threshold of McLendon was met.  Remand to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and provide the Veteran with a VA examination is necessary.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. With respect to the Veteran's claim for major depressive disorder, attempt to verify the Veteran's claimed stressors by contacting the appropriate government repositories.  The Veteran's claimed stressors include:

(a)	an A6 blowing up over the USS Enterprise, and 

(b)	a plane crash occurring near the USS Carl Vinson.

2. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations with appropriate examiners to address the nature and etiology of his claimed disabilities of the: (a) left ankle, (b) left foot pain, (c) right foot pain, and (d) cervical spine.

The examiner should obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology.

A.	The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that each of the Veteran's disabilities (a)-(d) 

(i)	Was incurred in service or is related to an in-service injury, event or disease, to include carrying heavy cables across flight decks, and equipment up and down stairs and ladders on-board ship,

B.	The examiner should also opine whether (a) left ankle, (b) left foot pain, (c) right foot pain was at least as likely as not

(i)	caused by right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain, or

(ii)	 underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated) by right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.

C.	 cervical spine was at least as likely as not

(i)	caused by or intervertebral disc syndrome with degenerative arthritis (claimed as low back pain and condition)

(ii)	 underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated) by intervertebral disc syndrome with degenerative arthritis (claimed as low back pain and condition)

For all opinions A.-C. the examiner must provide a complete rationale, including consideration of the Veteran's lay statements.  The examiner is instructed to consider:  

The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean within the realm of medical possibility.  Rather, it means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.

The term "incremental increase" in disability means additional impairment of earning capacity.  Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability.  Moreover, any incremental increase in disability need not be permanent.

Any opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized.  If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided.

The physician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.

?

The examiner is also reminded that noting that a condition did not manifest in service as the sole basis for forming a negative nexus opinion, without additional explanation, will not be adequate.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Barner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.