Citation Nr: A25031701
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240617-448137
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claims of entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure, an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, a left knee disorder, and a right knee disorder; to this extent, the appeal is granted.

Entitlement to an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A final December 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision dismissed the claims of service connection for high blood pressure, an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, a left knee disorder, and a right knee disorder; the evidence associated with the claims file subsequent to that final decision is not previously of record and tends to prove or disprove the claims.

2. There is persuasive evidence that the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disorder related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for migraines have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501(a).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2013 to March 2017.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision for the issues on appeal; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, Appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.302.

1. New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claims of entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure, an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, a left knee disorder, and a right knee disorder.

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidenced is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d)).  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1)).

In December 2021, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure and insomnia on the basis that there are no current diagnosed disorders; an acquired psychiatric disorder on the basis that the diagnosis of specified trauma and stressor related disorder does not rise to the level of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and evidence does not reflect a stressor; and left and right knee disorders on the basis that there is no nexus between service and the current disorders.  The evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 decision included service treatment records, VA treatment records, and VA examinations.  Subsequent to the December 2021 rating decision, the Veteran filed an October 2023 supplemental claim for entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure, an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, a left knee disorder, and a right knee disorder.

The evidence received since the final December 2021 decision includes a private and VA treatment records reflecting blood pressure readings; depression and anxiety symptomology; prescription medication for anxiety, depression, and insomnia; and a notation of knee problems.  See, e.g., July 2022 and October 2022 VA Treatment Records; January 2022 Private Medical Records. 

This evidence is new as it was not before the agency decision makers at the time of the December 2021 rating decision, and it is relevant as it provides additional diagnoses and symptomology related to the relevant issues.  Therefore, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been received, and the criteria to reopen the Veteran's claim of service connection for high blood pressure, an acquired psychiatric disorder, insomnia, a left knee disorder, and a right knee disorder are met.

2. Entitlement to an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Service connection will be granted if the Veteran has a disability resulting from personal injury or disease incurred in the line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury or disease incurred in the line of duty during active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To establish service connection, the evidence must show competent evidence of (1) a present disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A claimant bears the evidentiary burden to establish entitlement to the benefit sought.  See Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287-88 (2009).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The benefit of the doubt applies when the evidence for and against is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal," but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

A September 2021 VA examiner determined the Veteran has a diagnosis of "other specified trauma and stressor related disorder."  The examiner indicated that the diagnosis does not meet the full criteria for PTSD but did indicate that it accounted for the Veteran's anxiety and depression.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that anxiety began after his deployment during service.  The examiner opined that the diagnosis is at least as likely as not related to service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's anxiety reportedly began while working to intercept missiles during service, and his current symptomology indicates that the "current symptomology indicates that his response to the stressor events and circumstances involve a psychological and/or physiological state of fear and helplessness."  Notably, the Veteran's DD Form 214 indicates he was a Patriot missile operator and maintainer, supporting the examiner's opinion regarding missile intercept work.

In this case, the September 2021 VA examiner's diagnosis and opinion provides persuasive evidence that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is etiologically related to his service.  Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under AMA, the Board must remand issues to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

As discussed above, the Board has found that the claim warrants readjudication based on the submission of new and relevant evidence in the form of new blood pressure readings.  See, e.g., October 2022 VA Treatment Records.  However, the AOJ rating decision on appeal did not find that new and relevant evidence was received and declined to readjudicate the claim on the merits.  The Veteran has a procedural right to have one review of his appeal by the Secretary under 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); Hickson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 394, 399 (2010).  As the AOJ has not yet adjudicated the claim based on the merits, to include the new and relevant evidence, remand is required.

The Board is unaware of any legal authority to support the idea that Hickson does not apply to the AMA because Hickson was based on 38 U.S.C. § 7104, which was not amended by the AMA.  Thus, a remand for readjudication on the merits is necessary as the Veteran has a procedural right to have one review of his appeal by the Secretary under 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a), and the AMA amendments do not specifically revoke that right.

2. Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is remanded.

During the September 2021 VA examination, the examiner noted chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder.  However, VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran takes medication for insomnia.  See, e.g., October 2022 VA Treatment Records.  

Notably, however, the AOJ has conceded a diagnosis of insomnia.  See February 2024 Rating Decision.  The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine if his diagnosed insomnia is separate from his acquired psychiatric disorder symptomology.  Based on the evidence available as of the February 2024 rating decision, the low standards for obtaining examination and/or opinion have been triggered. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Finally, on August 10, 2022, the President of the United States signed into law the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  38 U.S.C. § 1168 requires a medical nexus opinion and examination for claimed disabilities with a possible nexus to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  Here, the Veteran has submitted a claim for compensation, demonstrated a current disability, and the AOJ has conceded that the Veteran participated in TERA.  There is insufficient evidence to grant the claim.  

The sub-regulatory guidance defines four exceptions to the requirement to obtain a TERA examination and medical opinion: physical trauma, mental disorders, disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide agent exposure, and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure (to include due to post-service events). VBA Letter 20-22-10, 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).  These exceptions do not apply in this case.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee is remanded.

The AOJ has conceded a qualifying event, injury, or disease during service for both knees and current diagnoses of left and right knee strain.

Service treatment records reflect that the Veteran injured his knees during basic training and had joint pain in both knees.  See, e.g., May 2013, June 2013, and January 2017 Service Treatment Records.  

A September 2021 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left and right knee strains and determined they are less likely than not related to service because medical records reflect a gap in treatment between service and the VA examination.  During the examination, the Veteran reported his bilateral knee pain began during service and has worsened since that time.

Notably, the September 2021 VA examination did not include any diagnostic testing.  Prior to the VA examination, an October 2021 report of general information indicates that the Veteran requested the diagnostic imaging be rescheduled for November.  The claims file does not reflect that any diagnostic testing was rescheduled or completed.

The absence of diagnostic testing prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  A remand is needed to obtain an additional VA examination that includes diagnostic testing of both knees and an additional VA medical opinion based on the diagnostic testing.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Adjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure on the merits.

2. Develop the claim of entitlement to service connection for insomnia pursuant to the TERA criteria.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether his insomnia is etiologically related to service.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a) Is the Veteran's diagnosis of insomnia separate from the chronic sleep impairment related to his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder?  The examiner should note that the Veteran's diagnosis of insomnia has been conceded.

(b) If the answer to (a) is yes, is there a nearly 50 percent probability or greater that the diagnosed insomnia is related to his conceded in-service qualifying event, injury, or disease?

A comprehensive rationale must be furnished for all opinions expressed.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether any diagnosed left and right knee disorders etiologically related to service.  Diagnostic testing should be completed as part of the examination.  The examiner shoulder note that an in-service qualifying event, injury, or disease and a current diagnosis of knee strain has been conceded for both knees, and should answer the following questions:

(a) Does the Veteran have any diagnosed left and/or right knee disorders in addition to left and right knee strain? 

(b) Is there a nearly 50 percent probability or greater that any diagnosed left and/or right knee disorders, including knee strain, are related to his conceded in-service qualifying event, injury, or disease?

The examiner should note that the Veteran has reported that left and right knee pain began during service and has worsened since that time.

A comprehensive rationale must be furnished for all opinions expressed. 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Howell, Chad

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.