Citation Nr: A25031800
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240515-442526
DATE: April 7, 2025

An initial evaluation of 50 percent for migraines is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is in approximate equipoise whether the Veteran's migraine headaches manifested in prostrating attacks averaging between four and eight times a month over several months, demonstrating severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial evaluation of 50 percent for migraines have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.10, 4.41, 4.124(a), Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 1995 to May 1999.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings." See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss each piece of evidence submitted by the Veteran or on his behalf. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (2000). Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claims and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claims. See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

The Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). After consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran's migraines are rated according to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124(a), DC 8100. Pursuant to DC 8100, a 10 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. A 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once per month over the last several months; and a 50 percent rating is warranted for very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124(a). These rating criteria are considered successive, meaning that a Veteran cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. See Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018). This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Id. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings to describe the nature and severity of headaches; however, it is not defined by regulation. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (33rd ed. 2020), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, or lack of vitality. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). The term "completely," as used before "prostrating" in the 50 percent criteria, means that the Veteran must be rendered entirely powerless and that "productive of severe economic inadaptability" means either producing or capable of producing severe economic inadaptability. Id. at 253.

The term "very frequent" is not defined in the regulation, but looking at the rating criteria as a whole, and noting that a 10 percent rating is warranted when prostrating attacks occur one in two months over the last several months, and a 30 percent rating is warranted when prostrating attacks occur once a month over the last several months, the 50 percent rating must logically require a frequency of prostrating attacks proportionally greater than once per month.

Migraine Evaluation and Severe Economic Inadaptability

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to a 50 percent evaluation for her service-connected migraines because the high frequency of her incapacitating episodes causes severe economic inadaptability. See April 2024 Statement in Support of Claim.

The record reflects very frequent, prostrating attacks of migraine pain when the ameliorative effects of medication are absent. The evidence is in approximate equipoise that when the ameliorative effects of medication are absent, the migraines demonstrated prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. Thus, a 50 percent rating, is warranted for the service-connected migraines.

This appeal arises from an initial grant of service connection for migraines in a May 2024 rating decision. The initial grant was at 30 percent disabling for prostrating attacks of migraine pain occurring approximately once a month.

The Veteran submitted an April 2024 Statement in Support of Claim in which she provided, "When I have migrain[e]s I experience severe pain that feels like throbbing and pounding, on both sides of my head. It last[s] anywhere from 20 minutes to 2 hours. This happens once to twice a week on average. I take Aleve or Motrin (OTC) to help with the pain. I try to take 15-20 minute rest periods during the day, particularly when my headaches occur. During this time I close my eyes and try to be in as [quiet] a place as possible. My migrain[e]s do [a]ffect me, causing me to move very slow or having to lay down. Any kind of physical activity definitely makes it worse. It does affect my work, as I'm less productive due to frequent breaks."

The Veteran was provided a May 2024 VA examination, at which examiner B.F. determined a diagnosis of migraines. The Veteran reported severe pain on both sides of head, throbbing and pounding with sensitivity to light and sound, which she treats with over-the-counter Aleve and Motrin. The Veteran reported that she was unable to focus or concentrate on complex tasks. The examiner noted pulsating or throbbing head pain on both sides of the head, that worsens with physical activity, and results in sensitivity to light and sound. The examiner indicated that the migraines usually last from one to two days, and that the characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain occur once a month.

In considering whether the Veteran is entitled to the higher 50 percent rating for her migraines, the question breaks down into three parts. First, what is the frequency of the prostrating attacks. Second, what is the duration of the prostrating attacks. Third, is there an economic impact that represents severe economic inadaptability.

The Veteran reported in her statement that she experiences severe migraine headache pain one to two times per week, while the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran only experienced prostrating attacks once a month. The Veteran reported in her statement that she takes over the counter Aleve and Motrin, and rests in a quiet place with her eyes closed for 15 to 20 minutes, lying down if she is able. The Veteran reported that the severe portion of her headache pain lasts from 20 minutes to two hours. Compare that with the examiner's report that the prostrating attacks last from one to two days. The Board considers both the lay statements and the examination competent and credible and assigns both pieces of evidence weight.

On its face, at least, it would appear that the Veteran is not entitled to a 50 percent rating because while the frequency of the prostrating attacks as reported by the Veteran meet the higher criteria, there isn't an indication in the record of an economic impact that represents severe economic inadaptability. There are neither statements indicating lost income or missed work, nor record of treatment for the migraines. However, there is an important consideration that comes into play when evaluating the severity of the Veteran's migraine headaches: the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

The VA examiner found that the Veteran had prostrating attacks of migraine pain about once a month for between one and two days. The Board notes that it is unclear whether the May 2024 VA examiner considered the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication, when evaluating the frequency and severity of the Veteran's migraine headaches. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). However, when considering the Veteran's reported frequency, that is once or twice a week, and the fact that the Veteran regularly takes medication to ameliorate the effects of the severe migraine pain, with the examiner's assertion that the prostrating attacks last for one to two days, if the Veteran did experience prostrating attacks lasting for one to two days once or twice a week, that would meet the criteria for migraines of a duration and frequency that would cause severe economic inadaptability.

Whether each of those headaches would last a day or two with the severity of a prostrating attack if the effects of the medication were removed, is a speculative question, which is not answered in evidence. However, certainty is not the standard, the standard is that when the evidence is in relative equipoise the benefit of the doubt is in the favor of the Veteran.

The Veteran is competent to report readily observable symptoms. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Veteran's statement does not report that she experiences average headaches once to twice a week. The Veteran's statement is specific, she experiences the severe pain like throbbing and pounding on both sides of her head once or twice a week, the kind of pain that is indicative of her diagnosed migraine headaches. The Veteran reports that the medication she takes helps with the pain and reports a duration of prostrating pain far less than the examiner does, that is from 20 minutes to two hours, rather than from one to two days. If the Veteran took her medication shortly after the pain started, there would be a delay in the effect of the medication, which is consistent with the Veteran's reported duration of severe pain being from 20 minutes to two hours.

The Board has weighed the evidence of the VA examination with the Veteran's statements about the frequency and severity of her headaches. Given the competent and credible statements, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraines cause a level of exhaustion, powerlessness, or lack of vitality that represented a "prostrating" attack between four and eight times a month. While it is not certain whether these prostrating attacks would last for only two hours, for four hours, for eight hours, for a day, or for two days when the effects of medication are removed, it is reasonable to assume that there will be a certain degree of variation, and that they would last far longer without the medication than with the medication, as the Veteran has credibly asserted medication "helps with the pain."

Based on the foregoing, the evidence is in approximate equipoise whether the migraine headaches caused severe economic inadaptability when removing the ameliorative effects of medication, the Board finds that a 50 percent initial rating for the Veteran's headaches is warranted.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence is in approximate balance regarding the nature and severity of the Veteran's migraine headaches. Thus, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board further finds that an initial rating of 50 percent for headaches, is warranted and the claim is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.16(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

JOHN Z. JONES

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Schneider, Joan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.