Citation Nr: A25031712
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240602-444815
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

A compensable rating for facial myokymia of the right eye is denied.

REMANDED

A compensable rating for residuals of a fractured orbit of the right eye.

Entitlement to a 10 percent evaluation based upon multiple, noncompensable, service-connected disabilities.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's facial myokymia has been characterized by subjective complaints of a pulsing lower eyelid and double vision; objective findings include no decrease in visual acuity, visual impairment, or incapacitating episodes attributable to the disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a compensable rating for facial myokymia of the right eye have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 20.202, 20.301, 3.102, 3.321, 4.3, 4.7, 4.79, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6026 (2024).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from February 1984 to May 1984.  His appeal stems from a December 2023 rating decision in which the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection for facial myokymia of the right eye, and residuals of a fractured orbit of the right eye, assigned noncompensable ratings for the two disabilities, and denied entitlement to a 10 percent rating based on multiple non-compensable disabilities pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.324.  

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 and requested a Higher-Level Review (HLR) of the December 2023 rating decision in accordance with the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  However, in a May 2024 HLR rating decision, a Decision Review Officer (DRO) continued the previously assigned non-compensable ratings for the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and again denied entitlement to a 10 percent rating based on multiple non-compensable disabilities pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.324.  In issuing the May 2024 HLR rating decision, the DRO considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2023 rating decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the initial December 2023 rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f).

Subsequently in June 2024, the Veteran appealed the DRO's decision to the Board via a Form 10182 and requested that his claim be reviewed on the Direct Review Docket.  Therefore, in assessing the Veteran's claims, the Board has not considered evidence during the period after the AOJ issued the initial December 2023 rating decision that was subjected to an HLR.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.801.  Rather, it has only considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.301.  

Turning to the relevant laws and regulations, disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.

The Veteran's facial myokymia of the right eye has been rated under DC 6026 for optic neuropathy.  The Board will consider all relevant diagnostic codes; however, diseases of the eye are generally evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye ("General Rating Formula") unless otherwise indicated.  Under the General Rating Formula, a compensable rating will be warranted for a disease of the eye with documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for the condition over the 12 months prior to examination.  

In an August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported an eye condition that began after being hit in the eye with a log while in training.  He explained that he underwent a maxilla bone floor repair and that since that time, his lower eyelid felt like it was pulsing.  He said that the condition occurred randomly and was visible in the mirror but went away on its own.  He also said that he had double vision in his right eye.  

Upon examination, the August 2023 examiner diagnosed facial myokymia of the right eye.  However, the examiner observed that the Veteran had no decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment attributable to the condition.  Moreover, the examiner found no incapacitating episodes attributable to the disorder and no documented medical visits to treat his facial myokymia.  Finally, the examiner noted that his eye condition did not impact his ability to work.  The evidence of record at the time of the initial December 2023 rating decision did not otherwise document incapacitating episodes or medical visits to treat his facial myokymia.  

Based on the above, a compensable rating for facial myokymia of the right eye is not warranted.  In this regard, the Veteran described symptoms of facial myokymia that included a pulsing lower eyelid and double vision.  However, the examiner found that the condition was not accompanied by a decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment.  Moreover, the examiner did not note incapacitating episodes attributable to the condition or any documented medical visits for treatment over the 12 months prior to examination.  As such, the medical evidence does not support a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected facial myokymia of the right eye, the appeal is denied to this extent, and there is no doubt to be otherwise warranted.  

The Board has considered the lay statements submitted by the Veteran regarding the status of his service-connected facial myokymia of the right eye throughout the period on appeal.  He is competent to report symptoms and describe his observations because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses.  However, he is not competent to offer an opinion as to the specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic code for his current service-connected disorder due to the medical complexity of the matters involved.

Such competent evidence has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined the Veteran during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations.  The medical findings (as provided in the VA examination and medical opinions) directly address the criteria under which his service-connected disorder is evaluated.

As the clinicians have the medical expertise to render medical opinions regarding the degree of impairment caused by his facial myokymia of the right eye, the Board attaches greater probative weight to the clinical findings than to the lay statements and testimony that have been submitted.  Based on the above, the appeal as to a compensable rating for facial myokymia of the right eye is regrettably denied.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings for the Veteran's service-connected disorder.  However, at no time during the period on appeal has his condition warranted higher schedular ratings than those assigned.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record for the Board's consideration.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for residuals of a fractured orbit in the right eye and his claim of entitlement to a 10 percent rating for multiple non-compensable disabilities pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.324 have been remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the issuance of the May 2024 HLR rating decision on appeal.

In this regard, in an August 2023 VA examination the Veteran reported that he underwent repair of the maxilla bone floor after being hit in the eye with a log while in service.  He said that it felt like a nerve below the right eye was firing.  

Subsequently in November 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA medical opinion on his facial myokymia of the right eye.  The opinion noted that condition was caused by a fractured orbit in service.  It implied that following his in-service fracture, he developed neuropathy of the right oculomotor nerve (3rd cranial nerve).   

The AOJ granted service connection for residuals of a fractured orbit in the right eye and assigned a noncompensable rating pursuant to DC 5296 for loss of part of the skull without a brain hernia.  However, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for the residuals of his fractured orbit, to specifically include right oculomotor nerve neuropathy.  In light of the Veteran's August 2023 lay statement and the findings implied in the November 2023 VA medical opinion, there was sufficient evidence at the time of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal to warrant an examination to more fully evaluate the claim.  Therefore, a remand is necessary to afford him a VA examination of the residuals of the fractured orbit in his right eye, to specifically include right oculomotor nerve neuropathy.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) (discussing the circumstances under which VA's duty to afford a medical examination to a veteran is triggered).  

With respect to his claim of entitlement to a 10 percent rating for multiple non-compensable disabilities, the claim of an increased rating for the residuals of the fractured orbit in his right eye may have an impact on his claim of entitlement to a 10 percent rating pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.324.  Therefore, the claim of entitlement to a 10 percent rating based on multiple non-compensable disabilities is inextricably intertwined with the pending claim of a compensable rating for residuals of a fractured orbit in the right eye and will also be remanded.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that issues are inextricably intertwined and must be considered together when a decision concerning one could have a significant impact on the other).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the residuals of the fractured orbit in the Veteran's right eye, to specifically include right oculomotor nerve neuropathy.  The claims file and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician and such a review should be indicated in the body of the examination report.  The clinician should perform all tests and studies necessary to ascertain the current severity of the disability.  In performing the examination, the clinician should specifically consider the statement made in the August 2023 VA examination in which the Veteran said that the nerve below his right eye felt like it was firing.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. Detailed, complete, and thorough reasonings and rationales for all opinions should be provided with regards to the Veteran's claim.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Spigelman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.