Citation Nr: A25031096
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240926-500536
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1965 to March 1967.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, most recently addressed in a February 2018 rating decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received, and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran uploaded evidence and statements with his September 2024 VA Form 10182. However, this only includes argument and duplicative evidence previously in the file and/or irrelevant to the issues in this appeal. Therefore, there is no concern pursuant to Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).

The Board also notes that the October 2024 docketing letter reflected that the appeal was docketed on the evidence submission docket. As it is clear from the Veteran's September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran chose the direct review docket; therefore, in February 2025, the Board sent the Veteran a letter that noted the correct docket. Further, the February 2025 Board letter also inquired as to whether the Veteran wanted to waive any remaining time to select a different Board review option. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). The time to switch dockets has now expired. As such, the Board will proceed with issuing this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. See September 2024 VA Form 10182. The Veteran contends that the various items he re-submitted with his September 2024 VA Form 10182 support service connection. See September 2024 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran also noted that he was stationed in Vietnam, was a Seabee, and was exposed to Agent Orange. Id. 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made favorable findings of diagnosed disabilities and of an in-service toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). Further, while the AOJ inconsistently said that there was, and was not, new and relevant evidence, the AOJ readjudicated the claims, which the Board finds is an implied finding of new and relevant evidence. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In a June 2017 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran said that he was seen for leg cramps and foot issues several times in service but that "peripheral neuropathy was not a diagnosis in 1962-1965." According to the Veteran, he reported cramps in his legs and pain in his feet and was consistently evaluated for a skin condition and given that as a diagnosis. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran contends that a doctor told him that his peripheral neuropathy was due to Agent Orange exposure. See September 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility; September 2024 Statement in Support of Claim; November 2023 VA peripheral nerves examination. However, a review of the September 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility document shows that there is no rationale in support of such a conclusion. However, as discussed below, the VA examiner should have addressed this treatment record in the VA examiner's rationales, and the Board will instruct the next VA examiner to do so. 

In November 2023, VA obtained a peripheral nerves examination, and in February 2024, obtained medical opinions for each lower extremity. The Board finds the February 2024 medical opinions inadequate for the following reasons. The opinions are conclusory; rely solely on whether there is a presumption, finding that the onset was more than a year after exposure, but doing so without addressing all the pertinent evidence; attribute the issues to a Vitamin B12 deficiency without providing an "at least as likely as not" opinion; do not address the Veteran's contentions in the June 2017 statement about how his peripheral neuropathy may be related to his in-service skin and cramping issues; do not address the VA skin examinations; do not address the various service treatment records (STR) notations regarding skin and/or cramping; and do not address the significance of the September 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility treatment record that mentions that the Veteran's neuropathy could be due to Agent Orange exposure. 

The AOJ's reliance on inadequate opinions constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to address the Veteran's claim for service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician.

The record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician.

Following a review of the entire record, to include any lay statements, the clinician should address the following: 

(a)	When did the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy onset/manifest to a degree of 10 percent?

(b)	Is the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including any in-service skin or cramping issues or related to the Veteran's in-service TERA? 

When providing an opinion about exposure to toxins, the examiner must consider:

(1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and

(2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

In providing the above opinions, the examiner must review and address the relevancy, or lack thereof, of the following: August 1967 VA skin examination; June 2017 Statement in Support of Claim; August 2017 VA skin examination; September 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (noting neuropathy is commonly seen with Agent Orange exposure); January 29, 2024 TERA memo (Agent Orange and asbestos); and any and all relevant STRs to include, but not limited to, any and all references in the STRs regarding the Veteran's lower extremities including the Veteran's skin issues, rashes, eczema, athlete's foot, blisters, dermatitis, pain, and cramping. 

As noted above, the examiner must review the claims file (including this remand) and note that such review was conducted. The examiner should review all medical evidence and all lay evidence.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. The VA clinician is advised that medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the VA clinician must so indicate and discuss why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veljic, Erica A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.