Citation Nr: A25031298
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-468337
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity nerve disorder, to include as secondary to a cervical spine disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2019 to January 2020.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA 10182 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran was not afforded VA examinations in connection with her claim for service connection for a cervical spine disorder and right upper extremity nerve disorder.  In a June 2023 statement, she reported having neck pain during training and being instructed to do stretches and use the RICE method.  She believes that her neck problems are related to having a "soldier's neck," as her neck has an abnormal curve, which she did not have prior to her military service.  The Veteran has indicated that she treats her neck problems with over-the-counter medication.  The Board notes that pain, in the absence of a presently diagnosed condition can cause functional impairment, which may qualify as a disability for VA purposes. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Therefore, the Board finds that an examination and medical opinion were needed to determine the nature and etiology of any cervical spine disorder that may be present. 

The Board also finds that the claim for service connection for a right upper nerve disorder is inextricably intertwined with the issue of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder.  In this regard, the Veteran has reported that she has shooting pain that runs from her neck down her shoulder, and she has claimed that she has a right upper extremity nerve disorder is secondary to a cervical spine disorder. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (noting that two issues are inextricably intertwined when the adjudication of one issue could have significant impact on the other issue); Gurley v. Peake, 528 F.3d 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (remand of inextricably intertwined claims was warranted for reasons of judicial economy even in absence of administrative error).

In addition, an October 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with minimal levoconvex scoliosis of the lumbar spine and mild L5-S1 degenerative disc disease, but he opined that the disorders were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  He noted that the Veteran's service treatment records did not document any back condition.  He also stated that her degenerative disc disease was likely caused by her scoliosis, which is a genetic/developmental issue.  However, it appears that the examiner relied on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise, as the Veteran's service treatment records do document low back pain in June 2019 and October 2019. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based upon an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Moreover, he did not specify whether the Veteran had a congenital defect or disease or the corresponding legal standards.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

An October 2023 VA examiner also found that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of a right hip disorder, relying on a finding of no documented treatment since 2019, negative x-rays, and a current physical examination.  However, he did not address the Veteran's reports that she has right hip pain that she manages on her own.  As previously noted, pain, in the absence of a presently diagnosed condition can cause functional impairment, which may qualify as a disability for VA purposes. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional examination and medical opinion were needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any disorder, to include levoconvex scoliosis and degenerative disc disease, that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

For each diagnosis identified, the examiner should indicate whether the disorder is a congenital defect or disease.

To assist the examiner, for VA adjudication purposes, "disease" generally refers to a condition considered capable of improving or deteriorating, whereas "defect" generally refers to a condition not considered capable of improving or deteriorating. (As an example, VA considers sickle cell anemia as congenital "disease" for VA purposes, whereas refractive error is considered a congenital "defect.")

For any congenital defect, the examiner should state whether there is any evidence of superimposed disease or injury during the Veteran's active duty service.

For any congenital disease, the examiner should state whether the disorder clearly and unmistakably preexisted the Veteran's active duty service. (The term "clear and unmistakable" means that the evidence is undebatable.)

If so, the examiner should state whether there was an increase in the severity of the disorder during the Veteran's active service.  If the evidence reflects such an increase, the examiner should indicate whether the increase was due to the natural progression of the disorder or whether it represented a chronic worsening of the underlying pathology.

If the examiner determines that any current back disorder is not a congenital defect or did not clearly and unmistakably preexist the Veteran's active duty service, he or she should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder manifested in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's military service, to include any injury or symptomatology therein.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should specifically consider the June 2019 and October 2019 service treatment records documenting low back pain.  He or she should also consider the Veteran's June 2023 statement wherein she reported that she continued to have back pain since service, which impacts her ability to perform activities. 

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

2.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any right hip disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should identify any current right hip disorders.  If the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis associated with her reported symptoms, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.  The examiner should also state whether there is any functional impairment caused by any reported pain.  Evidence of pain alone that causes functional impairment, even without a specific diagnosis or identifiable disease, may constitute a disability for VA purposes.

For each diagnosis identified or any functional impairment caused by pain, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any injury, duties, or symptomatology therein.

The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's service treatment records documenting right hip pain in July 2019, August 2019, and October 2019.  He or she should also consider the Veteran's June 2023 statement in which she reported that she injured her right hip during physical training exercises in service and that she has had issues with pain, limited movement, cracking, and popping, which affects her ability to walk and perform activities to this day.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

3.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any neck disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

For each diagnosis identified or any functional impairment caused by pain, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any injury, duties, or symptomatology therein.

The examiner should specifically consider the Veteran's June 2023 statement in which she reported having a "soldier's neck" that is characterized as stabbing, aching, and a pins-and-needles sensation that impacts her activities of daily living.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

4.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any right upper extremity nerve disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a right upper extremity nerve disorder that is causally or etiologically related to her military service, to include any injury, duties, or symptomatology therein.

The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's June 2023 statement in which she reported having shooting pain that runs down her shoulder and flare-ups several times a month, which impacts her ability to perform activities.

The examiner should also opine as to whether any right upper extremity nerve disorder is caused by or resulted from a cervical spine disorder.  He or she should also address whether any right upper extremity nerve disorder would have been less severe but-for a cervical spine disorder, to include any worsening of functionality.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deverter, Rebecca M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.