Citation Nr: A25031912
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430326
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's back disability was manifested by a limitation of motion to, at worse, 50 degrees forward flexion, with no evidence of ankylosis, or any incapacitating episodes.

2. The Veteran's left and right knee disabilities are manifest by flexion limited to 90 degrees and normal (zero degrees) extension, with no instability or ankylosis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5024-5260.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5024-5260.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 2012 to November 2014.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction.  In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182), requesting Direct review of the issues.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at that the time of the rating decision on appeal.

Increased Rating 

Disability ratings are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptomology with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's entire history is considered when assigning disability ratings.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  A review of the recorded history of a disability is necessary to make an accurate rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.41.  The regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings where such current findings are adequate and relevant to the rating issue.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994); Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31 (1999).  The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the claim on appeal.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When assessing the severity of musculoskeletal disabilities that are at least partly rated on the basis of limitation of motion, VA must also consider the extent that the Veteran may have additional functional impairment above and beyond the limitation of motion objectively demonstrated, such as during times when his symptoms are most prevalent ("flare-ups") due to the extent of his pain (and painful motion), weakness, premature or excess fatigability, and incoordination-assuming these factors are not already contemplated by the governing rating criteria.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-7 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59.  Pain, may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, [or] endurance."  Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 38 (2011).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability 

The Veteran service-connected back disability has been rated under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.

DC 5237 is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula).  Under the General Rating Formula, at 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, a 20 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the cervical spine to 15 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.

A 40 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire (thoracolumbar and cervical) spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula.

These ratings are made with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease.  Id.

The General Rating Formula also provides further guidance in rating diseases or injuries of the spine.  Note (1) provides that any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, should be rated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  Id.

Note (2) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the cervical spine is 0 to 45 degrees, extension is 0 to 45 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are 0 to 45 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are 0 to 80 degrees.  Normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is 0 to 90 degrees, extension is 0 to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are 0 to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are 0 to 30 degrees.  The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation.  The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.

Note (3) provides that, in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2).  Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted.

Note (4) provides that each range of motion measurement is to be rounded to the nearest five degrees.

Note (5) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching.  Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

Note (6) directs to separately evaluate disability of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which will be rated as a single disability.  Id.

The Veteran claims that his current 20 percent rating for his service-connected back disability does not fully contemplate the severity of his disability during that period.  The Board, however, finds that a close review of the relevant medical records, to include a VA examination for the back, does not show a back disability severe enough to warrant the next higher rating based on the appropriate DC. Therefore, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the finding of a more severe back disability the Veteran's claim for increased rating must be denied.

The evidence of record includes contemporaneous VA treatment records and a February 2023 VA examination.  A close review of the copious amounts of VA treatment records, contemporaneous to the claimed period show no evidence that the Veteran's back disability was ever limited to 30 degrees of flexion, or less, or had any indications of ankylosis.  To this end, while the Veteran was noted to suffer from both pain and flare-ups, treatment records, showed no evidence of any incapacitating episodes so severe as to require prescribed bed rest by a medical professional as due to intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS).

In February 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his back, which assessed the nature and severity of his disability.  During the examination, the Veteran was noted to report "stabbing" pain in the back, to which he alleviates by wearing a back brace, and taking over the counter ibuprofen.  The Veteran reported daily flare-ups, which resulted in increased pain and decreased range of motion.  Upon physical examination, the Veteran demonstrated forward flexion to 75 degrees, and 200 degrees of combined motion.  Repeated physical testing revealed decreased range of motion to forward flexion to 70 degrees, and 170 degrees of combined motion; estimates of repeat motion over time reveals reduced range of motion to 60 degrees of flexion, and 135 degrees of combined motion.  Further, considering flare-ups, the VA examiner estimated that limitation of flexion would further decrease to 50 degrees, and combined range of motion to only 100 degrees.  No evidence of ankylosis was noted, and no evidence of any incapacitating episodes due to IVDS was documented by the examiner.  The Veteran was ultimately diagnosed with lumbosacral strain.

After consideration of the pertinent evidence of record, the Board concludes that a disability rating greater than 20 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's back disability.  The evidence has not demonstrated flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, to warrant a rating in excess of 20 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula.  The Veteran has demonstrated forward flexion limited at worse to 50 degrees, with no indication of any incapacitating episodes and/or ankylosis.

The Board also notes that the medical records also show no evidence that the Veteran had a diagnosis of ankylosis of any kind (favorable or unfavorable) during the relevant time period.  Ankylosis is the "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, surgical procedure." Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992) (citing SAUNDERS ENCYCLOPEDIA AND DICTIONARY OF MEDICINE, NURSING AND ALLIED HEALTH at 68 (4th ed. 1987)).  Here, ankylosis has not been diagnosed or identified by X-ray evidence of record; indeed, X-ray diagnostics during the claims period, to explicitly include during the VA examinations, revealed no evidence of either ankylosis.  Therefore, as the Veteran has also been able to extend, flex, and flex and rotate laterally, the Board must find that ankylosis is not shown.

Finally, consideration has been given to an increased rating for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability under other potentially applicable DCs.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1995).  Spine conditions may also be rated under DC 5243 for IVDS.  The criteria for IVDS rates the disability according to the number of "incapacitating episodes" suffered per year. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.  An "incapacitating episode" is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.  Id. at Note (1).  However, the VA examiner of record, and treatment Notes from throughout the claims period, do not indicate that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability was productive of any incapacitating episodes due to IVDS.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, DC 5243.

Therefore, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the finding of objective evidence of the Veteran's back disability limited to at least 30 degrees of flexion, and/or evidence of a diagnosis of ankylosis, the Board must find that the Veteran's claim for a higher rating, must be denied.  In making this determination, the Board considered any functional loss caused due to flare-ups of pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5237; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  The evidence does not show that the spine disability more nearly approximates the criteria for a higher rating for any period on appeal.  To the extent that the Veteran has reported experiencing flare-ups and functional impairment, this impairment has been contemplated by the VA examiner when reporting his range of motion, as described above, and considered by the Board in evaluating the claim.  Here, even considering the Veteran's flare-up and/or repeat motion over time, the Veteran's condition only showed limitation of flexion of 50 degrees.  Therefore, such pain is contemplated by the current 20 percent rating and is not of such severity that it could be characterized as flexion of 30 degrees or less or ankylosis, as is required for a higher rating.  As such, a higher rating based on pain and functional loss is not warranted.  See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011); Deluca, 8 Vet. App. at 206-07.

As the weight of the probative evidence is against the claim for an increased rating, there is no doubt to be resolved, and a rating greater than 20 percent for the Veteran's back disability is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 54-56 (1990).

2. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability 

3. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability 

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for his service-connected left and right knee disabilities.  He is currently in receipt of a 10 percent evaluation under diagnostic code (DC) 5260 for both knee disorders based on limitation of flexion.

Disabilities of the knee are generally rated under Diagnostic Codes 5256 through 5263.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  A minimum compensable rating is warranted for musculoskeletal disabilities involving actual painful, unstable, or malaligned joints or periarticular regions regardless of whether the diagnostic code under which the disability was evaluated was predicated on range of motion measurements. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Lichtenfels v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 484, 488 (1991).

Under Diagnostic 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5260, if flexion of the knee is limited to 45 degrees a 10 percent rating is in order.  If flexion of the knee is limited to 30 degrees a 20 percent rating is in order.  If flexion of the knee is limited to 15 degrees a 30 percent rating is in order.

Under Diagnostic Code 5261, if extension of the knee is limited to 10 degrees a 10 percent rating is in order.  If extension of the knee is limited to 15 degrees a 20 percent rating is in order.  If extension of the knee is limited to 20 degrees a 30 percent rating is in order.  If extension of the knee is limited to 30 degrees a 40 percent rating is in order.  If extension of the knee is limited to 45 degrees a 50 percent rating is in order.

Diagnostic Code 5256 provides ratings for ankylosis of the knee.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for a favorable angle in full extension or in slight flexion between 0 and 10 degrees.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for a knee in flexion between 10 and 20 degrees.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for a knee in flexion between 20 and 45 degrees.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for a knee in extremely unfavorable flexion, at an angle of 45 degrees or more.

Generally, to warrant a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5257, the evidence must show recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for slight symptoms, a 20 percent rating for moderate symptoms, and a 30 percent rating for severe symptoms.  Objective medical evidence is not required to establish lateral knee instability, so objective medical evidence cannot be categorically found nor probative than lay evidence.  See English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347, 352-53 (2018).

With respect to Diagnostic Code 5257, the amended regulation provides that recurrent subluxation or lateral instability with unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability that requires a prescription by a medical provider for both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation warrants a 30 percent rating.  A sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability that requires a medical provider prescribed brace or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and either a medical provider prescribed assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation warrants a 20 percent rating.  A sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation warrants a 10 percent rating.

Diagnostic Code 5262 relate to impairment of the tibia and fibula and are not relevant to this case.

Diagnostic Code 5258 provides that a 20 percent rating is warranted for dislocated semilunar cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint.

Diagnostic Code 5259 provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage.

Evaluations for knee impairment can also be assigned based on ankylosis or genu recurvatum under Diagnostic Code 5263.

During the claims period, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2023 for his knee disabilities. The VA examiner noted a review of the Veteran's claims file and medical history, with an in-person examination of the Veteran's knees.  The Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral knee strain with tendonitis.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported increased pain and functional loss in both knees, to include flare-ups, which he noted to open a few times a week and precipitated by prolonged walking and standing.  Upon examination, with regards to both right and left knees, the Veteran was noted to be limited to 120 degrees of flexion and normal (zero degrees) extension.  Pain was noted upon active/passive motion and caused functional loss.  Repeat motion testing revealed no additional loss of range of motion; however, the examiner noted that repeat motion over time, and during flare-ups, range of motion was slightly decreased to 90 degrees of flexion, with normal (zero degree) extension. 

No instability was noted, with no evidence of recurrent subluxation/persistent instability, or patellar instability.  Examination also revealed no tibial/fibular impairment or meniscal conditions but noted the requirement of a knee brace for the right knee.  The examiner also noted no evidence of ankylosis or muscle atrophy for either knee.  With regards to functional loss, the examiner ostensibly noted that the Veteran's increased pain upon prolonged walking and/or standing.

The Board has reviewed the VA/private treatment record contemporaneous with the claims period.  A close review of such records reveals treatment notes for the Veteran's various disabilities but provides little to no objective evidence with regards to severity of his bilateral knees.  To this end, while there is evidence of complaints of pain and functional loss, no objective testing with regards to range of motion is demonstrated by such evidence.  Also, the records do not demonstrate any additional diagnoses regarding either knee, to include diagnosis for ankylosis or instability of for either knee.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's left and/or right knee disability with limitation of flexion/extension is not warranted. As noted above, a higher rating under the appropriate DC for limitation of motion requires a limitation of flexion of 30 degrees or less, or limitation of extension of 15 degrees, or more. The objective evidence of record, as noted in the objective testing result of the VA examination noted above, shows that the Veteran's left and right knee disabilities is only manifested by 90 degrees of flexion and normal extension, even considering repeat motion over time, and flare-ups. Therefore, the criteria for limitation of motion, for the next higher rating in excess of 10 percent, has not been met by the Veteran's disability for either knee. Accordingly, a higher rating is not warranted.

The Board has considered other diagnostic codes for both the Veteran's knee disabilities, to include ankylosis (DC 5256), instability (DC 5257), disabilities involving cartilage, semilunar, dislocated, with frequent episodes of locking, pain, and effusion into the joint (DC 5258), removal of the semilunar cartilage (DC 5259), malunion/nonunion of the tibia and fibula (DC 5262), and genu recurvatum (DC 5263), and found them to not apply to either knee disability picture for the period on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DCs 5256, 5257, 5258, 5259, 5260, 5261, 5262, 5263.  The Veteran is compensated for these impairments under his current ratings for limitation of flexion, which includes consideration of a higher rating due to function impairment caused by pain.  Thus, in this case and based on the facts here, assigning a separate rating under DC 5259 would constitute pyramiding.  See Walleman v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 294 (2002); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107, 118 (2017).

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements regarding his knee symptoms.  He is certainly competent to report symptoms such as pain, and the Board notes that a certain degree of functional limitation has been confirmed by the VA examination.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994).  To this end, however, the Board notes that while the Veteran is competent to speak to pain, he has not shown to possess the requisite medical education, training, and/or experience to speak to the objective criteria with regards to limitation of motion or any additional diagnose for either knee, to include instability and ankylosis.  Here, the 2023 VA examination, described above, already tested for the objective criteria related to his knees, to include ankylosis, limitation of motion, and instability.  The Board finds that such evidence, which is based on both the medical expertise of the VA examiner, and an examination of the Veteran, to be more probative in establishing whether a separate disability rating is required for instability.

With respect to Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017), which held that when flare-ups are an indicated part of a claimant's service-connected disability, VA examiners are obligated to elicit information concerning the "severity, frequency, duration, or functional loss manifestations" of flare-ups.  In the Veteran's February 2023 VA examination report, the VA examiner noted the Veteran's flare-ups are severe.  As to Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 168-70 (2017), the examination report reflects that there was objective evidence of pain on passive range of motion and the range of motion was the same on active and passive; the Board reiterates that these symptoms have been considered in the award under DC 5260-5261.

In sum, there is no probative evidence that additional ratings are warranted nor for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for either knee disability for limitation of flexion, for the reasons discussed above.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  Therefore, as the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for either knee must be denied. 

Signature on the next page 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ziheng Zhu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.