Citation Nr: A25031300
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240514-440097
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran was not in receipt of and was not entitled to receive compensation for service-connected disability that was rated totally disabling for 10 continuous years immediately preceding his death; he was not rated totally disabling continuously from the date of separation from service and for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding his death; and he was not a former prisoner of war (POW). 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to DIC benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1318; 38 C.F.R. § 3.22.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1979 to February 1982. Unfortunately, the Veteran passed away in August 2022. The appellant is his surviving spouse.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that it has interpreted the appellant's Board review request as expressing disagreement with the denial of DIC under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 and the denial of service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, only, based on the arguments put forth by the Veteran's representative, and because the Veteran did not have wartime service (required for survivor's pension) and no claims or appeals were pending at the time of his death. See August 4, 2023 Notification Letter (addressing entitlement to survivor's pension and accrued benefits in addition to the above-listed issues). 

Entitlement to Dependency and Indemnity Compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

VA death benefits may be paid to a deceased veteran's surviving spouse in the same manner as if the veteran's death was service connected. 38 U.S.C. § 1318(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.22(a). A deceased veteran is one who died not as the result of his or her own willful misconduct and who was in receipt of or entitled to receive compensation at the time of death for a service-connected disability continuously rated totally disabling for a period of 10 or more years immediately preceding death; the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than five years from the date of the veteran's discharge or other release from active duty; or, the veteran was a former POW, and the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding death. 38 U.S.C. § 1318(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.22(a). The total evaluation may be either schedular or based on a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU). 38 C.F.R. § 3.22(c).

Here, although the Veteran was in receipt of a TDIU, it was not continuously in effect from the date of discharge or for a period of at least 10 years immediately preceding his death. Also, the record does not establish that the Veteran was a former POW.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the criteria for DIC benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 have not been met, and the claim must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is remanded.

The appellant seeks service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, which she asserts is etiologically related to the Veteran's conceded in-service exposure to asbestos.

The Veteran's medical records and death certificate show a diagnosis of lung cancer. The death certificate also shows that condition was a primary cause of the Veteran's death. 

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Here, in July 2023, a VA clinician rendered a negative nexus opinion as to a connection between the Veteran's in-service asbestos exposure and the cause of his death. Specifically, the clinician opined that the Veteran's diagnosis of lung cancer was likely caused by smoking, citing it as a common risk factor for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). At the same time, the clinician also listed asbestos exposure as a known risk factor for NSCLC without providing rationale as to why smoking was the more likely cause of the Veteran's lung cancer than asbestos exposure. Further, the clinician explained that the Veteran's lung cancer was caused by NSCLC as opposed to mesothelioma without explaining how this fact made smoking a more likely etiology than the Veteran's TERA. 

The AOJ erred in failing to obtain an addendum opinion prior to adjudicating the appellant's claim, in light of the above-described deficiencies in the opinion of record, and this pre-decisional error must be corrected on remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's lung cancer. After reviewing the claims file, the clinician is asked to address the following:

Please provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lung cancer was incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness, to include his conceded exposure to asbestos. Please explain why or why not. 

If you find another risk factor is the more likely cause of this Veteran's lung cancer, please explain why you conclude the other risk factor is the more likely cause, addressing whether it is more likely than not that the Veteran's lung cancer would have developed in the absence of his conceded asbestos exposure, in light of his other risk factors. 

A complete rationale for the opinions should be provided, citing to specific evidence of record, as necessary. If you cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, please provide an explanation as to why this is so and state whether there is additional evidence that would permit the opinion to be provided.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Barbato

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.