Citation Nr: A25031893
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240606-518419
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1990 to October 1990 and in May 1992. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the VA Form 10182 was not timely; however, the Board found that good cause had been submitted for an extension of time to submit the VA Form 10182, and therefore will proceed to adjudicate the claims. See March 2025 BVA Letter. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has PTSD due to military sexual trauma (MST). 

The Veteran submitted a statement about the assault in July 2021 and detailed his symptoms in November 2021 correspondence. He stated that his medical records have his mental health history. Additionally, an April 2021 VA Memo noted a marker of MST in the Veteran's file. 

Under the AMA, only pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including those related to examinations, are eligible for remand. Here, the Board finds that VA did not fulfill its duty to assist the Veteran for the reasons detailed below.

The AOJ denied this claim based, in part, on the absence of evidence that the claimed condition exists. The AOJ scheduled the Veteran for an examination prior to denying this claim, but because the Veteran was incarcerated, the examination was cancelled.

The Veteran was incarcerated during parts of the appeal period; in June 2024 correspondence, the Veteran indicated that his release date was December 11, 2024. 

VA has special procedures for handling the scheduling of VA examinations for incarcerated veterans. The duty to assist incarcerated veterans requires VA to tailor its assistance to meet the circumstances of confinement as incarcerated veterans are entitled to the same care and consideration given to their fellow non-incarcerated veterans. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). This includes (1) attempting to arrange transportation of the claimant to a VA facility for examination; (2) contacting the correctional facility and having their medical personnel conduct an examination according to VA examination work sheets; or (3) sending a VA or fee-basis examiner to the correctional facility to conduct the examination. Bolton v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 185, 191 (1995).

VA twice attempted to schedule the Veteran for an examination for his PTSD. The first time, the examination was cancelled due to a high rate of COVID-19 cases. See February 2022 C&P Exam. The second time, the examination was cancelled because the facility was unresponsive to outreach for scheduling. See August 2022 Exam Request. 

There is no evidence that any attempt has been made to contact the facility where the Veteran is incarcerated and have their medical personnel conduct an examination according to VA examination work sheets, or to send a VA or fee-basis examiner to the prison to conduct the examination, or to arrange transportation of the Veteran to a VA facility, specifically to determine whether the Veteran has PTSD that was caused by or incurred in service. 

It is also unclear whether the Veteran is currently still incarcerated, as he stated his release date was December 11, 2024. A March 2022 Bureau of Prisons document confirms his projected release date as December 11, 2024. 

Accordingly, remand is determined to afford the Veteran an examination for his claimed PTSD. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has bilateral hearing loss that was caused by or incurred in service.  

VA has conceded that the Veteran had military noise exposure. See August 2022 Rating Decision. 

VA twice attempted to schedule the Veteran for an examination for his claimed bilateral hearing loss. The first time, the examination was cancelled due to a high rate of COVID-19 cases. See February 2022 C&P Exam. The second time, the examination was cancelled because the facility did not have OSHA compliant audio equipment needed and could not transport the Veteran. See July 2022 Exam Request. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's projected release date from incarceration was December 11, 2024. As that date has passed, the Veteran may no longer be incarcerated, and therefore may be able to access a facility with OSHA compliant audio equipment. 

Accordingly, remand is determined to afford the Veteran an examination for his claimed bilateral hearing loss. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Request the Veteran to identify and provide VA with authorization to obtain private medical records he referenced in his November 2021 correspondence. In the alternative, advise the Veteran that he may obtain and submit the records.

2. Then, schedule the Veteran for a VA mental health conditions examination with the appropriate medical professional to determine the nature and etiology of any currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. Provide the claims file, including a copy of this remand, for the examiner to review.

A complete history of symptoms must be elicited from the Veteran.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide a fully articulated opinion addressing the following:

(a)	Specifically state whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD. If a diagnosis of PTSD is not deemed appropriate, explain why the Veteran's reported symptoms do not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD.

(b)	For any acquired physicatric disorder identified, other than PTSD, opine as to whether such disorder is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that it was incurred in or otherwise due to the Veteran's service.

(c) If a diagnosis of PTSD is warranted, opine as to whether the PTSD is related to any verified in-service stressor.

In offering these opinions, the examiner must acknowledge and discuss the Veteran's reported in-service stressor of being sexually assaulted while in the barracks. 

Then, the examiner should determine:

(i) Whether the Veteran displayed any behavior in service that would be consistent with his claim of being assaulted during his active service?

(ii) If the examiner is of the opinion that a personal assault(s) occurred, the examiner should then state whether the Veteran has PTSD as a result of such assault(s) in service?

The Board notes that examples of such behavior includes but are not limited to: a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes.

In providing the opinions, the examiner must consider the April 2021 Memorandum finding a marker of MST - the Veteran's discharge as unsatisfactory - in the Veteran's military personnel records. 

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner must adequately consider and address the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's service treatment records, service personnel records, and lay contentions.

Note that the lack of documented treatment in service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination as to whether a nexus exists between the claimed disorder and service.

The examiner must set forth a complete rationale for any conclusions reached, citing to medical principles, literature, and evidence in the Veteran's claims file as necessary. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a new VA examination and opinion from an appropriately qualified examiner regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral hearing loss disability. Provide the claims file, including a copy of this remand, for the examiner to review.

The examiner must address whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) due to his active-duty service, to include his conceded in-service noise exposure.

The examiner should note that the absence of documented hearing loss during service cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. 

The examiner must set forth a complete rationale for any conclusions reached, citing to medical principles, literature, and evidence in the Veteran's claims file as necessary. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

4. If the RO is unable to obtain the requested examinations due to the Veteran's incarceration, document, in detail, all of the steps taken in attempting to do so. The RO is reminded that if the Veteran is incarcerated, the RO must follow the special duty to assist requirements for incarcerated veterans as outlined in VA's Adjudication Manual. Bolton v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 185, 191 (1995). 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Eisenberg

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.