Citation Nr: A25031139
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-433851
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received warranting readjudication of the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Evidence received is new and relevant because it was not in the record prior to the previous adjudication and tends to prove or disprove matters at issue with the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1978 to July 1981 and from March 1982 to May 1983.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for bilateral hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

New and Relevant Evidence

Except as otherwise provided, a claimant or his or her authorized representative who disagrees with a prior VA decision may file a supplemental claim, regardless of whether the claim is pending or has become finally adjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (d), 3.2501. New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1). Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim, including evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. Id. 

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim. For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (b). Upon receipt of a substantially complete supplemental claim, VA's duty to assist in the gathering of evidence is triggered and includes any such assistance that may help secure new and relevant evidence to complete the supplemental claim application. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(c).

The Veteran's claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss was previously denied in a November 2022 rating decision.  

New and relevant evidence for service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The January 2024 lay statement constitute new and relevant evidence as they were not part of the record that was previously before the AOJ and are relevant because they tend to prove or disprove a matter at issue with this claim, namely whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was caused by his active-duty service. The Board notes that the Veteran submitted a lay statement in January 2024, after the November 2022 VA examination within which he contends that he participated in live fire exercises while at Fort Irving and attended and graduated from Air Assault school in 1982, where he was exposed to additional hazardous noise which affected his hearing. Thus, readjudication of the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

a) The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2022. This examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral hearing loss for VA purposes pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 and stated that the Veteran has conceded in-service noise exposure. However, the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion rationalizing that "there is no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance in 1978 to separation in 1982, which is objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty from conceded noise." This examiner based his rationale on the absence of objective evidence of permanent auditory damage upon separation, but did not address the possibility of delayed onset hearing loss as a result of in-service acoustic trauma. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993). Thus, the VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

b) The record indicates the Veteran is in receipt of Social Security Administration disability benefits according to a letter submitted by the Veteran in July 2023.  It does not appear the RO made any efforts to obtain relevant records from the Social Security Administration. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  On remand, the RO should make appropriate efforts to obtain such records and associate them with the claims file.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW

1. Obtain any outstanding Social Security Administration records and associate them with the claims file.

2. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. 

Following a review of the evidence of record, and with consideration of the Veteran's statements, please provide the following:

Determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is related to his military service, to include as due to the Veteran's conceded in-service noise exposure.  Why or why not?

In rendering an opinion, the examiner must consider and address whether the Veteran has delayed onset hearing loss as a result of his noise exposure in service.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. 

The examiner is informed by the Board that chronicity is not required to find a nexus to service or for service connection to be granted.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

3. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Gillespie, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.