Citation Nr: A25031901
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-410302
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity nerve disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1983 to March 1988.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 and requested higher level review of a January 2022 rating decision.  In February 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the higher-level review decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2022 decision.  

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 in January 2024 and elected direct review.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board could not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

A January 2018 VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of a right upper extremity peripheral nerve condition or peripheral neuropathy.  He also opined that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of a right upper extremity nerve disorder, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, that was incurred in service or caused by or related to a forearm injury in June 1985.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was treated with surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome in the right upper extremity in May 2017.  However, he did not address whether the disorder resolved following the surgery.  He also did not reconcile his finding of no current disorder with the Veteran's report of moderate constant pain and mild intermittent pain, numbness, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias in his right upper extremity at the time of the examination or the positive Phalen's test for the right median nerve.  

A May 2021 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a cervical disc disorder with radiculopathy, but she opined that the disorder was less likely than not incurred in    or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  She found that the Veteran's right forearm injury in service was acute only and noted that a follow-up appointment clarified that there was decreased sensation just distal to wound in longitudinal position with no involvement to the wrist or hand and that there was good sensation to hand and digits.  Thus, the examiner concluded that the right upper nerve condition, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is more likely due to overuse of wrist or even possible cervical spine involvement.  However, the Board notes that the examiner had only diagnosed left carpal tunnel syndrome, despite noting prior surgery for right carpal tunnel syndrome and findings consistent with such a diagnosis.  Moreover, she did not explain the significance of the facts on which she relied.

For these reasons, the Board finds that an additional examination and medical opinion were needed.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted private medical opinions from C.M.B. (initials used to protect privacy), a physician's assistant, and from G.U. (initials used to protect privacy), a nurse practitioner.  Both healthcare providers stated the Veteran's carpal tunnel syndrome is at least as likely as not due to or related to his in-service right forearm laceration, but they did not address any other right upper extremity nerve disorder, such as radiculopathy.  Moreover, they both relied on the Veteran's statements regarding ongoing symptoms since service, but did not account for his report in a December 2012 email to a VA provider that he only had the problem for a few months. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based upon an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the etiology of any right upper extremity nerve disorder that may be present, to include any radiculopathy or carpal tunnel syndrome.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion. 

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a right upper extremity nerve disorder that is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any injury, symptomatology, or duties therein. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider the June 1985 service treatment records regarding the Veteran's right forearm laceration; the September 1985 and June 1986 service treatment records regarding the Veteran's complaints of neck pain; the July 1986 cervical spine radiographic report; the Veteran's March 2021 and January 2022 statements; a December 2012 VA treatment record containing an email from the Veteran stating that  he believed he had carpal tunnel syndrome, and that he had this problem for a few months.

If the examiner finds the lack of documentation of ongoing symptomatology in service and the years thereafter to be significant, he or she should explain the significance and discuss how any current disorder generally presents or develops.  The examiner should also discuss whether the subsequent development of the disorder could have been caused or related to an injury or duties in service even if the disorder did not necessarily manifest therein.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Windsor, Debra A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.