Citation Nr: A25031267
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-419463
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

The claim for restoration of a 50 percent rating for service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is dismissed.

An initial rating in excess of 50 percent for the period prior to June 30, 2021 for an acquired psychiatric disorder is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On March 7, 2024, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Board received notification from the Veteran's attorney requesting withdrawal of the claim for "Continuation of 50% rating evaluation, effective from October 7, 2021, for service-connected disabilities characterized collectively as bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis." 

2. For the period prior to June 30, 2021, the symptoms and overall impairment caused by the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was not shown to have caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, or worse. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of the appeal for continuation of a 50 percent rating for service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. 

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for the period prior to June 30, 2021 for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38 C.F.R. §4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2001 to November 2001, from October 2003 to February 2005, from June 2009 to December 2013, and from December 2017 to September 2020. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and resubmit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The record demonstrates that the Veteran has been diagnosed with multiple psychiatric disorders during the course of the appeal. As such, the Board recharacterized his claim as shown above.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

1. The claim for continuation of a 50 percent rating for service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is dismissed.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38?U.S.C. §?7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38?C.F.R. §?20.205. Withdrawal may be made by the Veteran or by his authorized representative. Id. In the present case, the Veteran, through his representative, withdrew his appeal in writing and hence, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration. Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal, and it is dismissed. 

2. An initial rating in excess of 50 percent for the period prior to June 30, 2021 for an acquired psychiatric disorder is denied. 

The Veteran is service connected for an acquired psychiatric disorder. The Board notes the following, relevant procedural history. 

In November 2020, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. In a June 2021 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection, effective October 1, 2020, the day after the Veteran was discharged from active duty. 

On June 30, 2021, VA received an intent to file a claim (ITF) followed by a claim for service connection for insomnia as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder. In the May 2022 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ joined the Veteran's insomnia claim with his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder and increased his rating from 50 percent to 70 percent, effective June 30, 2021 (the date VA received his ITF). 

In the February 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran requested an effective date earlier than June 30, 2021 for his 70 percent rating. In an associated brief, his former attorney argued that the Veteran was entitled to an October 1, 2020 effective date for his 70 percent rating because the AOJ issued its decision based on an April 2021 VA examination report that was already part of the record when it initially granted the previous 50 percent rating. As such, the attorney argued that the same evidence should support an initial 70 percent rating. Having carefully reviewed the record, the Board interprets this request to mean the Veteran is seeking an initial 70 percent rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder. Therefore, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's appeal from one seeking an earlier effective date of an increased rating to one seeking an initial increased rating for the period prior to June 30, 2021 (as shown above). The period on appeal before the Board begins October 1, 2020. The Board will address the attorney's arguments below. 

For the period on appeal, the Veteran's disorder is rated under 38 C.F.R. 4.130, DC 9411, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. The provisions pertinent to this claim are as follows:

A 50 percent rating is assigned when a psychiatric disability causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when a psychiatric disability causes occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when a psychiatric disability causes total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Nevertheless, as all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that a veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio at 118. Accordingly, the Board has considered all of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms for purposes of assigning an appropriate rating.

The Board will now discuss the relevant evidence of record.

The Veteran attended an April 2021 VA examination at which he was diagnosed with PTSD. The examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology most closely aligned with causing occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity (this is consistent with a 50 percent rating).

Regarding his social life, the Veteran reported that he had been divorced from his previous wife and was currently living with his fiancé. He stated, "things are good, things are very great." He reported helping out around the household as much as he could without difficulty. His activities included watching television; he noted that he used to enjoy fishing and socializing, but he had lost interest. To elaborate, he stated that he interacted with friends by text, but he avoided seeing friends and would "make up excuses" not to go out. He noted that going places made him nervous. Also, he stated that his mistrust of others had prevented him from making new friends. Even more, he reported having no relationship with his relatives.

With respect to work, the Veteran reported that he had been employed as a police officer for eight years. He noted that he used to work "on the street dealing with people," but he would "constantly" overthink "everything" which led to slow decision-making. In fact, on one occasion, he reported that his failure to act fast led to one of his coworkers getting hurt. He was later reassigned to desk duty to reduce his interaction with the public; however, he noted that he still experienced issues with concentration which interfered with his clerical duties. When asked about his job performance, he noted that he had not received any negative performance reviews since he did not deal with the public. However, he reported missing work approximately 15 or 20 times in the last 12 months due to "being irritable...not wanting to be around anyone." He noted no significant conflicts or disciplinary actions at work, and he endorsed having friendly acquaintances.

The Veteran's PTSD symptoms were noted as follows: recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of an in-service traumatic event; recurrent distressing dreams related to the traumatic event; intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event; marked physiological reactions to cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event; avoidance; persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world; persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic event that lead to blame; persistent negative emotional state; markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response; problems with concentration; and sleep disturbance. Additional psychiatric symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting).

Regarding behavioral observations, the examiner noted that the Veteran arrived on time, and he was groomed and dressed appropriately. Also, he was alert, fully oriented, cooperative, engaged, and offered good eye contact. The Veteran's speech was noted as normal in rate, volume, tone, and rhythm, and there was no evidence of motor abnormalities, acute alterations in memory, or overt behavior consistent with hallucinations or delusions. Even more, there was no evidence of acute suicidal, assaultive, or homicidal ideation. Regarding thought, his processes were linear and goal-directed while his content was appropriate to topic of conversation. Finally, the examiner noted that the Veteran's affect was mildly constricted with no lability.

VA treatment records do not provide for any findings of greater significance than those found in the above VA examination. For example, suicide screens were negative.  In a December 2020, a Post 911 Case Management Screening the Veteran was found to be alert, oriented focused and receptive during the appointment. He reported living with his fiancé and working full time as a police officer. He also reported completing his Master's degree in digital forensics in May 2020.  The Veteran did not identify any social/psychosocial concerns during his assessment.  During a January 2021 optometry consult, a review of systems was negative for psychiatric concerns (depression, anxiety, or PTSD).

After a careful review of the Veteran's symptomology during the period on appeal, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not reflect occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms of suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, or duration. That is, symptoms consistent with a 70 percent rating. The Board acknowledges the examiner's notation that the Veteran experienced difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); however, the record does not suggest that this symptom was pervasive enough to warrant a 70 percent rating prior to June 30, 2021.  

With respect to the Veteran's former attorney's argument that his increased 70 percent rating was based on the same VA examination report as the initial 50 percent rating, this is simply inaccurate. The initial 50 percent rating, granted in the June 2021 rating decision, was based on the April 2021 VA examination report detailed above. The 70 percent rating, granted in the May 2022 rating decision, was based on a March 2022 VA examination report in which the examiner explicitly stated that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder had worsened since his prior examination. Said another way, the Veteran's staged ratings are based on separate reports which reflect dissimilar disability pictures. 

In sum, the Board finds that, given the severity, frequency and duration of the symptoms indicated above, the Veteran's overall psychiatric symptomatology was not shown to have resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas to meet the criteria for a 70 percent rating or total social and occupational impairment to meet the criteria for a 100 percent rating prior to June 20, 2021.  Accordingly, the claim for a rating in excess of 50 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder for the period prior to June 30, 2021 is denied. 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Graison-McBride, Kimberly F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.