Citation Nr: A25031569
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 210119-134482
DATE:  April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran has not suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot, is not blind, nor is permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance due to his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1968 to April 1969 and from February 1971 to September 1972.

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a December 2020 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need aid and attendance on the merits. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a January 2021 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, and electing the Hearing docket. The hearing before the Board was held on December 2, 2024. 

In a Hearing appeal under the Appeals Modernization Act, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the December 2020 decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran and/or the representative on or within 90 days from the date of the Veteran's hearing, which would have been on March 3, 2025. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the date of the Veteran's Board hearing or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the Veteran's Board hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. Following the hearing, no additional evidence has been submitted.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Special Monthly Compensation

Compensation at the aid and attendance rate is payable when the veteran, due to service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot, or is blind in both eyes, or is permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

Determinations as to the need for regular aid and attendance are factual and must be based upon the actual requirements for personal assistance from others. The following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: (1) inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) physical or mental incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions that a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance not that there is a constant need for aid and attendance.

The particular personal functions that the claimant is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the claimant be so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. "Bedridden" constitutes a condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that an individual remain in bed. The fact that a claimant has voluntarily taken to bed, or that a physician has prescribed bed rest for a lesser or greater portion of the day will not suffice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

In Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 224 (1996), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that eligibility for special monthly compensation by reason of regular need for aid and attendance requires that at least one of the factors set forth in VA regulation is met. In addition, determinations that the claimant is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance will not be based solely upon an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him or her to be in bed. They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others. Id.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance and/or housebound status

Following a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance.

In a private November 2020 VA Form 21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance, Dr. N. McAfee stated that the Veteran could not stand long enough to prepare his own meals. She wrote he needs assistance in bathing and tending to other hygiene needs, and he has difficulty getting into the bath. The Veteran is not legally blind, but Dr. McAfee stated that the Veteran requires nursing home care. Dr. McAfee's comments are unclear and appear to state that the Veteran would require nursing care if the Veteran's spouse were unable to provide assistance. In describing the Veteran's restrictions, she noted that the Veteran's shoulders are deteriorating, and his lower extremities are affected from diabetic neuropathy, which limits him. She noted that the Veteran requires assistance with self-care and leaves his home only for medical appointments. The Board notes that the form contains several responses from Dr. McAfee that appear to be incomplete or partial sentences. Dr. McAfee noted that the Veteran is diagnosed with sinusitis, bipolar disorder, type 2 diabetes, and although the final diagnosis is truncated, she was apparently also noting the Veteran's diabetic neuropathy. 

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran reported that his caretaker helps him shower, dress, get into and out of bed, use his wheelchair, and cooks his meals. When his caretaker is absent, the Veteran's spouse helps him with those activities. The Veteran testified that he needs to be served and fed his meals and dressed. He also noted that he's losing his eyesight, has headaches, manages his diabetes, has residuals from cancer, heart issues, a knee disability, and several problems from Agent Orange exposure during service. 

The evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran, due to his service-connected disability or disabilities, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot, or is blind in both eyes, or is permanently bedridden or, as most applicable in this circumstance, is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance. The Veteran's only service-connected disabilities are unspecified depressive disorder with features of anxious distress associated with sinusitis with headaches and sinusitis with headaches. However, both the November 2020 private VA Form 21-2680 and the December 2024 Board hearing testimony show that the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance is due to other medical conditions for which he is not service connected. Thus, the Board finds that the facts do not persuasively establish that the criteria that would entitle the Veteran to special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance have been met. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the grant of special monthly compensation. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Husain, Rahat

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.