Citation Nr: A25031239
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-453092
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Eligibility for benefits under VA's Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC).

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The first party to the matter is the Veteran, who served on active duty from February 1959 to February 1979.  The second party to the matter is his adult granddaughter, who is applying to be the Primary Family Caregiver. 

The case is on appeal from a decision of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the June 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), the appellants elected the Hearing docket.

A Board hearing was held in January 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Eligibility for benefits under VA's PCAFC.

The Veteran in this case has had a continuous combined service-connected disability of 100 percent since July 2023.  He applied for PCAFC benefits in April 2024, jointly with his granddaughter as the Primary Family Caregiver-applicant. 

This appeal is remanded because there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, remand is needed for an adequate medical decision.  

The Board particularly finds the June 2024 Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) medical review legally inadequate to support the decision made.  

As a general matter, a determination by VA about the "furnishing of assistance or support" under PCAFC shall be considered a medical decision, which is not within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1720G; Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  These issues turn on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC.  The CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding medical eligibility for PCAFC benefits.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46230 (July 31, 2020).

However, decisions as to eligibility under PCAFC are nonetheless subject to Board review.  See Beaudette, 93 F.4th at 1369.  Decisions not related to the "furnishing of assistance and support" are within the Board's jurisdiction.  Id.  The Board has the authority to determine the specific types of PCAFC eligibility decisions that fall within its jurisdictional authority to address.  Id.  To this end, the Board finds that it is within its jurisdictional authority to review the legal adequacy of all medical opinions related to the CEAT's decision regarding the "furnishing of assistance and support."  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992).  This includes the CEAT's medical opinion upon which the instant eligibility decision was based.  

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion."  The VA opinion need not discuss each piece of favorable evidence in the record.  Likewise, a VA opinion is not nonprobative simply because it does not "explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion."  Rather, the VA medical report "must be read as a whole" to determine the examiner's rationale.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-06 (2012).  

A non-exhaustive list of factors that, depending on the case, may be relevant considerations in determining the adequacy and probative value of a medical opinion include: (1) whether there was personal examination of the patient; (2) the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data; (3) whether the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two; (4) whether the opinion is clear and susceptible of only one meaning; (5) the expert's familiarity with pertinent medical history; (6) whether there is any inconsistency in the expert's statements; (7) whether the expert has provided a thorough and detailed opinion about an area within his or her expertise; (8) whether the expert has provided factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for his or her conclusion; (9) whether the expert relied on sufficient facts or data; (10) whether the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; (11) whether the opinion is the result of principles and methods reliably applied to facts; and (12) whether medical text evidence that a medical opinion relies on contains qualifying or contradictory aspects where the text is entered into the record, at least in part.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).

An unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context.  Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240 (2012).  In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

Here, the CEAT's review does not meet these requirements.  It found, "[the] Veteran or service member does not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an ADL and/or a need for supervision, protection or instruction."  It explained, "At this time medical records do not support that the Veteran requires in-person personal care services from another person for a minimum of six continuous months due to either an inability to perform any Activity of Daily Living or has an identified need for supervision, protection, or instruction."  It further reasoned, "The [V]eteran's chart is notable for various health concerns and mental health diagnoses.  However, these specific illness/injuries do not rise to the level of needing personal care services on a continuous basis to assist with ADLs or to provide the [V]eteran supervision, instruction, or protection."

The Board finds this CEAT opinion legally inadequate to support the decision made.  

First, to the extent it found he did not "have a need for supervision, protection or instruction," this is not the correct legal standard.  The question is whether he needed personal care services because of (i) an inability to perform one or more activities of daily living; (ii) a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; (iii) a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.  The June 2024 denial notification letter cited the correct legal standard.  However, the Board has no way to know if the CEAT's medical decision would have been different if it had applied the correct legal standard.  

Second, the CEAT did not account for all potentially favorable evidence of record bearing on whether the Veteran needed personal care services.  

First, a May 2024 Veteran Functional Assessment Instrument (VFAI) is potentially favorable.  With regard to the need for supervision or protection and/or regular or extensive instruction or supervision, the VFAI shows he needed to be encouraged to bathe and change his clothes.  He also needed assistance with medication management; his caregiver reviewed his medications with him and arranged them for him to take on a daily basis.  The VFAI found him at risk of self-neglect; his caregiver reported he needed supervision and encouragement with ADLs, with hygiene potentially compromising his health.  The VFAI noted the Veteran's report that he could identify his own needs, but his caregiver reported arranging for his health by scheduling doctor appointments and ensuring he makes it to his appointments.  

Also relevant is a May 2024 Veteran Assessment.  It adds, for example, that the Veteran last drove independently in 2014.  The caregiver reported concerns with driving and cooking, so they did not allow the Veteran to drive or cook.  He had run into things and gotten confused while driving in the past.  They elaborated that the caregiver had to coax him to bathe because he sometimes smelled like urine, and he would not wash his feet.  Also, the Veteran would not verbalize when something was wrong with his health, so she had to assess when an issue arose.  She also had to monitor his house alarm because they had received bills from the police department when the Veteran did not hear it and turn it off due to hearing loss.  

These facts appear to bear on whether the Veteran needed either supervision or protection or a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which his ability to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.  

When assessing personal care needs, VA will assess and document the support the Veteran or servicemember needs to maintain personal safety, if such needs exist, and the frequency with which he or she requires interventions by the caregiver, including the Veteran's functional ability as it relates to such things as medication management.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46241 (Jul. 31, 2020).  A need for supervision or protection and/or regular or extensive instruction or supervision may be predicted on an inability to complete ADLs.  See id. at 46235.  "If [the] requirement of hands-on, physical care is not met," regarding a need for assistance with ADLs, "a veteran or servicemember may still qualify under the definition of need for supervision, protection, or instruction, as that definition does not require hands-on, physical care."  85 id. at 46235.  

Here, it is not clear to the Board how the Veteran's ability to function in daily life would not be seriously impaired if his caregiver were not assisting him by supervising the extensive daily activities described in the VFAI.

Relatedly, the CEAT decision found that participation in the program was not in the Veteran's best interest, but again here failed to explain the medical basis for this conclusion.  It simply answered, "No" to this question.  The June 2024 denial notification letter states that the CEAT did not evaluate if participation in the program was in the Veteran's best interest.  

The "best interest" requirement is a medical determination within the AOJ's medical authority to address.  The Board does not have the competence to address such a medical question.  See, e.g., Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 273, 274-75 (2015).  However, the "best interest" question comes within the scope of the Board's legal determination regarding basic Veteran eligibility.  See 38 C.F.R. § 71.20(a)(4).  Because the AOJ did not make a determination on the best interest component, the Board cannot make the legal determination regarding eligibility.  See 38 C.F.R. § 71.15.  Hence, the CEAT's medical opinion is incomplete.

Simply put, the CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding eligibility for PCAFC benefits, but without an adequate supporting explanation, the Board has no way to know how or why the decision here was reached, to include what specific medical facts in this Veteran's case justified the denial.  Remand is needed for a legally adequate medical decision.  

This remand is required to correct a duty-to-assist error that occurred prior to the decision on appeal.  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a); see also 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(12).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from the CEAT as to:

(a.) Whether it is in the Veteran's best interest to participate in the PCAFC program, to include consideration, by a clinician, of whether participation in the program: 

i.	Significantly enhances the Veteran's ability to live safely in a home setting,

ii.	Supports the Veteran's potential progress in rehabilitation, if such potential exists, 

iii.	Increases the Veteran's, if such potential exists, and creates an environment that supports the health and well-being of the veteran or servicemember

(b.) Whether the Veteran requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following: 

i.	Dressing or undressing oneself; 

ii.	Bathing; 

iii.	Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable; 

iv.	Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); 

v.	Toileting or attending to toileting; 

vi.	Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 

vii.	Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.)

(c.) Whether the Veteran has a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or 

(d.) Whether the Veteran has a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.

In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Bosely, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.