Citation Nr: A25031411
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-442351
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the U.S. Marine Corps from March 2008 to January 2010.

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 38 C.F.R. § 19.2. The AMA or modernized review system applies to all claims, requests for reopening of finally adjudicated claims, and requests for revision based on clear and unmistakable error for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019, the effective date of the modernized review system. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) following a decision issued in December 2023 by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath. The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in May 2024 and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim seeking entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Shortness of Breath 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath which he describes as difficulty breathing at high temperature and high heart rate due to an event, injury, or exposure during service. See September 2023 claim. 

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in October 2023 and was notified of the appointment via text message and a letter. See October 2023 Veteran Contact History. 

An October 2023 scheduling notice documents the Veteran did not appear for an October 2023 examination to evaluate his shortness of breath. See Exam Request. 

The evidence of record does not indicate a reason for why the Veteran was unable to participate in the October 2023 examination.  

Here, the Board finds a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran an additional opportunity for examination. 

The Board notes that the "duty to assist is not always a one-way street," and the Veteran has an obligation to actively participate in the retrieving of any information pertinent to his claim. A veteran is expected to cooperate in the efforts to adjudicate the claim, and the failure to do so subjects him or her to the risk of an adverse adjudication based on an incomplete and underdeveloped record. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 178 (2005).

The Board also finds a predecisional error has occurred as the Veteran was not scheduled for an examination to determine whether his claimed shortness of breath is due to conceded toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service. In a December 2022 VA memorandum, it was conceded that the Veteran has military service which constitutes presumptive toxic exposure per 38 U.S.C. § 1119. A TERA examination on remand is warranted under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty, specifically under the Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), which provides an additional theory of entitlement for service connection due to toxic exposure and which might have a reasonable possibility of aiding the substantiation of the Veteran's claim. 

The TERA medical opinion must address whether there is a nexus between the disability and the total potential toxic exposure through all applicable deployments, including the synergistic, combined effect of each identified substance, chemical, and airborne hazard as described in 38 U.S.C. § 1119 (b)(2).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for examinations to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed shortness of breath including a TERA examination which considers his conceded toxic exposure during service. 

The AOJ should notify the Veteran that it is his responsibility to report for any scheduled examinations, to cooperate in the development of the claim, and the consequence for failure to report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.158, 2.655. 

The examiner should identify any respiratory disabilities which may be present. The examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not that any diagnosed respiratory disability is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service. 

Pursuant to the PACT Act, an examination and medical opinion must also address whether there is a nexus between the disability and the total potential toxic exposure through all applicable deployments, including the synergistic, combined effect of each identified substance, chemical, and airborne hazard as described in 38 U.S.C. § 1119 (b)(2).

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and September 2023 claim statement. 

A complete rationale is requested from the examiner for all proffered opinions.

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Filsinger, Alexandra Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.