Citation Nr: A25031316
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240426-436705
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

As the claim was granted in a June 2024 rating decision, entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), claimed as bronchitis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

In a June 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) granted entitlement to service connection for other trauma and stressor related disorder; thus, the AOJ fully awarded the benefit sought on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition has been resolved in full; the appeal is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202(a), 20.801.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1974 to September 1977.  This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for neck, COPD/bronchitis, left ankle, and left knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific determination with which the claimant disagrees.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a) ("[T]he Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees.").  

In this case, the AOJ granted service connection for other trauma and stressor related disorder in a June 2024 rating decision.  As the AOJ granted in full the benefit sought by the Veteran, there is no remaining allegation of error of fact or law for appellate consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d).  Thus, the June 2024 rating decision constituted a full grant of the benefit sought by the Veteran, thereby resolving the issue in full.  Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (noting that a grant of service connection extinguishes appeals before the Board).

With regard to the April 2024 appeal of the AOJ's denial of service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, no determination remains with which the Veteran disagrees. Moreover, in the current appeal the Veteran filed his intent to file on December 14, 2023, and he is currently assigned an effective date of December 14, 2023. Therefore, the claim is dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability 

2. Entitlement to service connection for COPD (claimed as bronchitis)

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability

The Veteran and his representative assert that direct service connection is warranted for the Veteran's respiratory and musculoskeletal disabilities.  See May 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation; February 2024 Lay Statement.  The Veteran's representative also contends that the AOJ and VA examiners improperly discarded the Veteran's lay statements.  

For the reasons that follow, the Board agrees that remand is warranted to obtain VA medical opinions that address the Veteran's lay statements and provide sufficient information.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (explaining that the Board shall remand to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Additionally, remand of the Veteran's neck claim is warranted because the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to ensure all relevant treatment records were obtained.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1).

With respect to outstanding treatment records for the Veteran's neck claim, in a February 2024 statement, the Veteran reported chiropractic care for his neck pain.  The claims file does not contain any records of chiropractic treatment, and the AOJ did not make any efforts to obtain these records.  Thus, remand is warranted for the AOJ to make reasonable efforts to obtain these records.

Additionally, none of the medical opinions of record provide sufficient information to adjudicate the claims.

In a March 2024 VA medical opinion, an examiner opined that the Veteran's neck pain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in service injury, event, or illness.  As rationale, the examiner stated that based on review of the available evidence, it was less likely than not that the claimed condition was due to service because "there is a lack of substantiating evidence" to support a nexus between the Veteran's diagnosed degenerative changes of the cervical spine and military service.  The VA examiner also relied on the lack of "chronicity during service or after service," stating that in light of the lack of chronicity, a post service event, illness, or injury was a more likely etiology.  Last, the VA clinician noted that the Veteran's in service neck pain included a diagnosis of "muscle spasm" which was an acute issue that resolved.  The Veteran's diagnosis at the time of the examination was cervical spine degenerative disc disease.

This opinion relies upon the lack of evidence to form a negative nexus and does not consider the Veteran's lay statements.  See Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272 (2015) (stating that the Board must first establish a proper foundation for drawing inferences against a claimant from an absence of documentation); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (finding that an examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions that he had sustained a back injury in service); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (stating that an examiner's opinion failed to consider whether lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of the Veteran's disability such that his claim could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence).  

During the March 2024 VA examination of the cervical spine, the Veteran reported a 1975 onset of neck pain that had progressively worsened since its onset.  In his February 2024 lay statement, he reported duties that involved repeated hard aircraft landings and maximum takeoffs.  The March 2024 VA medical opinion should have addressed the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, in addition to the impact, if any, of the Veteran's military duties on his claimed neck disability.

Turning to the claimed disability of bronchitis, the March 2024 VA examination for respiratory conditions found that the Veteran had a diagnosis of COPD rather than bronchitis, and in connection with the Veteran's bronchitis claim, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed with COPD.  See March 2024 Rating Decision.

In March 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's COPD was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's exposure to jet fumes and fuel after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

As rationale, the examiner clarified that pulmonary function tests along with the Veteran's past medical history showed that he had COPD rather than bronchitis.  The examiner stated that the respiratory condition was less likely than not caused by in service exposure to fuels and fumes, considering the total potential exposure during service because there was "insufficient evidence to support a nexus even considering symptoms may occur years after exposure."

In a March 2024 direct service connection opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's COPD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by respiratory issues during service because there was "a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of COPD and military service."  The examiner attributed COPD to a post-service event, illness, or injury because there was no chronicity during service or after service.  

These opinions do not provide sufficient information because they are conclusory, rely on the lack of evidence, and do not consider the Veteran's lay statements.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  During the March 2024 VA examination for respiratory conditions, the Veteran reported a 1975 onset of symptoms, with frequent episodes since onset.  Additionally, in his February 2024 statement, the Veteran reported exposure to sand and dust, in addition to jet fuel and toxic fumes.  He explained that "since basic training," he has had pulmonary issues.  He explained that his military occupational specialty required him to stand "directly" in the exhaust of aircraft engines.  The Veteran reported that he did not wear any personal protective equipment while performing internal fuel tank inspections.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that addresses these statements.

A VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left ankle condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by ankle pain during service.  See March 2024 VA Medical Opinion.  As rationale, the examiner stated that there was a "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of   bilateral plantar calcaneal spurs and military service."  The examiner stated that a post-service event, illness, or injury was a more likely etiology in the absence of chronicity during service or after service.  The examiner also noted the absence of reports of an ankle injury in service treatment records.  Without explanation, the examiner stated that even if ankle pain during service had been recorded, "it   would be less likely than not related to current diagnosis."

The March 2024 ankle opinion does not address the Veteran's lay statements, is conclusory, and relies upon the absence of evidence.  During the March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms as pain during training exercises in 1974.  Since onset, the Veteran had intermittent pain that had progressed to daily pain by the time of the examination.  The Veteran claimed that his ankle pain was due to "forced marches, double time runs or cattle trailers," and "the extreme jarring" caused "constant deterioration" of his ankles.  Additionally, the Veteran had a bicycle accident during service.  See December 1974 Service Treatment Record.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that addresses all relevant evidence of record, including the Veteran's lay statements and the impact of a bicycle accident, if any.

Last, in a March 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee pain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his in service knee pain.  As rationale, the examiner relied upon the "lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of bilateral osteoarthritis of the knees and military service."  The examiner again found that a post-service event, illness, or injury was a more likely etiology based on the lack of chronicity during service or after service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had knee pain and abrasions during service that "were acute, resolved[,] and less likely than not related to current diagnosis."

The March 2024 opinion regarding the Veteran's left knee does not consider the Veteran's lay statements and relies upon a lack of evidence in support of a negative nexus.  During the March 2024 VA examination of the knees, the Veteran reported 1974 onset of bilateral knee pain while stationed at the infantry base in Ft. Polk, with bilateral knee discomfort since 1974.  In his February 2024 statement, he attributed his knee pain to in service "forced marches, double time runs or cattle trailers," with "extreme jarring."  Additionally, during service, the Veteran hit his left knee below the patella with a chain saw.  See February 1976 Service Treatment Record.  He injured his left leg in a bicycle accident.  See December 1974 Service Treatment Record.  He reported a sore left knee in October 1974.  See October 1974 Service Treatment Record.  On remand, the AOJ will obtain an opinion that addresses all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including relevant service treatment records and the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

After further development on remand, the AOJ will readjudicate the claims for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability, COPD (claimed as bronchitis), a left ankle disability, and a left knee disability.  In so doing, the AOJ will consider all relevant evidence of record, including subsequent treatment records.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. First, make reasonable efforts to obtain private treatment records from civilian doctors referenced in the Veteran's February 2024 statement for treatment the Veteran received for a neck disability during the appeal period, to include any missing chiropractic records.

2. Second, obtain medical opinions from an appropriate VA clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's respiratory, neck, knee, and ankle disabilities.  No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the clinician determines otherwise.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be provided to, and reviewed by, the clinician before rendering the opinions.  

The reviewing clinician must opine on:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's neck disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include in-service military duties and in-service neck pain.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's COPD is at least as likely as not related to an in service injury, event, or disease, to include in service pulmonary issues, jet fuel, fumes, sand, and dust exposure.

(c.) Whether the Veteran's COPD is at least as likely as not due to the total potential exposure from the Veteran's military deployments.

(d.) Whether the Veteran's COPD is at least as likely as not due to the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

(e.) Whether the Veteran's left ankle disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include a bicycle accident, pain during training exercises, marching, double time runs, and riding in cattle trailers.

(f.) Whether the Veteran's left knee disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include in service knee pain, a bicycle accident, marching, double time runs, riding in cattle trailers, and a chain saw injury.

The clinician should provide full explanation of the rationale for each opinion.  In formulating any opinion, the reviewing clinician should also address all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including all lay statements during VA examinations, the February 2024 lay statement, and all relevant service treatment records.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The reviewing clinician is not to mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.  The Board reminds the clinician that the absence of in-service evidence of a medical diagnosis is not always fatal to a service connection claim, as the laws and regulations do not require in-service complaints of, or treatment for, a diagnosed condition to establish service connection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Garcia, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.