Citation Nr: A25031595
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 210610-165288
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Injuries resulting from a June 2005 in-service motor vehicle accident occurred during active service were not the result of willful misconduct and were incurred in line of duty.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, depression, and an eating disorder, is granted.

Service connection for a lumbar spine disability is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition, claimed as right knee strain, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition, claimed as left knee strain, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The preponderance of the evidence does not demonstrate that injuries resulting from the June 2005 motor vehicle accident were due to the Veteran's own willful misconduct.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his acquired psychiatric disability is at least as likely as not related to his service.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his lumbar spine disability is at least as likely as not related to his service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The Veteran's June 2005 motor vehicle accident, and resultant in-service injuries, occurred in the line of duty and was not the result of the Veteran's own willful misconduct. 38 U.S.C. §§ 105(a), 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(k), 3.1(m), 3.301(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n).

2. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, depression, and an eating disorder, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2001 to October 2006. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2021 administrative decision and a March 2021 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the June 10, 2021, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 2, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2021 and March 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As an initial matter, the Board finds that it is appropriate to characterize the psychiatric disability claim more broadly as entitlement to an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depressive disorder.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that a grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, such as depressive disorder, would satisfy that issue on appeal.  See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35 (1993).

Service Connection - Line of Duty

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in the active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease. If there is no showing of a resulting chronic condition during service, then a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required to support a finding of chronicity. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

"In line of duty" means an injury or disease incurred or aggravated during a period of active service unless such injury or disease was the result of the veteran's own willful misconduct. Requirements as to line of duty are not met if at the time the injury was suffered or disease contracted the veteran was (1) avoiding duty by desertion, or was absent without leave which materially interfered with the performance of military duty; (2) confined under a sentence of court-martial involving an unremitted dishonorable discharge; or (3) confined under sentence of a civil court for a felony as determined under the laws of the jurisdiction where the person was convicted by such court. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(m).

"Willful misconduct" means an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action. It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n)(1).  Mere technical violations of police regulations or ordinances will not per se constitute willful misconduct, and willful misconduct will not be determinative unless it is the proximate cause of injury, disease, or death. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n)(1)-(3). 

The simple drinking of alcoholic beverage is not of itself willful misconduct. If, in the drinking of a beverage to enjoy its intoxicating effects, intoxication results proximately and immediately in disability or death, the disability or death will be considered the result of the person's willful misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.301(c)(2).

"Proximate cause" is defined as "[a] cause that directly produces an event and without which the event would not have occurred." Donnellan v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 167, 173 (2010) (citing BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 213 (7th ed. 1999)). In other words, "the proximate cause of an event is that act or omission which, in natural and continuing sequence, unbroken by an efficient intervening cause, produces the event, and without which that event would not have occurred." MicroStrategy Inc. v. Bus. Objects, S.A., 429 F.3d 1344, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2005).

The phrase "willful misconduct," in its ordinary meaning, entails three requirements for the Board to find the phrase applicable. The Board must (1) identify conduct; (2) the identified conduct must be misconduct; and (3) the identified misconduct must be willful.  Martin v. McDonald, 761 F.3d 1366, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2014).

A service department finding that injury, disease, or death was not due to misconduct will be binding on VA unless it is patently inconsistent with the facts and the requirements of laws administered by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n).  Stated in other terms, a finding of willful misconduct, defined as "an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action," negates the statutory presumption that a disease or injury was incurred in the line of duty. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n); Daniels v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 348, 351 (1996).  A veteran cannot receive VA compensation for a disability that is the result of willful misconduct. 38 U.S.C. §§ 105(a), 1110. 38 U.S.C. § 105(a) establishes a presumption in favor of finding of line of duty.

1. Whether the Veteran's injury residuals from a June 2005 motor vehicle accident were the result of the Veteran's own misconduct.

The Veteran contends that injuries sustained in a June 2005 accident were incurred in the line of duty. He asserts that he was not driving under the influence of alcohol at the time of the accident. He further contends that he was fatigued from working long hours as a recruiter, and, merely swerved to avoid an oncoming vehicle which led to the accident. See Board Hearing.

Turning to the record, in June 2005 the Veteran was admitted to the hospital at 3 am, following a motor vehicle accident.

The emergency room treatment note indicates:

(Veteran) complains of back pain and facial bruises and abrasions due to MVA. Positive for LOC (loss of consciousness). Patient ran off road and into trees. Patient smells of alcohol. Denies ETOH (alcohol) use.

The treatment note also indicates:

Restrained driver in a single vehicle accident...doesn't know where his car is now...He called friend to pick him up.

The Veteran's blood alcohol count was noted as .105.

In a June 2005 police report, the investigator reported that:

some time before 0325 hours, (the Veteran), driver of vehicle #1, struck a tree head on after swerving to miss an oncoming vehicle. (He) sustained multiple injuries consisting of facial abrasion, a mild concussion, facial fracture below the left eye, and a L3 compression fracture to the lower back. After the traffic accident, (he) fled the scene and went to his residence where he consumed several alcoholic beverages. He later went to Dewitt Army Hospital...reconstruction revealed the vehicle was traveling at 63 mph at the time of the accident. 

The investigator noted:

(The Veteran) was north on road when a vehicle was coming south and appeared to driver that it was in his lane, and he swerved to miss it which caused him to run off the road to the left.

The police report noted that the "offense charged driver" was "fail to keep vehicle under control." A crash data retrieval investigation noted that the vehicle's speed was approximately 65 mph prior to the accident.

The investigator noted that a "partially consumed 40 oz. bottle of Hurricane malt liquor" was located in the vehicle. 

In a sworn statement, the Veteran reported that:

Around 12 am, I was in a vehicle accident. It appeared that a vehicle was in my lane and when I went to avoid the accident, I hit the brake, slid on gravel, and the tree welcomed me to a complete stop. After notifying my chain of command, I (sought) help and no one on the road would stop. After crawling and walking around, finally my girlfriend found me and told me to go to the hospital. I said no due to past experiences and made her take me home. After a few drinks at the house and the pain getting worse, I went to DeWitt Army hospital.

When asked how many drinks he consumed following the accident, the Veteran stated "a couple beers and slipped in a couple shots of Yager. My FAV."

The investigator summarized an interview with the Veteran's friend as follows:

She had received a phone call from (the Veteran) while she was with friends. After searching for him for approximately an hour, she located him on the Occoquan River Bridge. She states that he refused medical treatment, and she transported him to his residence at approximately 0100 hours. Once at home, she remembers that he consumed only (2) 12 oz. bottlers of beer. She then states that his pain was too overwhelming and transported him to the hospital at approximately 0200-0230 hours. She does not recall him having any odor of alcohol emitting his person or any other person being involved in the crash.

The investigator amended the police report and accident investigation and added that the "offense(s) charged driver" were: misuse of a government vehicle, fleeing the scene of a traffic accident, drunk on duty, obstructing justice, and reckless driving."

It does not appear that there was a line of duty determination made during service.

Given the foregoing, the evidence does not establish that the Veteran was legally intoxicated at the time of the June 2005 motor vehicle accident. Moreover, even if the Veteran was intoxicated, it appears that the Veteran was not the proximate cause of the motor vehicle accident. Rather, the evidence indicates that another vehicle may have been in the Veteran's traffic lane, which in turn caused the Veteran to swerve and collide with a tree. The Board also notes that the Veteran was not charged with driving under the influence of alcohol in respect to the accident.

In sum, there is insufficient evidence of willful misconduct and sufficient evidence that the Veteran was not the proximate cause of the accident. Thus, the Board finds that the motor vehicle accident was incurred in the line of duty.

The Board notes that the evidence is suggestive of misconduct, however, the evidence is insufficient to find that the Veteran engaged in willful misconduct.  The Board also notes that the Veteran's actions, after the accident, obfuscated his potential intoxication and culpability in the motor vehicle accident.  First, the Veteran left the scene of an accident.  Second, he contacted his supervisor and girlfriend but did not notify law enforcement.  Third, after leaving the accident scene, he waited over an hour before seeking medical care, during which time he consumed alcohol, which would have prevented a valid breathalyzer or blood alcohol test related to his possible alcohol use prior to the accident.  These actions, coupled with the failure of the service department to complete a proper formal line of duty investigation, has effectively prevented an adverse finding of misconduct, despite the evidence of record which suggests that the Veteran had consumed alcohol prior to the accident, and was driving under the influence at the time of the accident. Nonetheless, the Board is bound by the legal and regulatory provisions in this case and, despite significant misgivings, must find that the evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran's motor vehicle accident was due to his willful misconduct.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence is in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's June 2005 motor vehicle accident occurred in the line of duty, and did not involve willful misconduct. As such, the appeal is granted.

Service Connection

Under applicable law, service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).

Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999). Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

A lay witness is competent to testify as to the occurrence of an in-service injury or incident where such issue is factual in nature.  In some cases, lay evidence will also be competent and credible on the issues of diagnosis and etiology. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Specifically, lay evidence may be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis where (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377; see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  A layperson is competent to identify a medical condition where the condition may be diagnosed by its unique and readily identifiable features. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007).

Additionally, where symptoms are capable of lay observation, a lay witness is competent to testify to a lack of symptoms prior to service, continuity of symptoms after in-service injury or disease, and receipt of medical treatment for such symptoms. Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002).

Additionally, where a veteran served ninety days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a). While the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time. Id.

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, depression, and an eating disorder.

As noted above, the Board has determined that the June 2005 motor vehicle accident occurred in the line of duty.

The first element is met, in that a March 2021 VA mental health examination indicates a current diagnosis of PTSD. In a March 2021 VA mental health examination, the VA clinician diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD related to the June 2005 motor vehicle accident and provided a positive nexus opinion.

The second element is met, in that in his hearing transcript the Veteran describes psychiatric symptoms during service. The evidence also indicates that he had psychiatric symptoms following the June 2005 motor vehicle accident. Consistent with his testimony, a service treatment record indicates treatment for psychiatric symptoms, to include, primarily alcohol abuse disorder. While the injury may be related to the June 2005 motor vehicle accident, the Board has found that the accident occurred in the line of duty, and, thereby, would support the second element of service connection.

The third element is also met in that the evidence is at least in equipoise with respect to nexus. A March 2021 VA medical opinion concludes that it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's PTSD is related to military service. The examiner noted that the Veteran had some symptoms of depression prior to service. However, the examiner still noted that he met the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD which was related to his service. This conclusion is based on the Veteran's current symptoms, the Veteran's report of in-service injury, in-service treatment, and a review of the Veteran's medical records.

Thus, the Veteran is entitled to a favorable finding with respect to the existence of a nexus between an acquired psychiatric disorder and service, and the third element of service connection is met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. As all three elements are met, service connection is warranted for an acquired psychiatric disability and the appeal is granted.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a back disability.

The first element is met, in that a March 2021 VA back examination indicates a current diagnosis of lumbar strain.

The second element is met, in that in his hearing transcript the Veteran describes injuring his back during service. Consistent with this testimony, a service treatment record indicates treatment for a back injury. While the injury may be related to the June 2005 motor vehicle accident, the Board has found that the accident occurred in the line of duty, and, thereby, would support the second element of service connection.

The third element is also met in that the evidence is at least in equipoise with respect to nexus. A March 2021 VA medical opinion concludes that it "is at least as likely as not the Veteran's thoracolumbar strain condition is related to military service. Records showed that the veteran was diagnosed with back pain and treated while on active duty. The current diagnosis of thoracolumbar strain is at least as likely as not a progression of the same condition diagnosed while veteran was in military service." This conclusion is based on the Veteran's current symptoms, the Veteran's report of in-service injury, in-service treatment, and a review of the Veteran's medical records.

Thus, the Veteran is entitled to a favorable finding with respect to the existence of a nexus between a back disorder and service, and the third element of service connection is met. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. As all three elements are met, service connection is warranted for lumbar strain and the appeal is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition, claimed as right knee strain, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition, claimed as left knee strain, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for right shoulder and bilateral knee disabilities.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran has asserted throughout the appeal that he has current right shoulder and bilateral knee disabilities that had onset during service due to repetitive injuries and that these disabilities have existed since then.  As such, he should have been afforded a VA examination that took into consideration his competent lay evidence of the onset of these conditions service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the likelihood that his right shoulder, right knee and left knee disability are related to or had their onset in service.

The examiner must consider the Veteran's competent lay account in responding to this inquiry.

 

 

STEVEN D. REISS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. O'Connor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.