Citation Nr: A25031540
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240131-413026
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Restoration to a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected right hip strain with limited flexion is granted subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits, as reduction to a 0 percent rating was improper. 

Restoration to a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of flexion and shin splints is granted subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits, as reduction to a 0 percent rating was improper. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip strain with thigh impairment, is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for scars post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction of the disability rating for the Veteran's right hip strain with limited flexion from a 10 percent rating to a 0 percent rating effective September 26, 2023, was not based on evidence of sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life. 

2. The reduction of the disability rating for the Veteran's right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of flexion and shin splints from a 10 percent rating to a 0 percent rating effective September 26, 2023, was not based on evidence of sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life. 

3. The Veteran's right hip strain with thigh impairment is not manifested by an inability to cross her legs or an inability to "toe out" more than 15 degrees or a limitation of abduction to 20 degrees. 

4. The Veteran's scars post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware measures less than 929 square centimeters required for a compensable rating.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are met for restoration of a10 percent disability rating effective September 26, 2023, because the reduction of the rating for the Veteran's service-connected right hip strain with limited flexion from a 10 percent rating to 0 percent, was improper. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.105, 3.344, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13. 

2. The criteria are met for restoration of a 10 percent disability rating effective September 26, 2023, because the reduction of the rating for the Veteran's service-connected right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of flexion and shin splints from a 10 percent rating to 0 percent, was improper. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.105, 3.344, 4.2, 4.10, 4.13. 

3. The criteria for a compensable rating for right hip strain with thigh impairment are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253.

4. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for scars post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2005 to March 2007.

In December 2007, the Veteran filed an application for compensation for what was then described as a right leg injury. 

In March 2008, a Rating Decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) granted service connection for a right tibia fracture at 10 percent effective March 17, 2007. The 10 percent rating was granted for malunion of the tibia and fibula with slight knee or ankle disability. The RO found that a 20 percent rating was not warranted in the absence of moderate knee or ankle disability. The Veteran did not appeal that decision, nor was new and material evidence received within one year following it, and it therefore became final. 

In December 2010, the Veteran submitted a statement seeking an increased rating for her right knee. A July 2011, the RO issued a Rating Decision interpreting the statement as an informal claim for increase for the Veteran's right leg disability.  The Rating Decision increased the Veteran's right tibia rating to 20 percent effective December 21, 2010, based upon a finding of moderate knee or ankle disability. It further granted service connection for scars at the noncompensable level effective December 21, 2010. The Veteran did not appeal that decision, nor was new and material evidence received within one year following it, and it therefore became final. 

In April 2016, the Veteran filed a new claim for an increased rating for the right tibia and a new claim for a right hip condition. A July 2016 Rating Decision granted service connection for a right hip strain at 10 percent effective March 5, 2016, and continued the right tibia at 20 percent. The Veteran did not appeal that decision, nor was new and material evidence received within one year following it, and it therefore became final.

In April 2020, the Veteran filed a new claim for increased ratings for her scars and the right tibia while also seeking service connection for the right hip. 

In July 2020, a supplemental claim was filed for hip pain, but no specifics were provided by the Veteran. A September 2020, Rating Decision continued the Veteran's scars at the noncompensable level, it granted service connection for the right hip with thigh impairment at the noncompensable level effective April 9, 2020, continued the right hip strain, now including limitation of flexion, at 10 percent, and decreased the Veteran's right tibia to 10 percent effective September 17, 2020. In October 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) seeking review of the reduction by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board). However, the 10182 was not properly filled out as the Veteran failed to choose a lane. In October 2020, after receipt of the 10182, a letter was mailed to the Veteran seeking clarification on how she wanted to proceed with this appeal. No response was ever received and so the appeal did not move forward. Because an appeal was not properly initiated within one year following notification of the decision, nor was new and material evidence received within one year following it, the September 2020 Rating Decision became final.  

In August 2023, the Veteran filed a new claim which is the basis of the current appeal. That claim sought increased ratings for a right hip strain with limitation of flexion, right hip with thigh impairment, scars, and for the right tibia. In January 2024, the RO continued the scar rating and right hip strain with thigh impairment as noncompensable while decreasing both the right tibia fracture and right hip strain with limited flexion from 10 percent to noncompensable. The RO noted that as the Veteran's combined evaluation would not change from its current 80 percent, a proposed reduction was not required. In January 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement seeking Board review of the January 2024 Rating Decision and elected the Direct Review docket. 

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence has been submitted during a window of time when the Board may not consider it in reaching this decision. If the Veteran wishes for this evidence to be considered, he may do so by filing a supplemental claim. Instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

RATING REDUCTIONS

Restoration to a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected right hip strain with limited flexion is granted subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits, as reduction to a 0 percent rating was improper.

The January 2024 rating decision reduced the Veteran's right hip limitation of flexion to noncompensable based upon the findings of a September 2023 VA examination. The RO noted that the Veteran's flexion had been found to be beyond 45 degrees and that a 10 percent rating for limitation of flexion required a finding of flexion of the thigh limited to 31-45 degrees.  The Veteran's February 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) argued that the rating should remain at 10 percent and that a decrease to noncompensable was not appropriate. 

When the propriety of a rating reduction is at issue, the focus is on the actions of the RO in effectuating the reduction, both in terms of compliance with the special due process considerations applicable to reductions, and in terms of whether the evidence at the time of the decision reducing the evaluation supported the reduction. In most cases, violations of the set of due process considerations applicable to rating reductions, or failure of the evidence to meet the standards for reducing an evaluation, render the underlying reduction void ab initio, rather than merely voidable. The burden is on VA to justify a reduction in a rating. See Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993).

The criteria governing certain rating reductions for certain service-connected disabilities are found under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344. If a disability rating has been continued at the same level for long periods, i.e., five years or more, VA may not reduce the evaluation based on examinations less full and complete than those on which payments were authorized or continued, and only evidence of sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life, as shown by full and complete examinations, can justify a reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a). If doubt remains after consideration is given to all the evidence, then the rating in effect will be continued. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(b). When a disability has not become stable and is likely to improve, and the disability rating has not continued at the same level for at least five years, a reexamination disclosing improvement in that disability will warrant a reduction in its rating. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c). The duration of the disability rating at issue is measured by the effective date assigned for that rating until the effective date of the actual reduction. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 418 (1993).

Prior to reducing a veteran's disability rating, however, VA must comply with several general VA regulations applicable to all rating-reduction cases, regardless of the rating level or the length of time that the rating has been in effect. These provisions require that VA rating reductions, as with all VA rating decisions, be based on review of the entire history of the disability. Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000) (citing 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420, and Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991)).

A veteran's disability rating shall not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. 288, 292 (1999) (including cases cited therein). Not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but it must also be shown that the improvement actually reflects an improvement in a veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-21; Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 594 (1991).

As a result of this reduction, the Veteran's combined disability rating was unchanged. It remained at 80 percent both before and after the reduction. Therefore, as the proposed reduction did not result in a change in the Veteran's total combined rating the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) and (i) do not apply.

Substantively, the standard to be applied to a rating reduction decision depends on how long the rating has been in effect. In the present appeal, the Veteran's 10 percent rating for her right hip strain with limited flexion was in effect for more than five years at the time the reduction took place. Specifically, the 10 percent rating for right hip strain with limited flexion was in place from March 5, 2016, to September 26, 2023. Therefore, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b) do apply. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) require a review of the entire record of examinations and the medical-industrial history to ascertain whether the recent examination was full and complete. Examinations less full and complete than those on which payments were authorized or continued will not be used as a basis of reduction. Ratings on account of diseases subject to temporary or episodic improvement will not be reduced on any one examination, except in those instances where all the evidence of record clearly warrants the conclusion that sustained improvement has been demonstrated. Moreover, though material improvement may be clearly reflected, the rating agency must consider whether the evidence makes it reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 350 (2000); 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

Moreover, in Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims stated that there are general VA regulations that apply to all rating reductions regardless of whether the rating was in effect for 5 years or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 requires that each disability be viewed in relation to its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2 establishes that the rating specialist must interpret reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.13 provides that the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the condition, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in use of descriptive terms. Additionally, in any rating reduction case, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but that such improvement reflects improvement in ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. See Brown v. Brown, supra.

In July 2016, an initial VA examination for the right hip was completed. The Veteran was diagnosed with a right hip strain. The Veteran complained of progressive limping and pain since the right tibia surgery which has resulted in constant right hip pain. She was not undergoing any current treatment. The Veteran flare-ups if she stands too long or sits for too long in the car. These flare-ups resulted in increased pain. Range of motion (ROM) measurements found flexion to 110 degrees with pain noted. Following three repetitions, flexion was measured at 105 degrees. Post-test adduction did not result in an inability to cross her legs. For both repetitive use over time and flare-ups the examiner was unable to provide a measurement without resorting to mere speculation. The Veteran did not suffer a loss in muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, and no evidence of malunion or nonunion of the femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy. Regarding functional impact, the examiner noted that the Veteran suffered an inability to stand or walk for extended periods of time. The Veteran could no longer run which resulted in her being unable to pass a police officer examination to further her career. The Veteran also reported an inability to sit for extended periods of time. 

In September 2020, the Veteran underwent a VA examination focused on the right hip. The Veteran was diagnosed with a right hip strain. The Veteran reported having gradual onset of right hip pain with no specific injury noted. The Veteran complained that her right hip had worsened since onset. Her current symptoms were limping, pain, swelling in the right hip, and tenderness to touch. The Veteran was treating this pain with over-the-counter medication on an as needed basis. The Veteran reported flare-ups of the right hip described as sharp and burning pain. These were noted as twice a week and moderate in nature. ROM measurements were taken with flexion measured to 100 degrees. There was no change in the ROM with observed repetitive use or repeated use over time. The examiner was unable to provide a ROM estimate for flare-ups. There was evidence of pain on flexion and with weight bearing. There was no muscle loss, muscle atrophy, no malunion or nonunion of the femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy.

In September 2023, an additional VA examination was completed focused on the right hip. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a right hip strain with thigh impairment and limitation of both flexion and extension. The Veteran reported her symptoms began in 2007 and that the onset was dull to severe pain in the hip with limited ROM. The Veteran reported that since onset her condition had stayed the same. The Veteran reported flare-ups that occur daily and were mild to severe in nature. These last around one day and were precipitated by overuse. They were alleviated by rest, hot baths, Epsom salt, medication, and ice/heat. ROM testing found flexion to 90 degrees with pain noted. Passive ROM was the same. Observed repetitive use measured flexion at 80 degrees, repetitive use over time measured flexion to 70 degrees while flexion during a flare-up was measured at 60 degrees. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, no malunion or nonunion of femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy. The functional impact was described as hip pain, stiffness, limited ROM, difficulty with bending, and difficulty with walking over one mile. There was no evidence that the Veteran was unable to cross her legs. 

Taking a complete review of these three VA examinations, the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence of improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work to justify a rating reduction. When comparing the three VA examinations focused on the right hip, the September 2023 VA examination, the basis for the rating reduction, contained the same symptoms, the same functional impact, and worse ROM results for flexion. Flexion was initially measured at 105 degrees in July 2016 but in September 2023 was down to 60 degrees. The Veteran continuously complained of flare-ups of the hip that result in increased pain and a loss of ROM. The Veteran has still been unable to run and therefore unable to complete the police officer's examination required to advance her career. None of that has changed while in fact her ROM has worsened. Based on the totality of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's right hip limitation of flexion has not shown improvement in her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work and therefore a rating reduction was improper. 

The appropriate remedy in this case is restoration of the 10 percent rating for the Veteran's right hip limitation of flexion effective September 26, 2023. See Hayes v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1996) (improper reduction reinstated effective date of reduction).

Restoration to a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of flexion and shin splints is granted subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits, as reduction to a 0 percent rating was improper.

The January 2024 rating decision reduced the Veteran's right tibial fracture residuals to noncompensable based upon the findings of a September 2023 VA examination. The RO noted that the Veteran's flexion was limited to 46-60 degrees which only justified a noncompensable rating. The Veteran's February 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) argued that the rating should remain at 10 percent and that a decrease to noncompensable was not appropriate. 

The same regulations and caselaw relating to rating reductions as discussed above also apply to the rating reduction of the right tibial fracture residuals. Though, in this instance, the Veteran's right tibia rating had not been in effect for five or more years. The Veteran's right tibia was reduced to 10 percent effective September 17, 2020, and then reduced to noncompensable September 26, 2023. 

In July 2006, the Veteran underwent right tibia surgery as a result of a fracture. 

In January 2008, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for the right tibial fracture residuals. The Veteran reported that she sustained a right tibia midshaft stress fracture in October 2005 during basic training. The Veteran was released to limited duty but found it difficulty to run. She reported that over the last 12 months she had experienced daily pain rated 6-9/10 intensity. The Veteran complained that the proximal and distal interlocking screw heads were irritating and painful. The Veteran denied the use of any orthopedic assistive devices. The Veteran's current standing weight bearing tolerance was 20 minutes or less and that she could no longer run. She noted increased pain on going up or down stairs, ladders, or steep inclines. The examiner noted the presence of scars over the location of the incision. The Veteran's leg lengths were equal. ROM of the right knee found extension to 0 degrees and flexion to 130. There was no apparent pain, loss of motion, weakness, fatigability, or loss or coordination during or following three reps of ROM testing. 

In January 2010, the Veteran underwent a physical therapy consult for the right leg. Her chief complaint was constant pain with swelling from time to time. 

In January 2011, a new VA examination was completed. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative joint disease and traumatic tricompartmental arthritis right knee and moderate instability status post proximal tibial fracture with residual chronic pain, right leg, knee, and ankle associated with the proximal tibial repair along with, status post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware with residual scars of right tibia. The Veteran reported that her right leg was originally casted but that it did not properly heal and so they had to put pins and rods into her right tibia in June 2009. During the Spring of 2009 she began physical therapy. The Veteran currently complained of shin splints. She reported her current symptoms included pain, weakness, instability, and swelling. The Veteran suffered from flare-ups which result in pain and swelling and were described as severe in nature. The Veteran reported that these flare-ups occur daily with varying duration. The Veteran did not use an ambulatory device. The Veteran reported pain along the right tibia and shin and that the area was tender to touch. The Veteran complained of being unable to stand for more than about a half an hour without having to lean on things and take weight off of the right ankle. ROM showed flexion to 120 degrees and extension to 0. The Veteran's right knee showed pain, fatigue, weakness, and lack of endurance. ROM of the right ankle was also measured with dorsiflexion measured to 15 degrees with plantar flexion at 45 degrees. 

In February 2011, lay statements from the Veteran and James Farmer were submitted. Both of these statements relayed that the right ankle, knee, and hip, were in constant pain. The Veteran reported an inability to run due to the pain which has prevented her from becoming a police officer as noted earlier in this decision. 

In July 2016, a new VA examination was completed which resulted in a diagnoses of right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery. The same medical history was relayed. The Veteran reported pain and limping. She continued to have flare-ups if she stood for too long or sat in the car for too long. The Veteran's right knee ROM was flexion to 125 degrees and extension to 0. There was pain noted on flexion along with objective evidence of pain medial and lateral to the patella which was moderate in nature. No estimates for ROM with observed repetitive use, repetitive use over time, or flare-ups were provided. There was no evidence of a loss of muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, no recurrent subluxation, no lateral instability, or any joint instability upon testing. The Veteran showed no need for an assistive device. 

In September 2020, a new VA examination was completed. The examiner again diagnosed the Veteran with right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain. The Veteran complained that her right lower leg pain had gotten worse. The Veteran stated that some of the hardware was sticking out of her tibia. She noted constant sharp stabbing pain with activity and an aching pain at rest. The Veteran noted swelling in her right leg, limited movement of the knee, tenderness to touch, and numbness in the lateral right leg. The Veteran treated herself with over-the-counter ibuprofen or Tylenol as well as ice of Icy Hot as needed. The Veteran complained of flare-ups resulting in pain with moving and soreness to touch as well as a sharp stabbing pain. The Veteran reported these occur 3-4 times a month and were moderate in nature and could last 1-2 days. ROM showed flexion to 130 degrees with extension to 0 with pain noted on both. There was no additional ROM loss with observed repetitive use, repeated use over time, or flare-ups. There was no evidence of loss of muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, no recurrent subluxation, no instability of any type, and no meniscal conditions. Imaging taken at the time of examination showed a normal tibia and fibula. 

In September 2023, the most recent VA examination was completed. The same diagnosis was provided. The Veteran's current treatments were medication and physical therapy. She described her condition as staying the same. The Veteran reported flare-ups that occur daily and were mild to moderate. These last around one day and are precipitated by overuse. The flare-ups could be alleviated with rest, use of a heating pad, icy hot, medication, and hot baths. The Veteran complained of difficulty with heavy lifting, prolonged standing, walking, light jogging, or climbing stairs. The Veteran had no history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee or frequent effusion. Right knee ROM was measured as flexion to 90 degrees and extension to 0 with pain reported on both. Passive ROM was measured as the same as active ROM. Observed repetitive use ROM found flexion to 80 degrees and extension to 0 while noting both pain and a lack of endurance. Repetitive use over time reduced ROM further with flexion to 70 degrees and extension to 0. Flare-ups resulted in flexion to 60 degrees and extension to 0. There was no evidence of ankylosis, no joint instability, no meniscal conditions, no use of an assistive device. The Veteran did have shin splints. 

Taking a complete review of these three VA examinations, the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence of improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work to justify a rating reduction. When comparing the three VA examinations focused on the right tibia, the September 2023 VA examination, the basis for the rating reduction, contained the same symptoms, the same functional impact, and worse ROM results for flexion. The flexion was initially measured at 120 degrees in January 2011 but in September 2023 was down to 60 degrees based on flare-ups. This is a 60-degree loss in ROM. The Veteran has continuously complained of flare-ups of the right tibia that result in increased pain and a loss of ROM. The Veteran has still been unable to run and therefore unable to complete the police officer's examination required to advance her career. None of that has changed while her ROM has worsened. The Veteran continued to complain of difficulty with prolonged standing, walking, jogging, and going up and down stairs since filing her claim. At the September 2023 VA examination, the Veteran noted that her condition had stayed the same. Based on the totality of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's right tibia has not shown improvement in her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work and therefore a rating reduction was improper. 

The appropriate remedy in this case is restoration of the 10 percent rating for the Veteran's right tibia effective September 26, 2023. See Hayes v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1996) (improper reduction reinstated effective date of reduction).

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is evenly balanced, with a claimant prevailing in either event. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505(2007). The Veteran's disability is viewed in relation to its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right hip strain with thigh impairment.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating because she believes her rating does not adequately measure her symptoms for her right hip strain with thigh impairment.

The Veteran's right thigh impairment is rated noncompensable under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5253. Under DC 5253, impairment of the thigh limiting rotation such that one cannot toe-out more than 15 degrees with the affected leg or limitation of adduction such that the legs cannot be crossed warrants a 10 percent evaluation while limitation of abduction with motion lost beyond 10 degrees warrants a 20 percent evaluation. A 20 percent rating is the highest schedular rating allowable under this DC. 

While portions of the rating schedule addressing the musculoskeletal system were revised effective February 7, 2021, Diagnostic Codes 5251, 5252, and 5253 were not changed.

In October 2006, the Veteran complained of pain in the right hip which had been present for the past two months. 

In February 2010, the Veteran was seen in physical therapy and was given additional exercises to strengthen the right hip. 

In February 2011, lay statements from the Veteran and James Farmer were submitted. Both of these statements relayed that the right ankle, knee, and hip, were in constant pain. The Veteran reported an inability to run due to the pain which has prevented her from becoming a police officer as noted earlier in this decision. 

In July 2016, an initial VA examination for the right hip was completed. The Veteran was diagnosed with a right hip strain. The Veteran complained of progressive limping and pain since the right tibia surgery which has resulted in constant right hip pain. She was not undergoing any current treatment. The Veteran reported flare-ups if she stands too long or sits for too long in the car. These flare-ups resulted in increased pain. ROM measurements found flexion to 110 degrees with pain noted, extension to 30, abduction to 45, adduction to 25, external rotation to 60, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. Following three repetitions, flexion was measured at 105 degrees. Post-test adduction did not result in an inability to cross her legs. Following three repetitions, flexion was measured at 105 degrees but there was no change in the other measurements. For both repetitive use over time and flare-ups the examiner was unable to provide a measurement without resorting to mere speculation. The Veteran did not suffer a loss in muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, and no evidence of malunion or nonunion of the femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy. Regarding functional impact, the examiner noted that the Veteran suffered an inability to stand or walk for extended periods of time. The Veteran could no longer run which resulted in her being unable to pass a police officer examination to further her career. The Veteran also reported an inability to sit for extended periods of time. 

In September 2020, the Veteran underwent a VA examination focused on the right hip. The Veteran was diagnosed with a right hip strain. The Veteran reported having gradual onset of right hip pain with no specific injury noted. The Veteran complained that her right hip had worsened since onset. Her current symptoms were limping, pain, swelling in the right hip, and tenderness to touch. The Veteran was treating this pain with over-the-counter medication on an as needed basis. The Veteran reported flare-ups of the right hip described as sharp and burning pain. These were noted as twice a week and moderate in nature. Initial ROM measurements were taken with flexion measured to 100 degrees flexion, extension to 20, abduction to 45, adduction to 25, external rotation to 40, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. There was no change in the ROM with observed repetitive use or repeated use over time. The examiner was unable to provide a ROM estimate for flare-ups. There was evidence of pain on flexion and pain with weight bearing. There was no muscle loss, muscle atrophy, no malunion or nonunion of the femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy.

In September 2023, an additional VA examination focused on the right hip. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a right hip strain with thigh impairment and limitation of both flexion and extension. The Veteran reported her symptoms began in 2007 and that the onset was dull to severe pain in the hip with limited ROM. The Veteran reported that since onset her condition had stayed the same. The Veteran reported flare-ups that occur daily and were mild to severe in nature. These last around one day and were precipitated by overuse. They were alleviated by rest, hot baths, Epsom salt, medication, and ice/heat. ROM testing found flexion to 90 degrees with pain noted, extension to 20, abduction to 35, adduction to 20, external rotation to 40, and internal rotation to 30 degrees. Passive ROM was the same. Observed repetitive use measured flexion at 80 degrees, extension to 15, abduction to 30, adduction to 15, external rotation to 35, and internal rotation to 25 degrees. ROM for repetitive use over time measured flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 10, abduction to 25, adduction to 10, external rotation to 30, and internal rotation to 20 degrees. During a flare-up ROM was measured at flexion to 60 degrees, extension to 5, abduction to 20, adduction to 5, external rotation to 25, and internal rotation to 15 degrees. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, no malunion or nonunion of femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy. The functional impact was described as hip pain, stiffness, limited ROM, difficulty with bending, and difficulty with walking over one mile. There was no evidence that the Veteran was unable to cross her legs. 

A review of the totality of the evidence finds that the Veteran does not have limitation of rotation such that she is unable to toe-out more than 15 degrees or that she could not cross her legs. The September 2023 VA examination measured the Veteran's external rotation at 25 degrees during a flare-up. This was the worst reading for external rotation from any VA examination. Also, each VA examination on record found that the Veteran was able to cross her legs. The Veteran has submitted no evidence showing that she meets either of the diagnostic criteria. Therefore, the Board finds that a compensable 10 percent rating is not warranted, and the claim is denied.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has multiple right lower extremity ratings. These include right lower extremity radiculopathy sciatic nerve, right lower extremity radiculopathy with femoral nerve, right hip strain with limited extension, right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of extension and shin splint, right hip strain with thigh impairment, right hip strain with limited flexion, and right proximal tibia fracture with residual pain and surgery with limitation of flexion and shin splint. The sheer number of service-connected disabilities indicates the severity of the right leg complaints. However, it is also this severity of disabilities that makes it more difficult to determine which complaints are related to which right lower extremity disability. To separately compensate a Veteran for the same symptoms of another service-connected disability would constitute impermissible pyramiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. Under the anti-pyramiding provision of 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, the evaluation of the "same disability" or the "same manifestation" under various diagnoses is to be avoided. For purposes of determining whether a Veteran is entitled to separate ratings for different problems or residuals of an injury, such that separate evaluations do not violate the prohibition against pyramiding, the critical element is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative of, or overlapping with, the symptomatology of the other conditions. Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1994). The available evidence fails to show that the Veteran is not already properly compensated for the right lower extremity complaints. Accordingly, to separately service connect the Veteran would constitute impermissible pyramiding.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for a 10 percent rating for her right hip with thigh impairment. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for scars post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware.

The Veteran is in receipt of multiple ratings for her scars. Under DC 7804, the Veteran is in receipt of a 10 percent rating for painful scars. Under DC 7802, the Veteran is currently rated as noncompensable. This was previously rated under DC 7805. It is this noncompensable rating that is on appeal. 

However, the Board will take note that in order to obtain an increased rating for her painful scars there would need to be three to four scars that are unstable or painful. Note 2 of DC 7804 indicates that if one or more scars are both unstable and painful you can add 10 percent to the evaluation that is based on the total number of unstable or painful scars. The September 2020 VA examination showed the Veteran having four scars with three found to be painful. None of the scars were found to be unstable. This is contradicted by the September 2023 VA examination which found only one painful scar and that this scar was not unstable. As this claim is not before the Board, the Veteran would need to file a new Decision Review Request using one of the available AMA options before the appeal period expires in May 2025. 

DCs 7800 to 7805 pertain to scars. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118. DC 7802 provides for a 10 percent disability evaluation for a scar not of the head, face, or neck, that is not associated with underlying soft tissue damage and which covers an area of at least 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or more. No higher ratings are available under this code. There are two notes associated with this diagnostic code. Note 1 states that there are six zones of the body which are defined as extremity, anterior trunk, and posterior trunk with the midaxillary line dividing the anterior trunk from the posterior trunk. Note 2 indicates that separate evaluations may be assigned for each affected zone of the body under this diagnostic code if there are multiple scars or a single scar affecting multiple zones of the body. The Board notes that all of the Veteran's scars are located on her right lower extremity and therefore multiple zones of the body are not impacted that would warrant multiple ratings for these same scars. 

In January 2008, a VA examination was completed on the right tibia. This examiner noted that the Veteran had a 6.5-centimeter linear longitudinal surgical incision scar overlying the anterior tibial tubercle. The examiner also noted that there were 1 centimeter bilateral proximal and distal interlocking screw scars present. These scars were all nontender and well healed without any sign of inflammation, infection, depression, or keloid formation. 

In January 2011, the Veteran underwent a new VA examination for the right leg. This examiner noted a surgical scar below the right patella measuring 6 centimeters by .5 centimeters for an area of 3 square centimeters which is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating. The examiner noted this scar was not painful and did not result in skin breakdown. The examiner described the scar as deep which meant that there was some underlying soft tissue loss or damage. Despite this, the examiner noted there was no change in limitation of motion or function as a result of the scar. Two additional scars were noted on the Veteran's right tibia. These both measured at 1 centimeter by .4 centimeters for an area of .4 square centimeters each. These were not painful and did not have any soft tissue damage. The combined area of these three scars was 3.8 square centimeters which is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating. 

In July 2016, a new VA examination measured the Veteran's scars. The examiner noted a scar on the Veteran's patella that was 5 centimeters by 5 centimeters for a total area of 25 square centimeters. There was no discussion by this examiner if the scars were painful, unstable, or otherwise resulted in tissue damage or loss. Regardless, 25 square centimeters is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating

In September 2020, a standalone VA examination for the Veteran's scars was completed. The Veteran was noted as having right leg scars. The Veteran's scars were not unstable and did not result in frequent loss of covering of the skin over the scar. The scars were all tender to palpation but did not have any underlying soft tissue damage. The examiner found four scars total. The first scar measured 4 centimeters by .5 centimeters for an area of 2 square centimeters. The second scar measured 1 centimeter by .2 centimeters for an area of .2 square centimeters. The third scar measured 1 centimeter by .2 centimeters for an area of .2 square centimeters. The fourth scar measured .3 centimeters by .3 centimeters for an area of .09 square centimeters. The total combined area of all four of these scars is 2.49 square centimeters which is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating. 

In September 2023, a new VA examination for the scars was completed. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with painful scars status post open reduction internal fixation with retained hardware. One of the Veteran's scars was noted as painful. None of the Veteran's scars were unstable. The examiner measured the scar as 6 centimeters by 1 centimeter for a total area of 6 square centimeters which is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating. No other scars were measured by this examiner. The rating of the painful scars would need to be addressed in a separate appeal for that rating as discussed earlier. 

The Board finds that the totality of the evidence does not meet the criteria for a compensable rating under DC 7802. The Veteran's scars have been measured by multiple examiners with none coming close to the required 929 square centimeters to justify a 10 percent rating. The largest area covered was noted as 25 square centimeters which is far below the 929 square centimeters necessary for a compensable rating. The Veteran has not submitted any evidence showing that there are additional scars or that the scars were measured incorrectly by any of the VA examiners. Also, all of the Veteran's scars are located in the right lower extremity and therefore the additional notes associated with DC 7802 are not applicable in the Veteran's case. Further, as noted above, the Veteran is already in possession of a rating for painful scars and any appeal of that rating is not presently before the Board. The evidence does not warrant a compensable rating under DC 7802 and therefore, the claim is denied. 

The Board finds the VA examinations and opinions on which it has relied in making this decision to be both adequate and probative. The examination reports included a recitation of the Veteran's medical history, including that related by the Veteran. Each VA examiner provided measurements of the Veteran's scars. The examination report and opinion provided sufficient information to allow the Board to make an informed decision.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered and applied the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. "When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant." 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). "Evidence is not in 'approximate balance' or 'nearly equal,' and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F. 3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In this case, the evidence persuasively favors a finding that the Veteran's scars are not large enough to justify a 10 percent rating under DC 7802. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not change the outcome on this issue.

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Andrew Ledman II

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.