Citation Nr: A25031969
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-437831
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2008 through April 2012 in the United States Navy. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.? 

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement: VA Form 10182 and selected the Direct Review docket. Based on that docket selection, the Board is limited in its review of the evidence and may only consider the evidence of record at the time the March 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued. 38 C.F.R.            § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the March 2024 rating decision was issued the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R.            §§ 20.300, 20.801.? 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the VA Regional Office in adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R.?§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

The Board finds it necessary to remand this matter to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error which occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal being issued. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 20.802.? 

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right knee condition which she asserts is secondary to her service-connected left knee and low back disabilities. 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to or the result of, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) a current disability exists, (2) the Veteran has a service-connected disability; and (3) the current disability was either (a) caused by; or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439, 448 (1995). Recently, in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals held 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. Therefore, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause (or aggravating factor), not the contributing cause (or aggravating factor), to establish secondary service connection.? 

A review of the Veteran's claims folder reveals that she was afforded a VA examination in February 2024. The examiner diagnosed with Veteran with a right knee strain. The examiner also provided an opinion on whether the Veteran's right knee strain was caused by her service-connected left knee and low back disabilities. However, the examiner did not address the issue of whether the Veteran's right knee strain was aggravated by her service-connected disabilities. A VA medical opinion for secondary service connection must include not only if the claimed disability was caused by, but also if it was aggravated by the service-connected disability. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26?Vet. App.?136 (2013). 

Thus, a remand is necessary to obtain that opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Return the record to the examiner who conducted the February 2024 VA examination for an addendum opinion that addresses the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right knee condition. The entire record, to include this remand order, must be provided to the examiner for review.

Based on a review of the record, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right knee condition is aggravated by her service-connected left knee or low back disabilities. The examiner is advised "aggravation" means any increase in the severity of the underlying disability beyond its natural progression. NOTE: Proximate cause is not required. It is sufficient if the Veteran's left knee and/or low back disabilities were a contributing factor to the aggravation of her right knee condition.

A clear and detailed rationale for the opinion(s), including a discussion of the medical principles involved, should be provided as it will be of considerable assistance to the Board.

If the examiner determines that a requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training). The examiner should identify what evidence is necessary to offer an opinion and why such evidence cannot be obtained.

[If the examiner is unavailable or cannot provide the opinions sought, forward the record to another appropriate medical provider for the opinion (and if in such circumstances further examination of the Veteran is deemed necessary, such should be arranged).]

The VA Regional Office will review the medical opinion(s) the ensure substantial compliance with the Board's directives. The VA Regional Office will take any additional corrective action necessary to ensure substantial compliance.

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crain, N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.