Citation Nr: A25031197
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250122-502362
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, variously diagnosed to include major depressive disorder and trauma-related disorder, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is related to his Vietnam service.

2. Although the persuasive weight of the evidence does not support a DSM-5 diagnosis for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) specifically, the Board finds the issue moot in light of the favorable grant herein, which encompasses the entirety of the Veteran's psychiatric disability picture.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, variously diagnosed to include major depressive disorder and trauma-related disorder, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1968 to July 1971.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2024 under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on April 2, 2025.  As this decision represents a full grant of the benefits sought, the decision is issued on an expedited basis.  A transcript of the hearing will be associated with the claims file at a later date.

Although the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), specifically, the Board has expanded the claim as set forth above in light of the evidence in the record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record). 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

1. Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, variously diagnosed to include major depressive disorder and trauma-related disorder, is granted.

The Veteran seeks service connection specifically for PTSD, but in essence is seeking compensation for an acquired psychiatric disability, asserting that his current psychiatric disability is related to traumatic events during his Vietnam service.

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal). 

To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

The October 2024 rating decision on appeal includes favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of major depressive disorder, and that the Veteran had an in-service stressor based on fear of hostile military or terrorist activity as consistent with his medals establishing service in a potentially hostile military environment in Vietnam.  Therefore, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran's current psychiatric disability (to include his major depressive disorder) is related to his service, to include the conceded in-service stressor.

Viewing the lay and medical evidence as a whole, the Board finds the Veteran's current psychiatric disability (to include major depressive disorder and trauma-related disorder) is related to an in-service stressor during Vietnam service.

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran's current psychiatric disability has been variously diagnosed, to include major depressive disorder, trauma-related disorder, and nightmare disorder.  See, e.g., September 2023, January 2024, and May 2024 VA Treatment Records.

The Veteran underwent VA psychiatric contract examination in July 2024.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that during his service in Vietnam, the perimeter was breached and an explosive was thrown into a bunker and killed six American soldiers.  He reported that he was secondary defense and saw enemy soldiers coming through and shot and killed two enemy soldiers.  He reported that he was depressed with some fear during service and did not want to kill anyone.  He reported that the incident upset him terribly and that fellow soldiers told him that he began to hold his breath.  He reported that he had guilt over killing the two enemy soldiers including after service and is now concerned about "meeting his maker."  He reported disturbing nightmares and feeling irritable.  The VA contract examiner noted that the in-service stressor was sufficient to meet Criteria A, in other words, was adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD.  The examiner also noted that the in-service stressor related to the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity.  Although the examiner noted that the Veteran's current symptoms did not meet the DSM-5 criteria for PTSD at the time of the examination, the examiner did not address the Veteran's earlier treatment records, including those diagnosing the Veteran with a trauma-related disorder and a nightmare disorder.  However, although the July 2024 VA contract examiner did not find a mental diagnosis separate from depressive disorder, the examiner still attributed the Veteran's entire psychiatric disability to his active service.  

The July 2024 VA contract examiner opined that the Veteran's current mental condition is at least as likely as not a result of an in-service stressor-related event.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's depression is likely attributable to the moral insult and subsequent guilt from being required to shoot and kill two enemy soldiers who breached the base perimeter during his Vietnam service.  The Board finds the July 2024 medical opinion connecting the Veteran's mental condition to his in-service stressor-related event highly probative, as it contains clear conclusions with supporting rationale based on the Veteran's particular circumstances.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  There is no contrary medical opinion in the claims file.  

Moreover, the July 2024 medical nexus opinion is in accord with other medical evidence in the claims file, including the Veteran's VA treatment records which attribute the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms and various psychiatric diagnoses to his in-service trauma.  See, e.g., May 2024 VA Treatment Record (noting Veteran's reports of worsening nightmares since returning from Vietnam, escalating memories of military experience in Vietnam, and rumination of combat experience); May 2024 VA Treatment Record (noting Veteran's symptoms are secondary to trauma event during deployment); January 2024 VA Treatment Record (noting Veteran reports symptoms of a trauma-related disorder, reports symptoms present since Vietnam, and is seeking treatment to stop having nightmares and problems relating to killing two enemy soldiers in Vietnam).  

The AOJ denied this claim finding the Veteran was not diagnosed with, specifically, PTSD.  In that regard, VA has expressly limited compensation to psychiatric disabilities conforming to a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) diagnosis. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.125; see also Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020). 

Nonetheless, where, as here, the Veteran does have a DSM-5 diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disability, other than PTSD, and all manifestations have been attributed to one disability (albeit variously diagnosed), then finding service connection as to one psychiatric disability will, under these circumstances, moot the appeal as to the rest as the Veteran's disability will be entirely rated under the same diagnostic code. See Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1277 (2009). 

As such, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disability, which has been variously diagnosed to include as major depressive disorder and trauma-related disorder, is related to his conceded in-service stressor event in Vietnam.  Resolving any doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for acquired psychiatric disability is warranted.  Further, given the favorable grant, the specific appeal seeking entitlement service connection for PTSD is necessarily moot as the benefits sought have been granted in full under these circumstances.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The appeal is, therefore, granted.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Purcell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.