Citation Nr: A25031407
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-453168
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve is denied.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve is granted.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's left lower peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve manifested as no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's right lower peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve manifested as no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

3. The secondary service connection claims for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy were within the scope of the claim and initial evaluation of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

3. The criteria for an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.310, 3.400.

4. The criteria for an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.310, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1965 to February 1969.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on November 5, 2024, and a transcript of the hearing is of record.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve.

The Veteran contends that his left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and his right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy should have been awarded an initial 40 percent evaluation for moderately severe incomplete paralysis.  See November 2024 Board Hearing Transcript.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ Part 4.  Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In establishing an appropriate initial assignment of a disability rating, the proper scope of evidence includes all medical evidence submitted in support of the Veteran's claim.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  In cases where an assigned disability rating has been challenged or appealed, it is possible for a Veteran to receive a staged rating. A staged rating is an award of separate percentage evaluations for separate periods, based on the facts found during the appeal period.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-28 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (in determining the present level of a disability for any increased evaluation claim, the Board must consider staged ratings).

The Veteran's left lower extremity and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve are each rated under Diagnostic Code 8520, which evaluates paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

Under Diagnostic Code 8520, a 20 percent evaluation is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis.  A 40 percent evaluation is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis.  A 60 percent evaluation is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy.  An 80 percent evaluation is warranted for complete paralysis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8520.

Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve is indicated where the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

The terms "moderate" and "severe" are not defined in the rating schedule.  Merriam-Webster defines moderate as "limited in scope or effect" and "not violent, severe, or intense."  See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate. Severe is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree."  See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.  The term "moderately severe" includes impairment that is considered more than moderate but not to the extent as to be considered severe.

The Board notes that use of terminology such as moderate, moderately severe, and severe by VA examiners or other physicians, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  Using the above definition as guidance, the Board must arrive at an equitable and just decision based on an evaluation of all relevant evidence.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis of the nerve.  When incomplete paralysis is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, moderate degree.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for disorders that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for disorders that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376, 380 (2017).

Turning to the case, an August 2021 electrodiagnostic testing report noted that the Veteran had numbness and tingling in both legs and feet with pins and needle sensation.  The report documented that the Veteran had an abnormal study, and there was "electrical evidence of moderately severe peripheral sensory greater than motor neuropathy of axonal type affecting the lower extremities."

An August 2021 letter from private physician Dr. T.P. stated that recent evaluation results found that he has peripheral neuropathy, and that this had been confirmed by electrodiagnostic studies showing moderate to severe peripheral sensory greater than motor neuropathy of axonal type.  

An August 2021 report from private physician Dr. D.C.M. stated that for the past 2 years, the Veteran had noted diminished sensation involving his feet.  At times, he felt as if he was walking on something, but he was not.  His wife had touched his feet, and he did not know it.  He noted no weakness or bladder issues, and he noted no truncal or proximal leg numbness, or lack of sensation.  His lower extremities distally were hairless.  He had normal gait.  Distal light touch, position sense, and pinprick were all diminished below the knees.  Strength, tone, and bulk were normal throughout, with muscle stretch reflexes being 2 at the knees and absent at the ankles, with downgoing toes to plantar stimulation.  He could heel and toe walk well.

In a January 2022 statement, the Veteran reported after he married his wife in 1971, she noticed that while watching TV his feet would be constantly moving with one foot rubbing the other.  He stated he did this because his feet felt cold and he rubbed them to keep them warm, which he said he still did to the present day after he puts a blanket over his feet.  He stated that he often wore socks to bed because he could not warm his feet even with two blankets.  He stated that he had this problem since 1968 or 1969 and that at times, he noticed numbness in his feet, and he would have to change his leg position to eliminate the sensation.  He stated he also had times that his feet jump or twitch when he sits for long periods of time.

In March 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA peripheral nerve examination, and the examiner reported a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremity.  At the examination, the Veteran reported that he had no feeling in both big toes and had intermittent needle like pain in the plantar aspect of both feet, which he described as like "walking on cotton."  He also reported having prickly, tingling sensation in the lower extremities.  He reported that a drawer dropped and landed on his left foot, hitting his big toe, and that he felt the drawer but "did not feel any real pain."  He had not been prescribed any medication.  The examiner reported his symptoms included mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in the bilateral lower extremity and that he did not have constant pain.  Muscle strength testing was normal, and he had no muscle atrophy.  A reflex exam showed his deep tendon reflexes were normal (2+) at the knee and hypoactive (1+) at the ankle bilaterally.  His sensation to light touch was normal at the upper anterior thigh and thigh/knee, decreased at the lower leg/ankle, and absent at the foot/toes bilaterally.  He had no trophic changes, and his gait was normal.  The examiner reported he had moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  As to functional impact, the examiner stated that it was difficult to do physical work since balance and gait problems could affect the ability to walk, bend, and other activities needed for physical labor, and for touch sensitivity, one cannot sense if they are bumped, and it impacted fine motor skills.

During a July 2022 Board hearing in connection with an appeal for service connection for monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, the Veteran testified that he had "moderate, severe" peripheral neuropathy from his feet to his knees.  He testified that at the VA examination when the tuning fork was being used, he felt pressure against his leg but when she put it in his hand, he could feel the vibration.  He stated he could not feel the vibration from the knees down.

During his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that since his discharge from service, he noticed his feet being cold.  He stated that he slept on his side, and he started noticing that he was not feeling his whole foot on the sheets or the bed.  He testified that he was referred to a neurologist who ran an electromyography on his legs with a needle, and that was when the neurologist determined he had peripheral neuropathy.  He stated that he asked the neurologist how severe it was, and the neurologist said, "well, it's severe."  He testified that the neurologist told him that he had neuropathy up to his knees but that he did not have muscle atrophy.  The Veteran stated that he asked the neurologist "to put that into some kind of terminology" that he could submit to VA, and that is when the neurologist described it as "moderately severe."  He reported that during the VA examination, when the examiner was testing him from his toes to his knees, he felt no vibrations until it reached his thighs.  Before that, he said "she might as well have been putting a pencil - an unsharpened pencil or the eraser of a - of a #2 pencil against my leg."  He testified that he could not feel the vibrations but could feel the pressure of someone putting something against his leg.  He testified that the coldness in his feet wakes him up and had done so for a long time.  He stated that if he stood for any length of time, he experienced pain and "zingers."  He reported that when watching TV at night, all of a sudden, his foot "will just jump because I'm getting some kind of an electrical something.  I call it a zinger."  He testified that while exercising he felt vibrations from his toes to the mid-calf and that when sitting in chairs, he lost a sense of feeling in his feet.  He further testified that standing for long times affected him and walking long distances had started to bother him due to the numbing feeling he experienced.  He stated that he had balance issues if he gets up real fast or stands sometimes.  He testified that he felt his peripheral neuropathy was incorrectly rated from the beginning.

After reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted for the left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy or the right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  The Board concludes that the Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve manifested as no more than moderate incomplete paralysis, as the symptoms were limited in scope and effect, and the evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's left or right lower extremity neuropathy resulted in moderately severe incomplete paralysis based upon the impairment of motor function, trophic changes, sensory disturbance, reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  

Here, August 2021 private treatment records and reports reflect that the Veteran experienced symptoms such as numbness and tingling and diminished sensation in his feet.  The Veteran had similar symptoms at the March 2022 VA examination, including mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness, as well as decreased sensation in the lower leg/ankle and absent sensation to light touch in his feet/toes.  His lay statements reflect symptoms such as coldness, numbness, and decreased sensation.  However, he did not have constant pain, and his symptoms were not characterized as moderate or severe at the March 2022 VA examination.  He also had a normal gait, and he had normal muscle strength with no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were noted to be absent at the ankles in the August 2021 records, and hypoactive at the ankle at the March 2022 VA examination but he had normal reflexes at the knee.  The August 2021 records also support that he had trophic changes as it was noted his lower extremities were hairless.  Overall, the evidence supports that he experienced both subjective and objective symptoms of peripheral neuropathy and the symptoms were limited in scope and effect.

The Board has considered that an August 2021 electrodiagnostic testing report noted the Veteran had "moderately severe" peripheral neuropathy and that an August 2021 letter from private physician Dr. T.P. stated that the Veteran had "moderate to severe" peripheral neuropathy.  The Board also acknowledges the Veteran's Board hearing testimony in which he testified that his neurologist described his neuropathy as "severe" and "moderately severe."  However, as noted above, the use of terminology such as moderate, moderately severe, and severe by VA examiners or other physicians, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  The private physicians did not explain why they characterized the Veteran's neuropathy as moderately severe and moderate to severe or what symptoms were of such a severity.  The Board finds the Veteran's symptoms overall reflect moderate incomplete paralysis throughout the period on appeal.

In sum, the Board finds that initial ratings in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve and in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve are not warranted.  In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, as the evidence is persuasively against the claims and the positive and negative evidence is not nearly in balance, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Accordingly, the claims are denied.

3. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than July 26, 2023, for the award of service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve.

4. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than July 26, 2023, for the award of service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve.

The Veteran asserts that he should have been assigned an earlier effective date for his award of service connection for left lower extremity and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy as secondary to monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS).  He contends his peripheral neuropathy should have been evaluated with his claim for service connection for MGUS and thus, that he should be awarded service connection for the bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy from September 15, 2021, the effective date of service connection for MGUS.

The statutory guidelines for the determination of an effective date of an award are set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 5110.  Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after a final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  If a claim is filed within one year after separation from service, service connection will be effective as of the day after separation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2).  Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.

In secondary service connection claims, the effective date can be no earlier than the date of the claim for service connection on a secondary basis.  See Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (noting that effective dates for primary and secondary disabilities are afforded the same treatment under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 and that secondary disabilities arise at the same time or after primary disabilities).  Entitlement to secondary service connection for an associated disability does not arise until service connection is granted for the primary disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  As such, the effective date for the grant of service connection for an associated disability on a secondary basis cannot be earlier than the effective date for the grant of service connection for the primary disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  This is such, because to establish secondary service connection, it must be secondary to a disability that is already service connected. 

By way of history, on September 15, 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking service connection for MGUS.  He also submitted an article titled, Monoclonal Gammopathy - Associated Peripheral Neuropathy: Diagnosis and Management, which discussed peripheral neuropathy as a complication of monoclonal gammopathies.  His claim for service connection for MGUS was denied in a December 2021 rating decision, and in January 2022, he filed a VA Form 10182 as to the December 2021 denial of service connection for MGUS.

In January 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking service connection for peripheral neuropathy as related to exposure to Agent Orange.  He submitted an article titled, Peripheral neuropathy and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance: a population-based study including 15,351 cases and 58,619 matched controls.  The article stated that MGUS is considered to be asymptomatic but has been shown to be associated with peripheral neuropathy.  

In March 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA peripheral nerve examination, and the examiner reported a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremity with a date of diagnosis of August 2021.  In a March 2022 opinion, the VA examiner opined that his peripheral neuropathy was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the Agent Orange exposure.  The examiner explained that it was the Veteran's neurologist's impression that the peripheral neuropathy was related to MGUS.  His claim for service connection for peripheral neuropathy was denied in an April 2022 rating decision.

During a July 2022 Board hearing in connection with his appeal for service connection for MGUS, the Veteran's representative stated that the Veteran's doctor has said that his peripheral neuropathy is due to the MGUS.  

In a November 2022 Board decision, the Board granted service connection for MGUS pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) and remanded the issue of service connection for MGUS on a basis other than presumptive service connection pursuant to the provisions of the PACT Act.  In the decision, the Board acknowledged that at the July 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran raised the question of service connection for peripheral neuropathy secondary to his MGUS.  However, the Board found that the matter was not before the Board and that the claim for secondary service connection was beyond the scope of the current appeal.  

Ultimately, in an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for MGUS on a direct basis and assigned a noncompensable evaluation effective September 15, 2021.

In June 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review as to the April 2022 rating decision that denied service connection for peripheral neuropathy.  The Veteran asserted that the AOJ did not reconsider the issues of service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy and right lower extremity neuropathy as being due to the now service-connected MGUS.  Subsequently, in a June 2023 letter, the AOJ advised the Veteran that the request for higher-level review was not timely.

In July 2023, the Veteran filed a Request for Higher-Level Review as to the April 2023 rating decision, seeking service connection for right and left lower extremity neuropathy.  In a December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ indicated that a duty to assist error had been identified during the higher-level review for MGUS, specifically that the AOJ failed to get an examination and/or medical opinion.  The rating decision stated that the AOJ understood his July 2023 higher-level review request to be a request for review of the evaluation assigned for his MGUS.  In the associated Higher-Level Review Return, the higher-level reviewer stated that the records indicated an association between the Veteran's neuropathy and his MGUS, that the issue was within the scope of the claim for MGUS, and that it was considered a downstream issue from the Board's grant of service connection for MGUS.  The higher-level reviewer indicated that a medical opinion should have been obtained prior to making a final decision on the evaluation of the Veteran's MGUS, and thus, the issue must be returned for correction.  The higher-level reviewer stated that as the medical evidence of record indicated an association between the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy and MGUS since at least August 10, 2021, if service connection was ultimately warranted, an effective date of September 15, 2021 (the date of receipt of claim/the effective date for MGUS) should be assigned.

In January 2024, a VA medical opinion was obtained, and the examiner opined that the bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the service-connected MGUS.  In the June 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy as secondary to the service-connected monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) with an effective date of July 26, 2023.

The Board recognizes that, consistent with VA's duty to maximize benefits, all possible schedular bases for separate ratings must be considered, including secondary service connection.  See Morgan v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 162, 167 (2018).  In this regard, the Court has held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) requires that, when entitlement to secondary service connection is raised, a formal claim for secondary service connection need not be filed, rather, VA must consider those "complications" in connection with the claim on appeal.  See Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021).

Furthermore, pursuant to Wilson v. McDonough, the Court held that VA is obligated to identify, develop, and adjudicate claims for secondary service connection that are reasonably raised during the processing of a properly initiated claim as to the primary service-connected disability's evaluation level, which may include complications of the primary service-connected disability and claims that logically relate to the pending claim.  Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103 (2022).

The Board finds that an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve, as secondary to the service-connected MGUS is warranted.  The AOJ found that the Veteran's July 2023 request for Higher-Level Review as to the April 2023 rating decision that granted service connection for MGUS on a direct basis with a noncompensable evaluation effective September 15, 2021, was a request for a review of the evaluation assigned for his MGUS.  The record establishes that the Veteran was diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in August 2021, and that his peripheral neuropathy was due to his MGUS.  As such, his peripheral neuropathy was a complication of his MGUS and should have been considered by the AOJ in connection with his claim for MGUS, particularly in evaluating the disability.  

Indeed, the July 2023 higher-level reviewer found a duty-to-assist error in not developing the Veteran's claim for service connection for peripheral neuropathy as secondary to MGUS given that the records indicated an association between the Veteran's neuropathy and his MGUS.  The higher-level reviewer found that the issue was within the scope of the claim for MGUS and was a downstream issue that the AOJ should have considered given the grant of service connection for MGUS.  

As noted above, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later, and in secondary service connection claims, the effective date can be no earlier than the date of the claim for service connection on a secondary basis.  Here, the record reflects that the Veteran was diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in August 2021.  His claim for service connection for MGUS was received on September 15, 2021, and he was ultimately awarded service connection for MGUS on a direct basis effective September 15, 2021.  Thus, the earliest possible effective date in this case is September 15, 2021, the date service connection was awarded for MGUS and the date of claim for MGUS.

(Continued on the next page)

Accordingly, the Board finds that an earlier effective date of September 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve as secondary to MGUS and for the award of service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy involving the sciatic nerve as secondary to MGUS is warranted.  To that extent, the claims are granted.

 

 

KELLI A. KORDICH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Bruce, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.