Citation Nr: A25031080
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-464165
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

An effective date prior to November 15, 2023, for a grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis is denied.

REMANDED

The claim of entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition, including as secondary to service-connected right ankle anterior talo-fibular ligament tear with instability and tenosynovitis, is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits, is remanded. 

The claim of entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection for a back disability in April 2011.

2. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim in May 2012, and the Veteran did not appeal the denial.

3. The AOJ received the Veteran's Supplemental Claim for service connection for a back disability on November 15, 2023.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to November 15, 2023, for a grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. 

§§ 3.102, 3.156, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from January 1969 to January 1971, including in the Republic of Vietnam. His awards and decorations include a Combat Infantry Badge. His claims come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Decision Review Operations Center rating decision.

This appeal originates from a Supplemental Claim and VA Form 21-526EZ the Veteran filed in November 2023. The AOJ initially decided these claims in March 2024, and in April 2024, the Veteran requested higher-level review of the decision. In August 2024, on higher-level review, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had not been received but then readjudicated the claims on their merits, confirming the prior denials. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice Of Disagreement)) appealing the decision, the Veteran elected a Hearing with a Veterans Law Judge as the Board review option. Therefore, in considering these claims, the Board may only review the evidence that was of record when the AOJ initially decided these claims in March 2024 as well as the evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at, or within 90 days of, the hearing, to include testimony. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. The Veteran provided testimony at a Board hearing in November 2024 before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge; a transcript of that hearing is of record.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence submitted or associated with the record outside the periods allowed, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) identifying it. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence that the AOJ previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In the claims remanded below, the AOJ may consider all evidence of record, including that which was submitted or associated with the record outside the allowable time periods. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Effective Date

Entitlement to an effective date prior to November 15, 2023, for a grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis

In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted the Veteran service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis and assigned that disability an initial 40 percent rating effective November 15, 2023. The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection. He acknowledges that, generally, an effective date is assigned no earlier than the receipt date of a claim to reopen but asserts that he is entitled to the benefit sought under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(q)(2), an exception to the general rule. "[W]hen the claim is reopened based on previously missing service medical records...the effective date can be as early as the date of receipt of claim on which a prior evaluation was made." 

During his November 2024 hearing, the Veteran testified that he initially filed his back claim in April 2011. He made several attempts to refile the claim after the AOJ denied it, but VA representatives stifled his efforts. When he first filed his claim, he complied with his representative's advice to submit treatment records from his doctor confirming back pain. After the denial, however, he had difficulty getting his medical records from the Army as Muskogee and St. Louis denied having them. It reportedly took until 2016 to secure them, at which time he filed for service connection for his right ankle disability. Transcript at 17. In the interim, he filed other claims but VA representatives from Muskogee told him that he didn't have enough evidence to file a back claim and "there's no use" in doing so. Without a written statement from a physician indicating that the ankle caused the back injury, it was not enough that doctors had told him that his back was connected. Transcript at 17-19. When he came "up here and we put in some stuff, DAV told me that they'd file it for me. They filed it and I got it", 15 years later. Transcript at 17. 

The evidence here is neither evenly nor approximately balanced, persuasively weighing against granting an earlier effective date. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th at 776. 

As shown above, the Veteran twice refers to a claim to reopen. However, the matter now before the Board originates from a Supplemental Claim that has been processed under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA). Under the AMA, VA no longer reopens claims based on "new and material evidence." Pub. L. 115-55, 131 Stat. 1105 (Aug. 23, 2017). That language is derived from the pre-Act version of the applicable regulation. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400 (2019) (explaining that claims filed before the effective date of the Act are "legacy appeals" to be analyzed under VA's traditional process, and claims filed after that date are to be adjudicated under a modernized appeal system); 84 Fed. Reg. 2449 (Feb. 7, 2019) (stating the effective date of the Act is February 19, 2019).

The effective date of an award of disability compensation based on an initial or supplemental claim will not be earlier than the receipt date of the claim. The effective date may be the day following discharge from service if the claim is received within a year of discharge; otherwise, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. 

§ 5110(a), (b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. 

Exceptions to this rule include a later grant of service connection based in whole or in part on newly obtained service department records under certain circumstances, as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c), a provision that is still applicable under the AMA. Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c), VA must reconsider a claim if, at any time, it receives relevant service department records that existed and were not part of the claims file when it first decided the claim. Jones v. Wilkie, 964 F.3d 1374, 1378-79 (Fed. Cir. 2020). If the new service records lead to an award of service connection, the effective date is the date entitlement arose or the date VA received the previously decided claim, whichever is later. Id. at 1379.

In this case, the Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection for a back disability in April 2011. The AOJ denied this claim in May 2012, and contrary to the Veteran's assertions, the denial is based in part on the Veteran's service treatment records, which were then available. The Veteran did not appeal or seek higher-level review of the decision. The decision is thus final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c)(1); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(a), 3.160(d), 20.200, 20.1103.

The Veteran did not again mention his back for over a decade, until November 15, 2023, when the AOJ received his Supplemental Claim for service connection for a back disability secondary to his service-connected right ankle disability. As noted above, the AOJ granted this claim in March 2024, effective November 15, 2023.

As the Veteran contends, between May 2012, when the AOJ first denied the claim, and March 2024, when it granted it, service department records, including duplicate treatment records and new personnel records, were associated with the record. Based on this fact, the Veteran claims that, pursuant to the exception noted in 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(q)(2), the effective date of the grant of service connection for his back disability should not correspond to the date of receipt of his Supplemental claim. First, the Veteran correctly points out that there is an exception to general effective date rules that involves service department records; however, the provision he cites does not refer to this exception. Instead, 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(q)(2) governs "[n]ew and material evidence (38 C.F.R. §3.156) other than service department records" that are received after a final disallowance. 

Second, in the Veteran's case, the exception that involves service department records does not allow for an effective date prior to the receipt date of his Supplemental Claim. According to 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c)(3), the effective date of an award based all or in part on official, relevant service department records that existed but were not part of the record when VA first decided the claim is the date entitlement arose or the date VA received the previously decided claim, whichever is later. The purpose of subsection (c) is "to place a veteran in the position he [or she] would have been had . . . VA considered the relevant service department record before the disposition of [the] earlier claim." Blubaugh v. McDonald, 773 F.3d 1310, 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2014).

Here, when the AOJ granted this claim in March 2024, it did so on a secondary basis, as related to the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability, not direct basis, as related to his active service. The AOJ had secured a medical opinion in support of the Veteran's then expressed theory of entitlement, and this opinion, dated in December 2023, linked the Veteran's back disability to his service-connected right ankle disability. The examiner explained that a failure to treat ankle pain affects one's back health, even on a long-term basis, sometimes causing a limp, an awkward shift in weight bearing, a reliance or other muscles, and strain on bones, joints, muscles. In its rating decision granting this claim, the AOJ did not refer to or provide any indication that it was basing its grant, even partially, on any of the new service department records submitted between May 2012 and March 2024. Even if this were not the case, an effective date of April 2011, corresponding to the date VA received the previously decided claim, would not be assignable as the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for a back disability did not arise until December 2023, when the examiner provided the favorable opinion.

During the November 2024 hearing, the undersigned Veterans Law Judge informed the Veteran that, because the May 2012 rating decision initially denying his back claim became final in 2013, the only way to vitiate that finality for purposes of getting an earlier effective date is to file a motion claiming clear and unmistakable error in the May 2012 decision. Transcript at 19. According to the Veteran's representative, the Veteran file it or "something when he sent in for review of the claim." Transcript at 20. However, to date, no such filing has been added to the record.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions in this case, but the criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to November 15, 2023, for a grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.400.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition, including as secondary to service-connected right ankle anterior talo-fibular ligament tear with instability and tenosynovitis 

This claim is being remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on review.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a right foot disability secondary to his service-connected right ankle disability. He claims that his in-service right ankle injury led to the development of disability in his right foot. He testified that he sprained his right ankle during service, after which he was casted and placed on limited duty, but it did not heal properly, causing a rolling right ankle. This is turn has resulted in a torn or pulled tendon, toe issues, and a neuroma/excess scar tissue in the right foot. Transcript at 12-14. He questioned why his right foot disability would be considered due to tight shoes and other footwear when his left foot is almost perfect. Transcript at 14.  

Treatment records, a Foot Conditions DBQ examination report, and a DBQ medical opinion confirm that the Veteran has multiple conditions affecting his right foot, including osteoarthritis, Morton's neuroma, hallux rigidis, and numbness and radiating pain from the middle toes to the right ankle. In December 2023, a Foot Conditions DBQ examiner ruled out a relationship between the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability and his right foot neuroma and hallux rigidis. However, she did not discuss the Veteran's right foot osteoarthritis or objectively confirmed neurological symptoms or offer an opinion on whether the right ankle disability is aggravating any right foot disability. The AOJ's failure to recognize this inadequacy represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected on remand.  

Entitlement to service connection for COPD, including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits

Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits

These claims are being remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on review.

The Veteran initially claimed entitlement to service connection for COPD and skin cancer on the basis that these conditions are related to his in-service exposure to Agent Orange. In November 2024, however, he testified that, while living at and patrolling base camp up to the demilitarized zone, he was also exposed daily to burn pits where medical supplies and garbage were dumped. Transcript at 2-3. When he first arrived at camp as a Private First Class, he was tasked with burning stuff. Transcript at 3. 

The AOJ has conceded that the Veteran served in Vietnam, where he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents, participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) by virtue of his service there, has COPD, and has had skin cancer since the filing of these claims. The question for the Board is therefore whether these conditions are related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the Veteran's exposure to herbicide agents/engagement in a TERA. 

The AOJ afforded the Veteran an examination in support of these claims in 2023, but the examiner did not provide opinions addressing this matter. The AOJ erred by failing to correct this inadequacy.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Secure an addendum opinion in support of the claim for service connection for a right foot disability, including as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability.

The examiner should review all pertinent evidence of record. 

Considering all right foot diagnoses of record, including osteoarthritis, Morton's neuroma, and hallux rigidis, and the objectively confirmed numbness and radiating pain from the middle toes to the right ankle, offer an opinion as to whether any right foot disability is related to the Veteran's active service, including his documented in-service right ankle injury.

If not, offer an opinion as to whether any right foot disability is due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability.

If not, offer an opinion as to whether any right foot disability is aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability. 

The examiner must provide clear rationale for each opinion. 

2. Secure an addendum opinion in support of the claim for service connection for COPD, including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without an examination, afford the Veteran an examination.

The examiner should review all pertinent evidence of record. 

The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's COPD is related to the Veteran's active service, including his presumed exposure to herbicide agents and participation in TERA while serving in Vietnam and/or his reported exposure to burn pits. 

The examiner must provide clear rationale for the opinion. 

3. Secure an opinion in support of the claim for service connection for skin cancer, including as secondary to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and burn pits. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without an examination, afford the Veteran an examination.

The examiner should review all pertinent evidence of record. 

The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's skin cancer is related to the Veteran's active service, including his presumed exposure to herbicide agents and participation in TERA while serving in Vietnam and/or his reported exposure to burn pits. 

The examiner must provide clear rationale for the opinion. 

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.