Citation Nr: A25031717
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-445292
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 50 percent disability rating for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in an approximate balance that during the applicable appellate period the Veteran's psychological signs and symptoms most nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

After affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the criteria for a disability rating of 50 percent for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran retired from the United States Navy, serving from November 1986 through November 2006.  The Veteran had over three years and five months of sea service, including on board USS ENTERPRISE (CVN 65).  The Veteran was a plane captain (on-deck aircraft launch and recovery operations supervisor) and an aviation supply specialist.  He was awarded the Joint Service Achievement Medal and Southwest Asia Service Medal, among numerous others.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2023 higher-level review rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The June 2023 higher-level review rating decision reviewed a March 2021 rating decision.  In June 2024, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Disability Ratings for Acquired Psychiatric Disorders

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD is currently rated as 30 percent disabling.  See, e.g., June 2023 VA Rating Decision Codesheet.  The Veteran contends that his psychological signs and symptoms meet the criteria for a disability rating of at least 70 percent.  See, e.g., June 2024 VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement); June 2024 Veteran Representative Argument.    

Generally, disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects their ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing a veteran's symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Most psychiatric disabilities, including PTSD, are rated using the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  VA adjudicators engage in a holistic analysis in which they assess the severity, frequency, and duration of any signs and symptoms of a veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder; quantify the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assign an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).  

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 30 percent disability rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal) due to symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, (weekly or less), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

A 50 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory such as, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent disability rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including at work or in a work like setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A maximum 100 percent disability rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders assigns ratings according to the manifestations of particular symptoms.  However, the use of the phrase "such as" in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve only as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  

VA adjudicators therefore must consider all symptoms of a veteran's condition that affect their level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed. 2013) (DSM-5).  Mauerhan at 436.  Ratings are then assigned based on a spectrum of symptoms displayed by a veteran and they "may qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of a similar severity, frequency, and duration."  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders and the Board considered all the symptoms of the Veteran's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.    

Increased Rating for PTSD

Turning now to the evidence in the instant case, the record includes a VA PTSD benefits examination report and psychiatric opinion, VA treatment records, service treatment records, military personnel records, and a statement from the Veteran.      

The Board reviewed the entirety of the evidence in the claims file, with a particular emphasis on the evidence pertinent to the issue on appeal.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, all contents of the extensive evidence of record.  See e.g., Gonzalez v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the Veteran's claim.

The Board determines the credibility and weight given to evidence.  Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 523 U.S. 1046 (1998); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367 (2001).  In Jefferson v. Principi, 271 F.3d 1072 (Fed. Cir. 2001), the Federal Circuit Court, citing its decision in Madden, recognized that the Board had inherent fact-finding ability.  Id. at 1076; See also 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).  Further, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to weigh and assess the evidence.  Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992).

Veteran's Lay Statement

The Veteran submitted an August 2018 VA Form 21-0781: Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) to VA in support of his initial service-connection for PTSD claim.  There, the Veteran detailed two aviation accidents that he witnessed while serving aboard aircraft carriers (which constituted the triggering traumatic event underlying his PTSD).  However, the Veteran did not describe any of the psychological signs and symptoms he experienced related to the aircraft accidents, or any other events, in this statement.  Accordingly, the Veteran's statement has low probative value as to the increased rating issue before the Board.     

VA Medical Examination Report and Opinion (March 2021)

There is also a VA medical examination report and associated medical opinion of record.  See March 2021 Medical Opinion Disability Questionnaire; March 2021 VA Initial Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  

In order to be entitled to probative weight, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned explanation connecting the two.  Nieves-Rodrigues v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Further, the examiner must determine whether any lay evidence was satisfactory.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lastly, the absence of a documented diagnosis or symptomology in service or at separation cannot be the basis for a negative opinion for service connection.  Ledford v. Derwinksi, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Dalton at 23.  

Accordingly, an inadequate medical examination or opinion may be assigned low probative value by the Board.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993) (Board may properly reject medical opinion where it is based on facts contradicted by the record).  Further, when faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one opinion over the other.  Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998).  

The March 2021 Medical Opinion Disability Questionnaire opined on service connection for the Veteran's PTSD but did not document or evaluate the Veteran's psychiatric signs and symptoms.  Accordingly, the opinion has low probative value as to the appropriateness of the Veteran's current disability rating.

The March 2021 VA Initial Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire was authored by the same examiner as the March 2021 Medical Opinion Disability Questionnaire.  There, after a video telehealth examination and review of the record, the VA examiner confirmed the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis, which they opined was caused by multiple traumatic events the Veteran witnessed during carrier-based aircraft launch and recovery operations while in the Navy.  The examination report has high probative value as it contained clear conclusions supported by the record, interview and observation of the Veteran, consideration of the Veteran's lay reports, and adequate supporting analysis.  

At that examination, the Veteran reported that he successfully served 20 years in the Navy, retiring in 2006.  He obtained a Bachelor of Science in business management, worked for several Department of Defense contractors, and at the time of the examination worked for the Department of Defense at the Defense Logistics Agency on "base."  The Veteran told the examiner that he liked his job as his duties are similar to his Naval duties, but said he had some issues with lateness.  He reported generally keeping to himself at work but said he was doing a "good job" there.  The Veteran admitted that coworkers have given him feedback that he sounds angry; and further acknowledged that he is easily irritated and will raise his voice at co-workers.

The Veteran's family included his spouse, two adult children (from a previous relationship), mother, and two surviving siblings.  He reported that most of his family lived in another region of the country.  The Veteran said that his father passed away when he was young.  The Veteran further reported family tragedy; his sister was murdered by her spouse in a domestic violence episode in 1998.  This loss had a "long-term impact" on the Veteran's mental health.  Despite these social challenges, the Veteran described a strong relationship with his spouse, explaining they were high-school sweethearts.  While he did admit that he will sometimes raise his voice at his spouse, he said that he would apologize and was not actually mad at her.  Veteran reported being triggered when speaking with his Navy friends, as their conversations often are about their time in service which reminds of the Veteran of the traumatic events he witnessed.  The Board recognizes that the Veteran reported being hypervigilant and ill-at-ease outside the house, making it unlikely for him to establish and maintain new social connections.

The Veteran was noted as having difficulty with alcohol, including two DUIs while serving in the Navy and self-medicating with alcohol at the onset of the manifestation of his psychological signs and symptoms.  However, the examination revealed no indications of other legal issues or other substance abuse issues (beyond a report of some past marijuana use), either in-service or post-service.  At the examination, the Veteran was observed to speak appropriately, was dressed and groomed appropriately, exhibited no evidence of delusions or psychosis, and denied both suicidal and homicidal ideation.   

At the examination, the Veteran reported his subjective psychological signs and symptoms such as daily intrusive thoughts about the traumatic events, practice of avoidance behaviors, fatalistic thinking patterns, nightmares, being easily irritated and perceived as angry, and episodic bouts of anxiety.   

The examiner assessed that the Veteran suffered from recurrent and involuntary distressing memories of the traumatic events he witnessed, recurrent distressing dreams of the traumatic events, demonstrated avoidance efforts, exhibited persistent negative beliefs and expectations, had a persistent inability to experience positive emotions, had irritable and angry outbursts, was hypervigilant, had sleep disturbances/chronic sleep impairment, depressed mood, and anxiety.  The examiner further identified that the Veteran was prescribed duloxetine and gabapentin, but did not offer an opinion on the effect, if any, on the Veteran's psychological signs and symptoms.   

Ultimately, the examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD signs and symptoms manifested in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

VA Medical Treatment Records           

The record also contains the Veteran's VA medical treatment records, including records of mental health treatment.  See, e.g., January 2019 VA RCS Client Information Records; February 2019 VA CAPRI Records; December 2019 VA CAPRI Records; March 2021 VA CAPRI Records.

January 2019 VA RCS Client Information Records document some of the Veteran's mental health treatment from July 2018 through June 2019.  Those records include a July 2018 Intake Assessment.  There, the Veteran was described as "very depressed with intrusive memories, nightmares, and hypervigilance" and suffering from sleep disturbances, anxiety, and abusing alcohol.  However, despite his PTSD signs and symptoms, the Veteran reported working for the Department of Defense in logistics and having generally "good family relationships."  Further, a September 2018 Progress report documented "likely panic attacks," hypervigilance, and worsening depression.  A November 2018 Progress note documented that the Veteran's sister was murdered while he was serving in the Navy, and he shared that he had never spoken about her death with anyone.  He was described as "sweating and anxious" during the session, but "making progress."  In a June 2019 Progress Note, the Veteran reported general improvement and indicated he hoped to be able to work toward getting his point across with fellow employees without resorting to anger. 

February 2019 VA CAPRI Records contained a January 2019 Psychiatry Attending Note which assessed the Veteran as suffering from late onset PTSD.  That entry documented that the Veteran was employed at an aviation facility (which had a triggering effect, reminding the Veteran of his past aircraft-related trauma).  However, the clinician described the Veteran as "resilient" with good long-term prognosis, "reliably" denying suicidal or homicidal ideations.  A November 2018 Psychiatry Attending Note documented continued anxiety attacks, hypervigilance, sleep disturbances and nightmares, and sadness.  

The February 2019 VA CAPRI Records also contain a comprehensive August 2018 Mental Health Diagnostic Study Note.  There, the Veteran was assessed as suffering from moderately severe depression, with the Veteran reporting little interest or pleasure in doing things, feeling down, depressed, and hopeless, and having trouble concentrating.  The Veteran reported that he began to experience intrusive memories, nightmares, and hypervigilance approximately five months before the medical appointment.  He continued that he self-isolated himself, avoided social interactions, and had been feeling anxious with added pressure at work (with the Defense Logistics Agency).  He further reported that he used alcohol to self-medicate (3-5 drinks per night for the previous 6 months).  Despite his signs and symptoms, the Veteran reported a "solid" home life with his wife; assessing the relationship with her as having "no conflicts."  Ultimately, that treatment provider diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD with mild alcohol use disorder.

A June 2018 Psychiatry Emergency Department Note, also within February 2019 VA CAPRI Records, recorded some of the Veteran's earliest documented descriptions of his psychological signs and symptoms and their onset.  There, the Veteran reported that he had suffered from nightmares related to his in-service trauma for many years, but recently they had begun getting progressively worse.  He reported that he was experiencing emotional distress upon waking and that he was actively avoiding reminders of his past trauma.  The Veteran said that he had trouble functioning at work and sometimes avoids leaving the house for days at a time.  He also reported intimacy issues due to his preoccupation with his traumatic memories.  The Veteran reported being alert for danger, disliking people standing behind him, and irritability and lack of control over his mood.  The Veteran also stated he found it difficult to concentrate and that he had lapses of memory.  The treating clinician diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD.         

December 2019 VA CAPRI Records contain a December 2019 General Psychiatry Attending Note which detailed that the Veteran lost his daughter's fiancé (father of his grandchild) in a car accident.  However, despite the loss and depression symptoms, clinicians noted a "robust response" to treatment and that the Veteran remained future-oriented, resilient, and working full time.  A June 2019 Psychiatry Attending Note also notated a positive response to pharmaceutical treatment, with the Veteran stating that his anxiety improved, he was not drinking alcohol, not smoking, and that his mood improved.  The Veteran further reported being motivated at work with good performance.  An April 2019 Psychiatry Attending Note documented the Veteran's response to new medications, he reported being less anxious, but still suffering from some anxiety, hypervigilance, and nightmares.  

March 2021 VA CAPRI Records contain an October 2020 Psychiatry Note which notated that the Veteran reported that he was doing "okay" overall and that he had adjusted to the COVID-19 pandemic, despite an initial spike of his PTSD symptoms.  There, the Veteran stated that his current medications have been helpful in reducing his anxiety and hypervigilance, reduced his nightmares, and improved his sleep.  The Veteran reported that he was no longer overwhelmed by his symptoms.  The Veteran was still living with his wife, with the rest of his family living in another state.  He reported that he continued to be employed by the Department of Defense.  The clinician assessed the Veteran as "overall stable with adequately controlled PTSD [symptoms] on his current medication regimen . . ."  However, an April 2020 Mental Health Nursing Note documented that the Veteran still reported continued nightmares and some mood instability, along with paranoia and hypervigilance.   

Analysis

The Board acknowledges that psychiatric signs and symptoms are not static and that the appellate period under review here is several years.  The Board also notes the Veteran began receiving mental health treatment during the appellate period for the first time, including pharmacological treatment.  After review, the Board attributes the following psychiatric signs and symptoms to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD: frequent intrusive thoughts, hypervigilance, practice of avoidance behaviors, chronic sleep impairment with nightmares, episodes of irritability with angry outbursts, persistent negative beliefs and expectations, anxiety with panic attacks, chronic depression, trouble with concentration, and memory issues.  The Board further recognizes that the Veteran's alcohol use is related to his PTSD. 

Despite his signs and symptoms and his workplace proximity to military aircraft, the Veteran appears to be functioning generally satisfactorily at work and has maintained fully-time employment since retiring from the Navy in 2006.  The Board further notes that the Veteran reported generally positive relationships with family, reporting relatively little in the way of familial strife caused by his PTSD during the period on review.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's sister's death still plays a role in causing the Veteran distress, as does the loss of his daughter's fiancé.  Further, the Veteran does appear to be socially isolated, relying primarily on his wife for support.  He also had difficulty socializing with Navy friends due to their conversations triggering traumatic memories from service. 

At points during the period on review, the Veteran suffered from frequent anxiety or panic attacks, impaired memory, impaired judgment, disturbances in motivation and mood, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; all signs and symptoms consistent with the 50 percent rating criteria.  At other points, the Veteran exhibited depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, less than weekly panic attacks, and chronic sleep impairment; signs and symptoms more consistent with the 30 percent rating criteria.  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.  When a veteran seeks benefits and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the veteran prevails.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

After engaging in a holistic review of the record, considering the psychiatric examination and opinion, medical records, and other relevant evidence, and assessing the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD, the Board finds that the Veteran displayed signs and symptoms consistent with both the 50 percent evaluation criteria and the 30 percent evaluation criteria.  Therefore, the evidence is in an approximate balance.

Accordingly, entitlement to a rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

The Board considered whether the Veteran's signs and symptoms more closely approximate the 70 percent rating criteria or the 100 percent rating criteria; however, entitlement to those ratings is not supported by the record.  

There is insufficient evidence supporting that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.  At no point during the period on appeal did the Veteran demonstrate occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including at work or in a work like setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that his anxiety and depression symptoms reach the threshold contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.  However, despite suffering from depression and anxiety symptoms for much of the period on review, the Board finds that those symptoms did not reach the level of "near-continuous" and affecting the Veteran's ability to function "independently, appropriately, and effectively" as contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria because the Veteran maintained continuous, stable employment, reported positive family relationships, and did not exhibit any other high-risk or concerning behavior such as violent outbursts, serious substance abuse (beyond some alcohol abuse), suicidal or homicidal ideations, or other legal or administrative issues.           

Similarly, there is no evidence suggesting that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating.  At no point during the period on appeal did the Veteran demonstrate total occupational and social impairment with symptoms comparable with grossly inappropriate in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting himself or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or his own name.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Lastly, notwithstanding the Court holding in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the Board finds that the record does not raise a claim for a total rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU).  In this regard, as mentioned above, the Veteran repeatedly told providers that he had stable employment with the Defense Logistics Agency throughout the relevant timeframe on appeal.  The Veteran does not allege, and there was no indication in the record, that the Veteran's psychiatric condition manifested to such a degree as to render the Veteran unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Stanley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.