Citation Nr: A25031095
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240103-406030
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right elbow strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder had its onset during his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2018 to November 2021.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the January 2023 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. Regarding the issues the Board is remanding, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  

After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. ?38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102.  If the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, the claim is to be denied.  Lynch?v. McDonough,?999 F.3d 1391 (2021).

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder

The Veteran contends that he has an anxiety condition due to his service. The AOJ has favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder. See January 2023 Rating Decision- Narrative. Thus, the remaining question is whether that diagnosed unspecified anxiety disorder had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that it is.

Regarding in-service events, the Veteran has described that his deployment to Oman during the pandemic caused him significant stress and anxiety from "being away," with limited connectivity to family; additionally, he explained that he was under a significant amount of "pressure from [his] [peers] and chain of command" to perform well "and not mess up" which took a "big toll" on his mental health. See October 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ); see also September 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. 

During his October 2022 examination, the Veteran reported that he became "frustrated" during his Oman deployment from November 2019 through February 2020 at the inability to communicate regularly with family at home. The Veteran subsequently explained that he worked 12-hour days, 7 days a week, and that when the pandemic began, it caused "mass anxiety." The examiner noted that records indicated that the Veteran was referred for a VA mental health assessment on March 10, 2021, but that he refused to complete required paperwork to facilitate an examination. The Veteran explained at the examination that he currently did not recall that event. See October 2022 DBQ.  

In the October 2022 VA medical opinion, the examiner provided a positive nexus opinion for the Veteran's anxiety condition, finding it was at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) incurred in or caused during service. The examiner found that the Veteran's medical records supported the diagnosed condition and opined that "the Veteran suffers from chronic anxiety related to his ability to succeed in life which may well have begun during his time in the Navy." This opinion serves to link the Veteran's mental health condition to his credible report of its onset during service and includes an adequate rationale for the opinion rendered with supporting data. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007). The Board notes that lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board also notes that a mental health condition was not noted on the Veteran's service entrance examination.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary is required to give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107. 

Here, the Board finds that the timing of the Veteran's service, his credible lay statements, the fact that he was sound at entrance, and the findings included in the October 2022 opinion bring the evidence addressing whether the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder had its onset in service into approximate balance. Accordingly, service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder is warranted, and the claim is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for right elbow strain

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition

The Veteran asserts that he has a right elbow strain and a left ankle condition due to physical fitness training and the duties he performed during his military occupational specialty (MOS), to include walking on non-skid flooring, holding heavy chains, and bending over or down multiple times over a short period of time to chain down aircraft. See September 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ; see also November 2022 Elbow and Forearm Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). The AOJ has favorably found that the Veteran has current diagnoses of right elbow strain and left ankle strain. See January 2023 Rating Decision-Narrative.  

The issues are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. Specifically, the AOJ obtained a medical opinion prior to the rating decision on appeal; however, the medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's right elbow strain or left ankle condition had onset in service and does not address the Veteran's competent report of right elbow and left ankle pain symptoms since service. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made).

In that regard, the VA examiner who completed a November 2022 DBQ concluded that the Veteran's "right elbow strain and bilateral ankle strain was less likely than not (less than 50% probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in service injury, event, or illness." In support of her opinion, the examiner stated, "per my review of STR's [service treatment records] there was not enough evidence to substantiate a claim of elbow pain; ankle pain." In addition, the examiner acknowledged that on his separation Report of Medical History the Veteran checked the box indicating a 'painful shoulder, elbow or wrist,' however, noted "Veteran reports on report of medical history 5.24.21 pain on 12a however on written findings only reported plain with L wrist." See November 2022 DBQ.

The Board notes that the absence of medical records during or after service cannot be the sole basis for an opinion against a claim. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007).  While the lack of contemporaneous medical records may be considered and weighed against lay evidence, the lack of such records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence not credible. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Here, the November 2022 VA examiner relied entirely on a lack of contemporaneous medical records without providing a reasoned medical explanation as to the significance of that finding, particularly in the context of the Veteran's lay statements describing his ongoing right elbow and left ankle symptoms. 

As such, the Board finds the November 2022 VA medical opinion inadequate, and the AOJ erred in failing to obtain an addendum opinion prior to issuing the decision on appeal. This pre-decisional duty to assist error must be corrected on remand. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician on the etiology of the Veteran's right elbow disability. If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions posed, one should be scheduled.  After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right elbow disability was incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness? Please explain why or why not, specifically considering and discussing the Veteran's assertions 1) that he has had right elbow pain since service, and 2) that physical fitness training and the wear and tear associated with his military occupational specialty caused a right elbow disability.

The examiner should consider the nature of the Veteran's current disability and whether it is consistent with an onset in service. The rationale cannot solely rely on the absence of a diagnosis or symptoms noted in the STRs or at separation from service to form the basis of a negative opinion.

2. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician on the etiology of the Veteran's left ankle condition. If an examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions posed, one should be scheduled.  After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left ankle disability was incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness? Please explain why or why not, specifically considering and discussing the Veteran's assertions 1) that he has had intermittent left ankle pain since service, and 2) that physical fitness training and the wear and tear associated with his military occupational specialty, to include walking on non-skid flooring, holding heavy chains, and bending over or down multiple times over a short period of time to chain down aircraft, caused a left ankle disability.

The examiner should consider the nature of the Veteran's current disability and whether it is consistent with an onset in service. The rationale cannot solely rely on the absence of a diagnosis or symptoms noted in the STRs or at separation from service to form the basis of a negative opinion.

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hampl, Samantha

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.