Citation Nr: A25031805
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433241
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an eye (vision) disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a diagnosis of an eye (vision) disorder at any time during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an eye (vision) disorder are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 2014 to July 14, 2023.  He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal and Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, among others.

These matters are before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision. 

When appealing the matter to the Board the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, electing the Direct Review Docket.  He did not submit additional evidence, but he did file VA Form 21-526EZ on the same day he submitted his VA Form 10182.  In this application the Veteran filed three service connection claims, separate and apart from claims on appeal herein.  As such, Edwards v. McDonough, 36?Vet. App.?56 (2023) is not applicable as the Veteran did not submit additional evidence so clarification as to whether he wishes to change dockets is not required.

As explained in the VA Form 10182, Direct Review means the Veteran does not desire a Board hearing and will not submit any additional evidence in support of his appeal.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?20.300(a), 301.

The Board will not consider evidence received after the March 2024 AOJ decision, unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38?C.F.R. §?20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request.

If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it.  The Veteran is welcome to file a supplemental claim in connection to the eye disorder claim to have this evidence considered.  Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  However, as a remand of the service connection claim for bilateral foot disability is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand for this service connection claim.  

Service Connection 

The Veteran filed his service connection claim in March 2023, while he was on active duty.  As such, the first question before the Board is whether the record submitted during the applicable evidentiary shows a current diagnosis of an eye disorder as of March 2023.  

Establishing service connection generally requires medical evidence or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of the following: (1) A current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) nexus between the claimed in-service disease and the present disability.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

The Veteran contends that he has an eye (vision) disorder.  He did not provide any specificity in his claim but contends that this disorder is a result of his time in service.  During the February 2024 VA examination, he reported being assigned to a submarine during active-duty service and reported that since then his eyes are more sensitive to fluorescent overhead lights.  After noting the Veteran's reporting the examiner stated that the record review and exam today shows good ocular health with no evidence of ocular pathology or any systemic pathology that would cause these symptoms.  

The June 2013 enlistment examination shows that on clinical evaluation, the Veteran's eyes were noted as normal.  The Veteran also denied any eye trouble.  Therefore, the Veteran is deemed healthy upon entrance.  Service treatment records do not indicate treatment for an eye disorder.  A March 2014 service treatment record notes that there were no eye symptoms.  Service treatment records dated October 2018 and April 2020 indicates he denied eye trouble.  

A January 2023 separation service treatment record shows that he denied eye trouble but noted that he wore contact lenses or glasses as at age 11 as he had astigmatism.  The examiner noted that he does not require visual acuity correction.  

In February 2024, after performing an in-person examination of the Veteran a VA ophthalmologist concluded that the Veteran does not currently have an eye condition.  The examiner also specifically noted that there was no astigmatism.  Under the Remarks section of the report the examiner stated, "For the claimant's condition of left eye vision condition there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs and or symptoms to support a diagnosis.  For the claimant's condition of right eye vision condition there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs and or symptoms to support a diagnosis."  

On review of the record, there is no probative evidence to indicate a current diagnosis of an eye disorder or residuals thereof.

The Veteran is competent to report that he experienced symptoms of vision loss of other symptoms related to an eye disorder in service, and the Board acknowledges his contentions that his eyes became more sensitive to fluorescent overhead lights after being assigned to a submarine during active duty.  However, he is not competent to self-diagnose an eye disorder beyond lay observable symptomatology such as pain.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis); see also Jones v. West, 12 Vet. App. 383, 385 (1999) (where the determinative issue is one of medical causation or a diagnosis, only those with specialized medical knowledge, training, or experience are competent to provide evidence on the issue); Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's in-service reporting of having astigmatism as a child.  However, this reporting does not equate to a competent, medical diagnosis of astigmatism, or other eye disorder, and the February 2024 VA examiner's conclusion far outweighs the Veteran's contentions.  

As stated above, a VA ophthalmologist performed an in-person examination of the Veteran and concluded that he did not have a current diagnosis of an eye disorder.  The Board places high probative value on this ophthalmologist's medical conclusions.  This opinion is the most probative evidence as to whether the Veteran has or had a diagnosis of an eye disorder at any time during the appeal period.   There is no competent evidence to the contrary.

Further, there is no medical opinion of record regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed eye disorder.  Here, no VA opinion is warranted, as the evidence of record does not demonstrate any current disorder of the eye.  The low threshold for obtaining a VA medical opinion in this case has not been met.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). 

In short, there is no diagnosed disability of record, and the evidence of record does not demonstrate any functional impairments in earning capacity of the Veteran's eyes.  As such, the Board must find that no current disability of the Veteran's eyes is present at any time during the appeal period.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim... even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim.").

The threshold requirement for the granting of service connection is evidence of a current disability.  In the absence of a current disability, there can be no valid claim.  The totality of the competent evidence does not reflect that the Veteran has or has had a disorder of the eye during the appeal period.  Therefore, this claim must be and is denied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1995) (Congress specifically limited entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents had resulted in a disability).

REASONS FOR REMAND

As will be explained below, pre-decisional duty to assist errors were committed and as such the service connection claim for bilateral foot disability is being remanded.

As stated above, the Veteran filed his service connection claim in March 2023 while on active duty.  As such, a current disability is one that is diagnosed as of March 2023 and if the Veteran is successful in his claim, the earliest effective date assigned will be July 15, 2023, the day after separation.  

In February 2024 a VA examiner performed an in-person examination of the Veteran and diagnosed him with arthralgia of the bilateral foot.  As such, the threshold element of a current disability for the service connection claim has been met.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral foot disability was caused by his military service.  See March 2023 claim.  He did not provide any specific contentions in his March 2023 claim but did report as to the onset of his symptoms during his February 2024 VA examination.  He reported the onset of his bilateral foot disability as occurring in 2015, describing it as a gradual onset, aching in bilateral feet with pain.  

Given the current diagnosis and the Veteran's contentions, the minimal threshold has been met to require VA to provide a medical examination.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).  Therefore, a remand is required to provide the Veteran with a VA examination of his feet and to obtain medical opinions as to the etiology of this disability.  

A January 2024 VA Memorandum shows that the Veteran was exposed to radiation during service and confirms that he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The Board acknowledges that the AOJ did not request a TERA exam for the bilateral foot disability, as they noted that a TERA examination is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma.  That notwithstanding, for the reasons described above, a remand is required, and as TERA is presumed the examiner will be requested to consider this on a direct basis.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please schedule an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's foot disabilities, with an appropriate clinician.  

The claim file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner who performs the examination of the Veteran is the examiner who should provide the requested opinions.

2. The examiner is requested to note?in?his/her report that a full review of the?Veteran's electronic claims file, to include this remand, was completed.

The examiner should identify all current foot disabilities, found at any time during the appeal period.

"Current" is defined as any condition identified since the filing of the claim in March 2023.  "Disability" includes any diagnosable conditions as well as pain or symptoms that are not diagnosable but, nonetheless, results in functional impairment.?

If a medical diagnosis cannot be given, the examiner must state whether the medical record shows that the Veteran had any functional impairment, such as loss of range of motion, pain, or instability.

If any previously diagnosed foot disability, is not found on examination, the examiner must address the prior diagnoses of record and indicate whether they may have resolved or been misdiagnosed.

Following examination of the Veteran, and thorough review of the file, and for each diagnosed foot disability, the examiner should address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's foot disability manifested during active service; or is otherwise related to an event, injury, or disease incurred during active service, to include his presumed participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and to include his presumed exposure to radiation.  

1.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity while in service is presumed and the examiner must consider the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, when providing an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement.

2.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that exposure to radiation while in service is presumed and that an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement is requested.  

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.

The examiner is further advised that the mere absence of treatment records is not wholly dispositive as to whether the Veteran had ongoing problems with his feet since service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If any clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Talamantes, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.