Citation Nr: A25031885
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 201015-116080
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for a back brace for calendar year 2020, subject to any regulatory limitations on payment, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran is service connected for a back disability during the 2020 calendar year, and her back brace is shown to have caused wear and tear to her clothing.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a clothing allowance for the 2020 calendar year for a back brace are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1162; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the United States Air Force from February 2003 to October 2003.  The Veteran previously had lengthy inactive service, as well as an initial period of active duty for training from June 1981 to October 1981.  For her meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Air Force Commendation Medal and Air Force Achievement Medal.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2020 letter of determination issued by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Prosthetics & Sensory Aids Service Department. 

In the October 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  

Clothing Allowance

The law provides for payment of an annual clothing allowance for each veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the clothing of the veteran, or uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments.  38 U.S.C. § 1162.

The implementing regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.810, provides, in pertinent part, that an annual clothing allowance may be granted when the Under Secretary for Health or a designee certifies that a Veteran, because of a service-connected disability or disabilities, wears or uses one qualifying prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair) which tends to wear or tear clothing, or that a veteran uses medication prescribed by a physician for one skin condition, which is due to a service-connected disability, that causes irreparable damage to the Veteran's outer garments. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810 (a)(1)(ii).

A Veteran is entitled to an annual clothing allowance for each such prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair) or medication used by the veteran if each appliance or medication affects a distinct type of article of clothing or outergarment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810 (a)(2).  A Veteran is entitled to two annual clothing allowances if a veteran uses more than one such prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, which together tend to wear or tear a single type of article of clothing or irreparably damage a type of outergarment at an increased rate of damage to the clothing or outergarment due to a second appliance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(3).

The Veteran contends she is entitled to a clothing allowance for her back brace, resulting from her service-connected back disability.  She stated her back brace has Velcro which does not fit properly and catches on her clothing, resulting in damage to her clothes.  The Veteran is competent to report that her back brace causes wear and tear to her clothing, as wear and tear to her own clothing is an observable phenomenon.  The Board finds her report is credible.

The Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that in May 2019, she reported she had back pain and sharp shooting pain in her right leg.  She was seen for an orthotics and prosthetics consultation for the fitting and issuance of a back brace.  

Here, the Board finds a clothing allowance for calendar year 2020 for the Veteran's back brace is warranted, as the evidence shows the brace causes wear and tear to the Veteran's clothing.  

Notably, an April 2020 Award Print shows that the Veteran was approved for a clothing allowance for calendar year 2020.  However, the award prints do not contain any information on what device the clothing allowance was approved, therefore, the Board notes that if the Clothing Allowance award in 2020 was for the back brace, this award should not be awarded twice.  

(Continued on next page) 

In sum, a clothing allowance for calendar year 2020 for a back brace, subject to any regulatory limitations on payment, is granted.

 

Evan M. Deichert

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Mouzakis, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.