Citation Nr: A25031695
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240605-449476
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2000 to December 2000.  

This appeal stems from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Pre-Decisional Duty to Assist Error

A remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error; specifically, to obtain an adequate medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder.  

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's February 2000 enlistment examination showed no psychiatric complaints or diagnoses.

According to a November 2020 service treatment record (STR), the Veteran was sent by command to the medical clinic due to claustrophobia while in the engine room.  He was referred to psychiatry for a consultation; the consultation request showed a provisional diagnosis of rule-out claustrophobia. Following the consultation, the Veteran's Axis I diagnosis was occupational problem rule-out adjustment disorder and depressed mood.  The medical professional added that the Veteran was not mentally ill, nor did he meet the criteria for a personality disorder.  However, given his lack of motivation, continued service makes it unlikely that he will be able to successfully complete his military obligation.  The recommendation was Entry Level Separation explaining that the Veteran would become an increasing administrative/medical burden if retained on active duty.  This consultation including the recommendation was reviewed and signed by two medical professionals, including a psychiatrist.

A December 2000 STR shows an assessment of an adjustment disorder with depressed mood; he separated from service in the same month.

In December 2022, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for mental health disorder.  

The Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination via telehealth in April 2023.  The examiner, a psychologist, diagnosed adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety, including anxious mood with sporadic panic attacks, rumination, impaired sleep, difficulties with short term memory, and depressive symptoms of anhedonia, avolition and asociality.  The Veteran reported that his anxiety began on his "first day of enlistment" and that "no one was even friendly."  The condition continued worsening until he was diagnosed with adjustment disorder and discharged after approximately six months as unsuitable.  The examiner added that at the present, although functioning generally well, the Veteran reported that his symptoms continued and that he received counseling and took Diazepam for anxiety.  A medical opinion was not provided.

In a July 2023 addendum opinion, the same VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that the current diagnosis of adjustment disorder was unlikely proximately due to military service because during service, mental health professionals concluded that he was not mentally ill and did not meet the criteria for a personality disorder.  The examiner then noted that the Veteran was discharged under separation code "JFX" for personality disorder and noted that the Veteran did not claim service connection for twenty years after separation from service.  The examiner concluded that if personality disorder was in fact the reason for discharge, it almost certainly predated the Veteran's service.

The Board finds the July 2023 VA opinion inadequate to decide the claim.  

First, while the examiner diagnosed an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood during the April 2023 examination, he did not explain why the current adjustment disorder is not related to the adjustment disorder diagnosed during service.  See December 2000 STR.  Second, the examiner did not address the Veteran's competent lay reports that he now experiences the same mental symptoms that he had during service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination must consider lay evidence of in-service incurrence or continuity of symptomatology since service).  Third, in rendering the opinion, the examiner did not reconcile the evidence that the Veteran felt anxious and claustrophobic during service and whether those symptoms are etiologically related to the current disorder.  See November 2000 STR.

Lastly, the Board observes that the VA examiner attempted to address the conflicting evidence of whether the Veteran had a personality disorder in service.  Compare November 2000 consultation sheet with the separation code JFX on the DD-214.  The VA examiner stated that if the Veteran did have a personality disorder, "it almost certainly predated the Veteran's service."  Given this determination, the AOJ should have requested that the examiner determine whether the personality disorder as shown on the separation report was subject to a superimposed injury resulting in additional disability. Indeed, VA regulations provide that, while personality disorders are considered a congenital or development defect and are not subject to service connection, if a veteran has an acquired psychiatric disorder as a result of disease or injury superimposed on a personality disorder during or as a result of service, service connection may be granted for that additional psychiatric disorder.  Lastly, the examiner did not address whether a personality disorder is currently shown.

For these reasons, a remand is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to help determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

After review of the evidence, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: 

Direct Service Connection

a)	Clarify whether the current adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood had its onset during service or is otherwise related to it.  

In doing so, the examiner must address: 

"	September 2000 STR showing Veteran's complaint of motion sickness.

"	November 2000 STR and Consultation Sheet showing Veteran's complaints of anxiety, nervousness, sweating, and heart racing especially when in an enclosed space such as engine room and his rack; provisional diagnosis was rule-out claustrophobia; Axis I diagnosis was occupational problem rule-out adjustment disorder and depressed mood. Examiner stated that the Veteran was not mentally ill nor did he meet the criteria for a personality disorder. Consultation was reviewed by two medical professionals, including a psychiatrist.

"	December 2000 STR showing assessment of an adjustment disorder with depressed mood.

"	DD 214 showing Entry Level Separation due to unsuitability; Separation Code was JFX, which corresponds to a personality disorder.

"	The Veteran's statement that he experienced similar psychiatric symptoms since service (see e.g., December 2022 statement in support of claim).

Personality Disorder

b)	Address the separation code of JFX (personality disorder) on the DD214.  Was that personality disorder subject to a superimposed injury during service resulting in additional disability? Please explain fully.

(Continued on the next page)

?

c)	Determine whether the Veteran currently has a personality disorder.  If not, explain how it has since resolved, if applicable.

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Yaffe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.