Citation Nr: A25031746
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439249
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, and no higher, for rhinitis is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has moderate hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates and constant congestion that causes forced mouth breathing. These symptoms most nearly approximate 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased initial rating of 10 percent, and no higher, for rhinitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 U.S.C. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6522. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2003 to August 2015, November 2015 to November 2016, and October 2017 to May 2018, with additional National Guard service.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 (obstructive sleep apnea) and March 2024 (migraine headaches and rhinitis) Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office rating decisions. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal (February 6, 2024, for obstructive sleep apnea and March 16, 2024, for migraine headaches and rhinitis). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With respect to the rhinitis increased rating claim, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is remanding the migraine headache increased rating claim and obstructive sleep apnea service connection claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to an increased initial rating of 10 percent, and no higher, for rhinitis is granted.

The Veteran seeks a compensable (10 percent or greater) initial rating for rhinitis.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from the Veteran's disability or combination of disabilities. Id. The Schedule for Rating Disabilities assigns a unique diagnostic code to each listed condition.

If two disability ratings under the same diagnostic code are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When the evidence is in approximate balance as to which rating is warranted, the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Rating Schedule anticipates that symptoms may vary from those listed in the rating criteria. In light of "the number of atypical instances," the Rating Schedule directs that "[f]indings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom, and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will... be expected in all instances." 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

Allergic or vasomotor rhinitis is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6522. Under DC 6522, a 30 percent rating is assigned if the veteran has polyps, and a 10 percent rating is assigned if the veteran does not have nasal polyps but has greater than 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side. A noncompensable (0 percent) rating is assigned if the criteria for a 10 percent rating are not met. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.31 ("In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.").

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for respiratory conditions in February 2024. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a respiratory condition, but that a rhinitis/sinusitis disability benefits questionnaire should be completed because the Veteran had symptoms consistent with a non-respiratory complaint. The examiner noted that the Veteran had congestion that resulted in forced mouth breathing.

Imaging conducted in March 2024 showed moderate bilateral (both sides) nasal hypertrophy.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for rhinitis in March 2024. The examiner wrote that the course of rhinitis since onset included constant nasal congestion. The examiner marked that the Veteran did not have nasal polyps, did not have greater than 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides, and did not have complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side.

Although the Veteran does not have signs or symptoms that match the listed criteria for a 10 percent rating under DC 6522, the Board finds that the Veteran's documented bilateral nasal hypertrophy, constant nasal congestion, and subjective report of forced mouth breathing due to nasal congestion constitutes a degree of functional impairment that most nearly approximates 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides. Accordingly, an initial rating of 10 percent for rhinitis is warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for migraine headaches is remanded.

The Veteran seeks a compensable (10 percent or greater) initial rating for migraine headaches.

After review of the record, the Board finds the claim must be remanded to correct a pre-duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, the VA examination of record is inadequate for adjudication. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (stating that "once [VA] undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim... [VA] must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided").

The Veteran's headaches are evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100. Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is assigned for headaches with less frequent attacks, a 10 percent rating is assigned for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months, a 30 percent rating is assigned for headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average once a month over the last several months, and a 50 percent rating is assigned for headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 50 percent is the highest schedular rating available for headaches.

The term "prostrating" is used in the DC 8100 rating criteria to describe the nature and severity of headaches, but it is not defined in the regulations. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32nd ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe headaches that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The Board "may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria." Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). In other words, the Board must "base its evaluation on [the veteran's] baseline level of functioning without the use of medication." Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, at *10 (March 12, 2025).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024. The examiner recorded that the Veteran experiences bilateral headaches with pulsating or throbbing pain, light sensitivity, and noise sensitivity, at least once a week. The examiner noted that the headaches are "worse with activity." The examiner marked that the Veteran does not experience characteristic prostrating attacks. 

The February 2024 examination is inadequate for adjudication because it is insufficiently detailed. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011) ("In evaluating disability claims, the Board is obliged to reject insufficiently detailed examination reports."). The examiner did not document the Veteran's baseline level of functioning without the use of medication and did not describe what activity exacerbates the Veteran's headaches. Accordingly, remand is required to obtain a new VA examination.

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

After review of the record, the Board finds the claim must be remanded to correct errors in satisfying VA's duty to assist and statutory duties under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a); C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Generally, to establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. Shedden?v. Principi,?381 F.3d 1163, 1167?(Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

Once a veteran files a claim for VA benefits, VA has a duty to assist the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A. The duty to assist includes making reasonable efforts to assist claimants in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate their claims. Id.; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). It also includes providing a medical examination and obtaining a medical opinion when there is competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability) associated with active service but there is insufficient medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App. 79, 86 (2006). Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Additionally, pursuant to the PACT Act, when a veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active service, but the evidence is insufficient to establish service connection, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1). 

Remand is required because VA has not yet fulfilled its duty to assist by obtaining the Veteran's complete service treatment records. VA obtained the Veteran's service treatment records from his first period of active duty, but has not attempted to obtain records more recent than August 2015.

Remand is also required to obtain a new VA nexus opinion.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024. The examiner reported that the Veteran's OSA symptoms began at least ten years ago and that since onset, the Veteran has experienced snoring, apnea at night, daytime fatigue, and gasping for air at night. 

The February 2024 examiner rendered an opinion that the Veteran's OSA was less likely due to his in-service exposure to burn pits, volatile organic compounds, particulate matter, jet exhaust, and vehicle exhaust because "there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of OSA and the TERA."

The February 2024 opinion is inadequate for adjudication because the examiner did not consider whether the Veteran's OSA was directly caused by service, did not consider whether the Veteran's OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected rhinitis, and provided a rationale that did not address the specific facts of the Veteran's case. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 370 (2017) (explaining that VA must consider all theories of service connection raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record); Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60-61 (2018) (holding that a medical opinion is inadequate when it is based solely on general articles without discussing any facts pertaining to Veteran's condition or individual circumstances). Accordingly, remand is required to obtain a new medical nexus opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service treatment records from all periods of active duty and National Guard service (to specifically include the Veteran's active duty service from November 2015 to November 2016 and October 2017 to May 2018). Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

If further efforts to obtain the Veteran's outstanding service records are determined to be futile, prepare a Memorandum of Formal Finding of Unavailability outlining all steps taken to attempt to obtain them and notify the Veteran of such efforts, with a request to submit any outstanding records that are in the Veteran's possession. The Memorandum should detail how service records are maintained, why the search that was undertaken constitutes a reasonably exhaustive search, and why further efforts are not justified. See Dixon v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 261, 264 (1992). 

2. Once the above development has been completed, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician, or clinicians, to determine the severity of his migraine headaches from August 2023 to the present. 

The examination report should include an estimate of the frequency of symptoms severe enough to require medication, and a description of the symptoms and their functional impact if medication is not taken.

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's headaches under the rating criteria. If the nature and/or severity of the signs and symptoms have changed over time, the examiner should state or approximate when the changes occurred, to the extent possible.

The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Remand, and attest to having fully reviewed it.

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider all additional lay statements of record. The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the Veteran's account of his symptoms or history, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

3. Once all development related to outstanding service records is complete, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician with respect to the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). If deemed necessary by the examiner, afford the Veteran a VA examination.

The examiner must review the claims file, to include this Remand, and attest to having fully reviewed it.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following inquiries:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service?

In responding to this inquiry, the examiner must consider and address the synergistic, combined effects of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure through all applicable deployments.

The examiner is advised that if the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not began during active service, a positive nexus opinion must be rendered.

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA was caused by his service-connected rhinitis?

(c)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA was aggravated (worsened beyond its natural progression, even if only temporarily or incrementally) by his service-connected rhinitis?

The term "at least as likely as not" means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion as it is to find against the conclusion.

The examiner is advised that, while the extent to which a scientific theory is accepted in the scientific community is a relevant consideration, a positive nexus opinion for service connection requires only an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence. Scientific consensus or certainty is not required

Any opinions expressed must include a thorough rationale specific to the circumstances of the Veteran's case. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation should be provided as to why an opinion cannot be rendered.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must address the Veteran's assertions on examination and any additional lay statements of record. The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner is reminded that an absence of documented treatment in or after service is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. 

The examiner is reminded that if positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance as to any issue, the Veteran should receive the benefit of the doubt. 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Karp, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.