Citation Nr: A25031650
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240630-451842
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left knee condition, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee condition manifested in service or is otherwise related to service, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a left knee condition, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1995 to July 1997.

The current appeal stems from a rating decision was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  The Veteran selected the Direct Review Docket, meaning that the Board can only review evidence that was of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision.  Additional evidence has been added to the claims file since the rating decision on appeal was issued.  The Board, by operation of law cannot review that evidence in adjudicating this appeal.  To the extent the Veteran would like that evidence reviewed in conjunction with any of the issues on appeal, she may file a supplemental claim and identify or resubmit the evidence.  Instructions on filing a supplemental claim are attached to this decision. 

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of this issue.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal finding that new and relevant evidence was received but subsequently denied the claim.  Therefore, the Board will assume that there was a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was submitted and will be bound by this determination.

The Veteran claimed her left knee condition was the result of her military service.

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In addition, service connection can be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of a service connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a).    

A review of the service treatment records reveal that the Veteran was treated for a right knee injury during basic training.  However, the service treatment records are absent complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of any left knee problems during her military service.  Moreover, the Veteran filed for service connection for her right knee disability several years after separation, but did not file for her left knee for many years thereafter, suggesting that left knee problems were not continuous from service.

In February 2009, the Veteran's gait was found to be normal.  In July 2010, the Veteran was noted to have bilateral knee pain, but her gait was found to be normal and she was able to wear high heeled shoes.  In August 2010, the Veteran was noted to have experienced a severely antalgic gait for the previous 4-6 weeks.  As such, the altered gait appears to have begun after the Veteran started to experience left knee problems.

The Veteran's VA treatment records confirmed a diagnosis of a left knee joint osteoarthritis.  Following a VA knee examination in January 2024, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee disability was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the service-connected right knee disability. The VA examiner explained "Arthritis in one joint does not cause arthritis in another joint.  A thorough review of medical literature failed to show such causal relationship.  It is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but one joint's disease does not 'spread' to another or cause damage to it... A nexus has not been established."

The Veteran's VA and private post-service record reflect that she has been treated for left knee osteoarthritis and pain.  However, there are no findings by any medical professionals within the records to suggest that the Veteran's left knee condition either began during service or was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, namely her service connected right knee disability. 

As such, in this appeal the criteria for service connection have not been met for a left knee condition.  That is, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's disability was diagnosed in service or within a year of service and the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the condition has existed continuously since service.

The only evidence of record in support of the Veteran's claim consists of her own lay statements.  The Veteran is considered competent to report the observable manifestations of her claimed disability.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994).  However, the Veteran is not competent (meaning medically trained) to opine on the diagnosis or etiology of her current left knee condition.  Where a determinative issue involves medical causation or a medical diagnosis, competent medical evidence is required.  See Grottveit v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 91, 93 (1993).  In this case, the etiology of the Veteran's left knee condition, to include whether it is secondary to her service-connected right knee condition, is a complex medical question that is not within the competence of a layperson.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).  The Veteran has provided no medical evidence to support the assertion of a secondary theory of entitlement, and the claims file fails to show such a suggestion.

Therefore, the criteria for service connection for a left knee condition have not been met, and the Veteran's claim is denied.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Yoo, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.