Citation Nr: A25031192
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-421034
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

As the reduction in rating for PTSD from 100 to 70 percent effective January 1, 2024, is proper, restoration of a 100 percent disability rating is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. An October 2023 rating decision reduced the Veteran's rating for PTSD from 100 to 70 percent effective January 1, 2024.  

2. At the time of the October 2023 rating decision, the 100 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD had been in effect for less than 5 years, and the evidence established material improvement of the condition.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The reduction in the rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD from 100 to 70 percent, effective January 1, 2024, was proper.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.343, 3.344, 4.14.14, 4.124A, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Army from March 1983 to April 1995.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) decision on their claim to seek review.? The AMA applies to all?initial?decisions issued after February 19, 2019.?? 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).? The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board in a February 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  The Veteran requested the direct review docket, which limits the Board's review to evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal.

The Board notes that the Veteran's reduction in rating for PTSD stems from a March 2023 claim for special monthly compensation (SMC) based on a need for Aid and Attendance, which was denied in a July 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran appealed this decision in an October 2024 VA Form 10182, which will be addressed in a separate appeal stream at the Board.  

Reduction in Rating

The Veteran was notified of a proposed reduction in his rating for PTSD from 100 to 70 percent in a June 2023 rating decision.  The AOJ implemented this reduction effective January 1, 2024 in an October 2023 rating decision.  

For a reduction of a disability rating to be proper, there are both procedural and substantive requirements that must be followed.

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e) allow for the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability when warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedural guidelines. The AOJ must issue a rating action proposing the reduction and setting forth all material facts and reasons for the reduction. The veteran must then be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing. Then a rating action will be taken to effectuate the reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e). The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (e), (i)(2)(i).

Notwithstanding the requisite procedural steps, a rating reduction is not proper unless the veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000). Congress has provided that a Veteran's disability will not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. When an AOJ reduces a rating without following the applicable regulations, the reduction is void ab initio. Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. 288, 292 (1999).

Specific requirements must be met in order for VA to reduce certain ratings assigned for service-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.344; see also Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277 (1992). Where a disability rating has been in effect less than five years, a rating reduction is warranted where reexamination of the disability discloses improvement of that disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (c); see also Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 415-16 (1993). Where a disability rating has been in effect for five years or more, a rating may be reduced only if the examination on which the reduction is based is at least as full and complete as that used to establish the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (a). Since the Veteran's rating had been in effect for less than five years at the time of the AOJ's reduction, the provisions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (c) will apply in this case.

Additional requirements must be met in cases where a veteran has a 100 percent disability rating.  Specifically, "[t]otal disability ratings, when warranted by the severity of the condition and not granted purely because of hospital, surgical, or home treatment, or individual unemployability will not be reduced, in the absence of clear error, without examination showing material improvement in physical or mental condition.  Examination reports showing material improvement must be evaluated in conjunction with all the facts of record, and consideration must be given particularly to whether the veteran attained improvement under the ordinary conditions of life, i.e., while working or actively seeking work or whether the symptoms have been brought under control by prolonged rest, or generally, by following a regimen which precludes work, and, if the latter, reduction from total disability ratings will not be considered pending reexamination after a period of employment (3 to 6 months)." 38 C.F.R. § 3.343(a). 

In determining whether the reduction was proper in this case, the Board must focus on the evidence available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction medical evidence may be considered in the context of evaluating whether the disability had actually improved. Dofflemyer, 2 Vet. App. at 281-282. Such after-the-fact evidence may not be used to justify an improper reduction.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse?control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.?38?C.F.R. §?4.130.? 

The maximum schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.?38?C.F.R. §?4.130.? 

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the lengths of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  38?C.F.R. §?4.126 (a).? The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id.?However, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation on the basis of social impairment.  38?C.F.R. §?4.126 (b).? 

Symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects,?which?would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan?v.?Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436, 442 (2002).? Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under?38?C.F.R. §?4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.? Id.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment. ?Id.

The record contains?Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scores assigned by?a?mental health professional?who?has?evaluated the Veteran.?The GAF is a scale reflecting the psychological, social, and occupational functioning based on a hypothetic continuum of mental health illness.?See?DIAGNOSTIC AND STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS (4th ed.) (DSM-IV).?????? 

Effective August 4, 2014, VA amended the regulations regarding the evaluation of mental disorders by replacing references to DSM-IV with the Fifth Edition of the DSM (DSM-5).? See?38?C.F.R. §?4.125, amended by 79 Fed. Reg. 45099 (effective Aug. 4, 2014).?Although the DSM-5 no longer uses the GAF scale to assess functioning, the DSM-IV was in effect at the time the GAF score?was?assigned.  Therefore, the Board will consider?the?GAF score?in evaluating the Veteran's occupational and social functioning.?However, an examiner's classification of the level of psychiatric impairment, by word or by a GAF score, is not determinative of the VA disability rating to be assigned.?See?Carpenter v. Brown,?8?Vet.?App.?240 (1995).  The percentage evaluation is to be based on all of the evidence that bears on occupational and social impairment.  Id.; see?also 38 C.F.R. §?4.126; VAOPGCPREC 10-95, 60 Fed. Reg. 43186 (1995).

Factual Background

In August 2021, the AOJ granted a 100 percent disability rating for PTSD effective July 3, 2021.  This rating was based upon private disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) submitted in August 2021. In this examination, a clinician assessed the Veteran with occupational and social impairment in most areas.  

Symptoms noted by the clinician included the following: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events); impairment of short term and long term memory (for example, retention of only highly learned materials, while forgetting to complete tasks); memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; gross impairment in thought process or communication; disturbances of motivation and mood;  difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; negligent of personal appearance and hygiene; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; and disorientation to time or place.

With respect to the Veteran's functioning, he reported that he often gets disoriented and forgetful.  He elaborated that he gets lost, and his wife keeps tabs on him if he goes out alone.  He further reported that his wife and children are fearful around him, and his made him get rid of his guns.  He indicated that he is extremely uncomfortable around others, and he mostly keeps to himself.  He reported his symptoms make his wife and children fearful around him.  He also reported that his wife worries about him getting lost, and he has to keep in touch with her to make sure he arrives safely.  

With respect to the Veteran's occupational functioning, the Veteran reported working in shipping and receiving.  He indicated that he was demoted twice due to an inability to perform the tasks required of him.  He elaborated that he could not handle managing people due to extreme mood swings and inability to deescalate.  He also reported that he leaves work early and arrives late due to his symptoms, and he expressed his fear that he would soon be fired.  

In June 2023, the Veteran was provided another VA examination to assess the nature and severity of his PTSD.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's symptoms cause occupational and social impairment in most areas.  Symptoms noted by the VA examiner included the following: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events); flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting). 

With respect to his social functioning, the Veteran reported that he lives with his wife of 19 years and 18 year-old daughter.  He indicated that he is distant with his children and his wife babysits him.  He elaborated that she does not want him to drive.  He also reported that she made him sell his boat, and he cannot go fishing by himself.  He further reported that he does not sleep with his wife due to violent nightmares.  Additionally, he reported that he does not have friends, and he just wants to be left alone.  He also indicated that he avoids guns, close spaces, and the smell of fire.  He indicated that he spends his time watching television or sitting in the backyard.  

With respect to his occupational functioning, the Veteran reported that he has not worked since September 2021.  He reported that he tried to apply to jobs, but he struggled to get through the interview.  He also reported that he is does not get along with others and he is argumentative.  

With respect to his mental status, the Veteran was oriented in all spheres.  He exhibited good hygiene and good eye contact.  He exhibited a flattened affect.  He appeared quiet and had difficulty finding words to express himself.  He did not endorse hallucinations or delusions and there was no evidence of a thought disorder.  He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  He exhibited good judgment and insight.  

The Veteran told the June 2023 VA examiner that he was not in therapy, but he was trying to get back into it.  Treating records reveal that he has taken psychiatric medication during the period at issue, but there is no documentation of visits for medication management with a psychiatrist or primary care.

Treating records also reveal that the Veteran received care across a variety of settings from 2022 to 2023, including visits with his primary care, a gastroenterologist, physical therapy, and the emergency room.  The Veteran consistently presented in these visits as alert and oriented.  There is no indication that he attended visits with the assistance of his wife or caregiver, nor is there any indication that there were barriers to understanding or remembering medical advice.  These records also reveal that the Veteran told his primary care physician in September 2022 that he stopped working due to bilateral knee pain and low back pain, and he wanted to apply for Social Security disability on this basis.  

Analysis

The Veteran contends that the October 2023 rating decision that reduced his evaluation of PTSD from 100 percent to 70 percent was improper.  However, the Board finds that the reduction was proper, and a restoration of a 100 percent rating is not warranted.

With respect the provisions in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, the Board finds that the AOJ followed the proper procedures.  In July 2023, the AOJ issued a rating decision proposing a reduction of the Veteran's PTSD rating in which it set forth all material facts and reasons for the reduction.  The Veteran was notified of his rights to submit evidence and obtain a personal hearing to support his claim, but he did not respond.  Subsequently, the AOJ implemented the reduction in an October 2023 rating decision effective January 1, 2024, which was more than 60 days after the Veteran was notified of the action.  

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran's rating was in effect for less than five years at the time of the AOJ's reduction.  Accordingly, the provisions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (c) apply, and a rating reduction is warranted where reexamination of the disability discloses improvement of that disability.  Because the Veteran was in receipt of a total disability rating, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.343(a) also apply, and his rating will not be reduced in the absence of clear error, without examination showing material improvement in physical or mental condition.  Finally, the Board notes that a rating reduction is not proper unless the veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000).  Here, the Board finds that these criteria have been satisfied.  

The Board finds that material improvement by reexamination has been established.  The April 2021 VA examiner documented numerous symptoms that were not identified by the June 2023 VA examiner.  These symptoms include the following:  near-continuous panic or depression; impairment of short term and long term memory; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; gross impairment and thought process or communication; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals; impaired impulse control; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; negligent of personal appearance and hygiene; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; and disorientation to time or place.

Additionally, the Veteran reported significant problems with memory in his April 2021 VA examination, including getting lost, disoriented, and forgetful.  He also reported that his wife and children were fearful around him.  Conversely, he did not complain of these difficulties during the June 2023 VA examination.  Moreover, the Veteran's mental status was normal except for a flattened affect, and appearing quiet with some difficulty finding the words to express himself.  Notably, he was oriented in all spheres, he exhibited good judgment and insight, and there was no evidence of a thought disorder.  Given this evidence, the Board finds that the reexamination demonstrates material improvement in the Veteran's PTSD.  

The Board also finds that actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work has been established.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the exhibited difficulty managing himself independently due to disorientation and memory loss during the April 2021 VA examination.  Conversely, he presented across a variety of treatment settings in 2022 and 2023 without any indication that had memory loss or disorientation.  Moreover, it appears that he attended his medical visits on his own and he did not exhibit any issues understanding or remembering medical advice.  

Furthermore, the Board finds that the symptoms and limitations identified in the record do not rise to the level of severity contemplated in the 100 percent disability rating.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that there is no evidence on record that the Veteran currently experiences?gross impairment in thought processes or communication,?persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior,?persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  

Additionally, the Veteran's symptoms do not equate in severity, frequency, and duration to cause total social and occupational impairment.  Notably, the records indicate that the Veteran was applying for Social Security disability due to his physical impairments alone in September 2022.  At this time, the Veteran did not identify any mental limitations that would prevent him from working.  Additionally, the Veteran indicated that he maintained his marriage of over 19 years and lived with his wife and daughter.  In light of this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have total social and occupational impairment.? 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the AOJ's reduction of the Veteran's disability rating for PTSD from 100 to 70 percent effective January 1, 2024, was proper.  The Board further finds that a restoration of the Veteran's 100 percent disability rating is not warranted.  Accordingly, the Veteran's claim is denied. 

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Beech, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.