Citation Nr: A25031424
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452021
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a low back disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, to include flatfoot, is remanded.

An initial compensable disability rating for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Air Force Reserve from January 1989 to December 2006 and had Active Duty for Training (ACDUTRA) service, including from March 1989 to June 1989, October 1990 to May 1991, and November 1999 to April 2000.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

While the Veteran listed the issue of entitlement to service connection for a stress disorder on the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, he already filed a Supplemental Claim for that issue in May 2024. A claimant who has filed for review under one of the available administrative review options may not, while that review is pending final adjudication, file for review under a different administrative review option. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b). Moreover, the AOJ accepted that Supplemental Claim and readjudicated the issue in a September 2024 rating decision. Thus, that issue is not properly before the Board.

The Board notes that the AOJ granted service connection for a left knee disability and hypertension in the February 2024 rating decision. While January 2024 VA examination reports indicate those grants were based on periods of ACDUTRA service in 1993 and 2000, respectively, the record is unclear as to the exact dates. As the grants would make those periods active service, and effectively change the requirements of service connection, including for purposes of requesting medical opinions, the AOJ should specify the dates of those periods of ACDUTRA service.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).?Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors is required.

Service connection for a low back disorder 

Service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, to include flatfoot

The issues of entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder and a bilateral foot disorder are remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the February 2024 rating decision. 

Based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the February 2024 rating decision, the record indicated outstanding service treatment records that may have been relevant to both issues on appeal. The Veteran served in the Air Force Reserve from January 1989 to December 2006. However, the service treatment records in the claims file only date to June 2000. Moreover, they were received at VA's Records Management Center (RMC) in August 2004, prior to the Veteran's discharge from the Reserve. August 3, 2004 STR - Medical. A September 2024 rating decision reflects the Veteran's service treatment records for the period January 1989 to December 2006 were received on August 3, 2004. A remand is required to allow VA to obtain any additional service treatment records.

The AOJ also did not obtain an examination or medical opinion for either disorder on appeal. However, based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the February 2024 rating decision, the Board finds that examinations and opinions were required to determine whether the Veteran's low back disorder and bilateral foot disorder began in service or were related to service. 

The Veteran indicated his low back disorder was due to his in-service duties which required a lot of bending. September  26, 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. His DD Forms 214 reflect he served as an air cargo specialist apprentice, air transportation specialist, and air transportation craftsman, all of which indicate he loaded and unloaded cargo. While service treatment records show only one report of low back pain-an April 1993 report of medical history showing low back pain in 1993 that resolved in a few days, the Veteran is competent to report he had back pain in service. August 3, 2004 STR - Medical. Moreover, as noted above, there are outstanding service treatment records, including the separation examination report, which may have shown additional reports. Post service, a May 2021 private treatment record shows complaints of ongoing low back stiffness. October 17, 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. Thus, the AOJ should have provided the Veteran an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his low back disorder.

With respect to the foot disorder, the Veteran indicated he developed flatfoot from wearing service issue boots. September  26, 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. While the Veteran denied having foot problems at the November 1988 Air Force Reserve enlistment examination, clinical evaluation of the feet revealed asymptomatic, mobile pes planus and the examiner noted a diagnosis of pes planus. August 3, 2004 STR - Medical. Post service, while there is no record specific to flatfoot, a May 2021 private treatment record shows complaints of ongoing numbness and tingling in the feet. October 17, 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. In any event, the Veteran is competent to report he has had foot pain since service. Thus, the AOJ should have provided the Veteran an examination to obtain an opinion on whether his pes planus was aggravated during service and whether he had any other foot disorder that began in service, to include his duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation.

Also, as the Veteran indicated his low back disorder and bilateral foot disorder, to include flatfoot, were incurred in or aggravated during a period of ADT or inactive duty training (INACDUTRA), the AOJ should have attempted to verify the dates of his periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA. The Board notes that an ANG/USAFR Point Credit Summary prepared in 1995 appears to indicate the Veteran had an additional period of active duty from August 21, 1994 to October 10, 1994.  See DPRIS Response received October 9, 2023.

An initial compensable disability rating for hypertension 

The issue of entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for hypertension is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 10 percent rating is available for hypertension for an individual with a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more who requires continuous medication for control. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104. While the record clearly shows the Veteran requires medication for control, the record is unclear as to whether he has a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more. At a December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran indicated he was diagnosed with hypertension in 2000 when he started having blurred vision, headaches, chest pain, and left arm pain. However, as noted above, the service treatment records in the claims file only date to 2000. Thus, the AOJ should have associated the remainder of the Veteran's service treatment records through his discharge in December 2006.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's complete service treatment and personnel records from his service in the Air Force Reserve from January 1989 to December 2006.

2. Attempt to verify the Veteran's periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA from January 1989 to December 2006, as well as the Veteran's periods of active duty. All verified dates of service and all responses received should be documented and associated with the claims file. If necessary, submit a request for information to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), to include copies of any leave and earning statements. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his low back disorder. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. 

(a.) Identify any low back disability by either (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment. Please clearly state whether the Veteran has had a low back disability at any time during the period on appeal (since September 2023), even if resolved. Why or why not?

(b.) As to each low back disability identified, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disability was incurred in or aggravated by a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, to include duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation. 

(c.) As to each low back disability identified, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disability had its onset in or is otherwise causally related to the period of active service in 1993 or 2000 (dates to be determined by the AOJ), to include complaints of low back pain in April 1993 and duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation.

The examiner should discuss the service treatment records and VA and private medical records, to include the May 2021 record showing complaints of ongoing low back stiffness. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral foot disorder, to include flatfoot. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report.

(a.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's bilateral flatfoot was aggravated during a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, to include his duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation.

(b.) As to any other foot disorder diagnosed, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disorder was incurred in or aggravated by a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, to include his duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation.

(c.) As to any other foot disorder diagnosed, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disorder had its onset in or is otherwise causally related to the period of active service in 1993 or 2000 (dates to be determined by the AOJ), to include duties of loading and unloading cargo in air transportation

(d.) If the examiner finds that the Veteran's flatfoot was aggravated during a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA and another foot disorder is diagnosed, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disorder was caused or aggravated by his flatfoot.

The examiner should discuss the service treatment records and VA and private medical records, to include the May 2021 record showing complaints of ongoing numbness and tingling in the feet. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.W. Kim

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.