Citation Nr: A25031335
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240610-446054
DATE:  April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right long finger injury residuals is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right long finger scar is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a scalp scar is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a hemorrhoid disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is remanded.

Entitlement to a 10 percent evaluation based upon multiple, noncompensable, service-connected disabilities pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.324 is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during active service. 

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's tension headaches have not been productive of characteristic prostrating attacks.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024). 

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for tension headaches have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active naval service from April 2016 to April 2022. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from July 2023 and September 2023 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the July 2023 and September 2023 decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for a right long finger injury residuals, right long finger scar, scalp scar, hemorrhoid disability, and a back disability, and entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a TBI and a 10 percent rating based upon multiple, noncompensable, service-connected disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection - Tinnitus

The Veteran asserts his tinnitus had its onset during active service. Specifically, the Veteran stated he began to experience ringing in his ears after working on the flight deck during flight operations.

As to current disability and in-service event, the Veteran's personnel records reflect that from June 2018 until his discharge in April 2022, he served as a Bow crewmember on a ship where he was responsible for the management, maintenance, preservation, and operation of the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System and associated equipment. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) contain a March 2020 audiogram, which noted an early warning for a decrease in hearing. In the Veteran's January 2022 separation report of medical history, the Veteran marked hearing loss or wear a hearing aid, which he described as experiencing ringing in his ears and occasionally needing to ask people to repeat themselves. In the February 2022 separation examiner's summary, the examiner noted the Veteran's reported ringing in his ears and hearing loss were secondary to noise pollution from the ship and noted the Veteran would follow up with a subsequent provider. 

The Board finds this evidence supports the Veteran's statements that he was exposed to hazardous noise during service, and that his tinnitus onset during active service and has continued since. Moreover, the Board finds the Veteran competent to report when his symptoms began, and that he is credible in that regard. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran failed to attend the scheduled VA examination; however, the Board notes that lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In this case, as noted above, the Veteran is competent to report when his symptoms started and that they have continued since that time and the Board has found him credible in that regard. Further, the probative medical evidence of record supports the Veteran's statements that his tinnitus began during active service and has continued since. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively for the claim. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

Increased Rating - Tension Headaches

The Veteran asserts that his headache symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. The Veteran's headaches are rated at 0 percent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.214a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. A 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted for very frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The rating criteria of Diagnostic Code 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation. 

In Johnson v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) decided that "the phrase 'characteristic prostrating attacks' plainly describes migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality." 30 Vet. App. at 252.

In Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020), the Court held that Diagnostic Code 8100 contemplates all migraine symptoms. Therefore, to evaluate migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100, VA must consider all symptoms experienced due to migraine attacks and then rate the symptoms based on the frequency, duration, and economic impact of those attacks. The Court commented that this analysis is similar to that used to assign ratings for psychiatric disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran reported he began to experience headaches after a head injury, which the Veteran's STRs reflect occurred in September 2020. A November 2020 STR notes the Veteran reported unintentional weight loss in the past four months, and the review of systems for this encounter notes the Veteran denied headaches. In the Veteran's January 2022 separation report of medical history, the Veteran marked frequent or severe headaches, and stated he had experienced frequent headaches since his August 2020 head injury. In the February 2022, separation examiner's summary, the examiner noted the Veteran had a head injury in August 2020 which required staples. At the Veteran's February 2022 separation physical examination, the provider noted the Veteran denied headaches. The record does not contain any other treatment records following the Veteran's September 2020 head injury that note complaints of or treatment for headaches.

In June 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA headache examination. The Veteran reported he started having headaches following his head injury in 2020. The Veteran stated he experienced headaches two times per week that occurred randomly without an inciting event. The Veteran described his current symptoms as throbbing, pulsating pressure pain in his bilateral frontal lobes lasting 2 to 4 hours. The examiner diagnosed tension headaches, and noted the Veteran's headache symptoms as pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head. The examiner did not note any non-headache symptoms, and noted the Veteran reported that his typical headache pain lasted less than 1 day. The examiner found the Veteran did not experience characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain, and that the Veteran's headache condition did not impact his ability to work. 

After careful consideration of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's tension headaches are entitled to a compensable rating. The June 2023 VA examination findings do not demonstrate that the Veteran's tension headaches produced powerlessness or a lack of vitality. While the Veteran reported symptoms of throbbing and pulsating headache pain, there is no evidence of record to support finding that these symptoms are characteristic of prostrating attacks. Rather, the June 2023 examiner found that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks. Additional findings reveal that the Veteran's symptoms last less than one day, and did not impact his ability to work.

While the Veteran is competent to give evidence about what he observes or experiences including his symptoms, see, e.g., Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994), his belief that his symptoms constitute characteristic prostrating attacks thus entitling him to a higher rating is outweighed by the medical findings discussed above and on VA's Schedule for Rating pertaining to headaches.

The Board thus concludes that the Veteran's tension headaches are not characterized by characteristic prostrating attacks, and they correspond to the criteria for a noncompensable rating under Diagnostic Code 8100. Therefore, entitlement to an initial compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted higher schedular ratings than those assigned. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

In reaching the above decision, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt; however, as the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Right Long Finger Injury Residuals, Right Long Finger Scar, Scalp Scar, Hemorrhoid Disability, and Back Disability 

The Veteran asserts his right long finger injury residuals, right long finger scar, scalp scar, hemorrhoid disability, and back disability had their onset during active service or are otherwise etiologically related to service.

Initially, the Board notes that a scalp scar was noted on the Veteran's June 2023 TBI examination, and the examiner opined the scar was due to the Veteran's in-service head injury. However, the examiner only noted one scalp scar, and the Veteran's May 2016 enlistment report of medical history notes the Veteran reported a head injury, which required staples, and the enlistment examiner noted a laceration repair. As the Veteran had a scalp laceration repair prior to and during service, the AOJ scheduled an additional examination to clarify whether the noted scar was the result of the Veteran's head injury prior to or during service. 

However, the record indicates the Veteran failed to report to the scar examination. The record also indicates he failed to report to the scheduled examinations for his right long finger injury residuals, hemorrhoid disability, and back disability claims. In the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran stated the examinations had been scheduled in Virginia, and he lived in South Carolina. A review of the record indicates the Veteran listed a Virginia address in his January 2023 claim, and it does not appear he reported a change of address to the AOJ. It also does not appear the appointment notifications sent to the Veteran's Virginia address were returned as undeliverable. However, the TBI and headache examinations were scheduled in South Carolina using a South Carolina address, and the Veteran reported for these examinations. Despite being on notice that the Veteran's address had changed, there is no indication from the record that an attempt was made to reschedule the missed Virginia examinations to examinations in South Carolina. Further, after the Veteran attended the examinations in South Carolina and reported a change in his address, the AOJ continued to schedule examinations in Virginia and send examination notifications to the Veteran's Virginia address.

Based on review of the record and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the examinations being scheduled in Virginia when the AOJ was on notice the Veteran had moved to South Carolina constitutes good cause for his failure to report for the examinations. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a) and (b). Given the facts, the Board finds there is a question as to whether the Veteran was afforded due process in the scheduling and notification of his VA examinations. Further, the Veteran has demonstrated his willingness to comply with such requests, as he appeared for the examinations scheduled in South Carolina.

The Board notes that the duty to assist is not a one-way street, and the Veteran is responsible for actively pursuing his claim and providing evidence and information as necessary. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991); see also Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 68 (1993). When entitlement to an initial claim for compensation, claim for increase, or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination, and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, action is to be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, as appropriate, including the possible denial of a claim as a matter of law. 

Nevertheless, in providing the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that remand is necessary to provide the Veteran an opportunity for VA examinations in relation to the instant claims.

Increased Rating - TBI 

The Veteran asserts that his TBI symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned noncompensable rating.

In June 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA residuals of TBI examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed head injury. However, a review of that examination report shows that it is inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the examiner did not note or discuss the Veteran's in-service diagnosis and treatment for an adjustment disorder or the Veteran's reported nervous trouble and depression in his January 2022 separation report of medical history, which he described as feeling anxious around loud noises and feeling down and not wanting to do anything. Further, the examiner did not perform a mental disorders examination or answer the TBI examination questions regarding whether any emotional/behavioral signs and symptoms were residuals of the Veteran's TBI or part of a co-existing psychiatric condition. As the examination obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal is inadequate, the Veteran must be afforded a new VA examination to determine the severity of all impairment resulting from his TBI. As such, remand is warranted for corrective action.

Increased Rating - 10 percent rating for multiple, noncompensable, service-connected disabilities

As the issue of entitlement to a 10 percent rating for multiple, noncompensable, service-connected disabilities could be impacted by the grant of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus and the remanded issues herein, this issue is inextricably intertwined, and it is also remanded for adjudication following implementation of the grant of service connection for tinnitus and correction of the above identified pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for examinations to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed right long finger injury residuals, right long finger scar, hemorrhoid disability, and back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner(s). Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner(s) must provide opinions as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed right long finger injury residuals, right long finger scar, hemorrhoid disability, and back disability had their onset during the Veteran's active service or are otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinions, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed scalp scar. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed scalp scars clearly and unmistakably existed prior to the Veteran's active service, and if so, whether such disability was clearly and unmistakably NOT aggravated by service. 

For any diagnosed scalp scar(s) that did NOT clearly and unmistakably exist prior to service, the examiner must also provide opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that said scalp scar(s) had their onset during the Veteran's active service, or are otherwise etiologically related to service. In forming the opinions, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the level of severity of all impairment resulting from his service-connected TBI. Any indicated tests must be performed. The examiner must provide all information required for rating purposes.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.