Citation Nr: A25031703
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240321-426582
DATE:  April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Navy from July 2000 to April 2004.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for CFS, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is remanded.

Legal Principles

Service connection may be granted for disability due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) a disease, injury, or event in service; and (3) a nexus or causal relationship between the claimed disability and the disease, injury, or event in service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Except as provided in paragraph (a)(7) of this section, VA will pay compensation in accordance with chapter 11 of title 38, United States Code, to a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability, provided that such disability: (i) became manifest either during active military, naval, or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations, or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026; and (ii) by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

For purposes of this section, a qualifying chronic disability means a chronic disability resulting from any of the following (or any combination of the following): (A) an undiagnosed illness; (B) a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; (2) fibromyalgia; (3) functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases).  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).

For purposes of this section, the term medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained.  Id.

VA is required to make reasonable efforts to help a claimant obtain evidence necessary to substantiate their claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §?3.159(c), (d). This "duty to assist" contemplates that VA will help a claimant obtain records relevant to the claim, whether or not the records are in federal custody, and that VA will provide a medical examination or obtain an opinion when necessary to make a decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(4).

When VA seeks to obtain a medical opinion, the Secretary must ensure that the opinion provided is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A VA medical opinion is adequate "where it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations," Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007), "describes the disability... in sufficient detail so that the Board's 'evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one'," id. (quoting Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994)), and "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion," Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105 (2012). See Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 293 (2012) ("[A]n adequate medical report must rest on correct facts and reasoned medical judgment so as [to] inform the Board on a medical question and facilitate the Board's consideration and weighing of the report against any contrary reports."); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) ("[A] medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two").

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. Id. The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ. Id.

Relevant Facts and Analysis

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to presumptive service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome because of his service in Southwest Asia; because he experienced fatigue after exertion, even after getting plenty of sleep; and that he experienced these symptoms, beginning while serving in Southwest Asia, and continuing after. See May 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

In June 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for CFS. However, the Veteran contacted VA afterward requesting a new examination with a new examiner because the previous examiner exhibited unprofessional behavior during the examination. The AOJ ordered a new examination.

In August 2023, the Veteran attended the new examination. See August 2023 C&P (Compensation and Pension) Examination. The examiner declined to provide any diagnosis, neither of CFS nor other conditions contemplated by 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. Id., p. 2. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had not had a "thorough work up [sic]" to determine if there were underlying causes for his fatigue (labs, sleep study, etc.). The examiner opined that the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder "could be" the source of his fatigue. Id., pp. 4-5. The Board acknowledges that the inability to provide a medical opinion without resorting to speculation must reflect the limitation of knowledge in the medical community at large and not a limitation, whether based on lack of expertise, insufficient information, or unprocured testing, of the individual examiner. Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

The Board finds that the thorough workup referenced in the VA examination should have been provided to the Veteran under VA's duty to assist and duty to ensure the medical opinions it obtains are adequate. Especially in the case of a diagnosis of exclusion as CFS is known to be, VA has a duty to aid the Veteran in ascertaining the etiology of the symptoms; or, if no etiology is knowable, to aid the Veteran in the often complex and multi-step process necessary to arrive at that conclusion. See August 2023 C&P (Compensation and Pension) Examination, p. 2 ("The diagnosis of [CFS] requires...[t]he exclusion, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, of all other clinical conditions that may produce similar symptoms). Ultimately, the information acquired from a thorough workup is necessary to produce an adequate medical opinion so that VA's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one. Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 123; Ardison, 6 Vet. App. at 407.

The fact that the AOJ did not ensure that a thorough workup was done prior to adjudication constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The evidence is not sufficient to grant the claim; thus, remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for chronic fatigue syndrome. The examiner must review the claims file. In completing the disability benefits questionnaire(s), and any additionally necessary examination reports, the provider should order tests and imaging, as appropriate, to obtain any and all diagnostic information that has a possibility of pertaining to the Veteran's claim. The examiner should elicit a detailed and complete medical history that is directly relevant to the claimed condition and service records.

The etiology opinions requested below must indicate the conditions excluded, and must account for each symptom, whether objectively observed, or subjectively reported by the Veteran. Conclusory and speculative opinions will not be considered adequate, nor will opinions which rely upon a lack of necessary diagnostic investigation.

(a)	Identify the Veteran's objective indications of a disability.

"Objective indications" of a qualifying chronic disability include both objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician and other non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3).  Non-medical indicators include evidence such as time lost form work, the veteran having sought treatment for the symptoms, and change in the veteran's appearance, physical abilities, and mental or emotional attitude.  60 Fed. Reg. 6661, 6663 (Feb. 3, 1995).

(b)	By history, physical examination, or laboratory testing, can the Veteran's objective indications of a disability be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis?

If the signs and symptoms are not characteristic of a known clinical diagnosis, the examiner should so indicate.  There is no requirement that the examiner provide a diagnosis of undiagnosed illness.

(c)	If the Veteran's objective indications cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is there affirmative evidence that the undiagnosed illness is not incurred during active service during the Persian Gulf War or that it was caused by a supervening condition or event that occurred since the Veteran's departure from service during the Persian Gulf War?

The examiner should note that a positive response to this question requires affirmative evidence.  The mere absence of evidence is not sufficient.

(d)	If the Veteran's objective indications can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is the etiology of the Veteran's condition (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

This determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(e)	If the Veteran's objective indications can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's condition (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

This determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the pathophysiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(f)	If both the etiology and pathophysiology are partially understood or fully understood, then is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed condition was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, active service?

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner should specifically consider and address the Veteran's service treatment record from June 26, 2003, where the Veteran reported on a post-deployment health assessment that he still felt tired after sleeping during and after the deployment; the note from September 2, 2003, where the Veteran obtained emergency care following a motor vehicle accident; and the March 11, 2004, separation report of medical history where the Veteran reported frequent trouble sleeping.

(g)	Secondary Service Connection - Causation: For each disability, is it at least as likely as not that the disability was caused by, or is otherwise due to, a service-connected disability (including headaches, posttraumatic stress disorder, tinnitus, and allergic rhinitis), or due to two or more service-connected disabilities in combination?

(h)	Secondary Service Connection - Aggravation: For each disability, is it at least as likely as not that the disability was aggravated (i.e., worsened) by a service-connected disability, or aggravated due to two or more service-connected disabilities in combination?

Provide rationale to support the opinions.

The requested opinions should reflect consideration of the Veteran's description of the in-service events and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "at least as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay 

?

contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Williams, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.