Citation Nr: A25031856
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230618-355935
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent for lumbosacral strain, intervertebral disc syndrome is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to higher initial ratings in excess of 20 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability evaluation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain, intervertebral disc syndrome had forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; and no ankylosis.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain, intervertebral disc syndrome have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2004 to November 2005.

In the June 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the cervical strain, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and TDIU claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent for lumbosacral strain, intervertebral disc syndrome is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher initial rating for his spine disability. As the Veteran is appealing the original assignment of a disability evaluation following the award of service connection, the entire appeal period is to be considered to ensure that consideration is given to the possibility of staged ratings; that is, separate ratings for separate periods of time based on the facts found. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

In the June 2022 rating decision on appeal, the RO granted service connection for the spine disability and granted a 20 percent rating, effective September 29, 2021, under Diagnostic Code 5243. 

All spine disabilities covered by Diagnostic Codes 5235 to 5242 are rated according to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Formula) based on limitation of motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Formula. 

Under the General Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; and muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

Regarding the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome, which based on a total of incapacitating episodes during a 12-month period, the rating criteria provide that a 10 percent rating is warranted if intervertebral disc syndrome is manifested by incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than two weeks during a 12 month period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243. A 20 percent rating is warranted if incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least two weeks but less than four weeks during the past 12 months; a 40 percent rating is warranted if the total duration is at least four weeks but less than six weeks during the past 12 months; and a 60 percent rating is warranted if the total duration is at least six weeks during the past 12 months. An incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243, Note (1).

Under the rating schedule, IVDS (preoperatively or postoperatively) is to be evaluated either under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome based on incapacitating episodes or under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under § 4.25. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.

Relevant Evidence

The Veteran underwent a VA Back examination in October 2021. The examiner confirmed diagnoses of lumbosacral strain and IVDS. He had severe flare-ups that he experienced daily and lasted until he was able to pop his back into place. The flare-ups were precipitated by standing too long or bending over and were alleviated by an inversion table. Active range of motion testing results were forward flexion endpoint to 90 degrees and extension to 30 degrees; repeated use over time testing results were forward flexion to 50 degrees and extension to 20 degrees; and flare-ups testing results were forward flexion to 50 degrees and extension to 20 degrees. There was no localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. There was disturbance of locomotion, and he regularly used a brace to ambulate; he was unable to stand and walk for prolonged periods. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis of the spine. He also had IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine but no symptoms due to IVDS that required bedrest or treatment prescribed by a physician.

Legal Analysis and Conclusion

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is against a finding that a rating in excess of 20 percent is warranted for the Veteran's back disability. During the appellate period, the Veteran complained of severe back pain on movement. The statements are credible and competent, and therefore these statements are entitled to weight. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, despite the Veteran's complaints of back pain, the records do not support a disability rating in excess of 20 percent.

Based on the records, the Board finds the Veteran's back disability is consistent with a 20 percent disabling rating as the records show that at the worst the Veteran had a forward flexion of 50 degrees and a combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees. Additionally, there was no ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. As the Veteran exhibited a forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, the Veteran is entitled to a 20 percent rating based on Diagnostic Code 5242. The Veteran is not entitled to a 40 percent rating as the Veteran did not have a forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's back disability is consistent with a 20 percent disability rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

Moreover, a higher rating under DC 5243 is not warranted. An incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243, Note (1). Because there had been no physician-prescribed bed rest for a period of at least six weeks due to symptoms of the back disability during a 12-month period at any time during the rating review period, the criteria for an increased rating higher than 20 percent for the back disability based on incapacitating episodes have not been met or approximated for any period. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

Under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA), the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a)). Here, the Board's review of the record reveals a duty to assist error that was evident prior to the June 29, 2022, Rating Decision on appeal.

A VA examination and opinion were obtained in April 2022. The VA opinion states that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the service because "there are not any complaints that illustrates the neck condition is chronic in nature.  No x-rays from the time of the explosion or up to this point." 

The Board finds this opinion is inadequate because the Veteran reported at the April 2022 VA examination that his neck condition symptoms of burning pain in the neck began in 2005 with a back injury from a bomb blast, which he is competent to attest.  And, the examiner disregarded the lay statements simply because of the lack of contemporaneous medical records. See April 2022 VA examination. The lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence incredible or serve as an "absolute bar" to service connection. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

Moreover, no examiner has opined on whether the Veteran's cervical disability is related to his service-connected back disability.

Thus, on remand, a new opinion considering the Veteran's lay statements, without discounting them solely because of the absence of contemporaneous documents, and a secondary service connection opinion, must be obtained.

2. Entitlement to higher initial ratings in excess of 20 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is remanded.

A VA Back Conditions Disability Benefits examination was conducted in April 2022 that diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathies. However, the DBQ used by the examiner did not include the option for the examiner to choose "moderately severe" to assess the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy. The Board observes that the sciatic nerve is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520, which provides for a 40 percent rating if the radiculopathy is "moderately severe." Therefore, a remand is required to afford the Veteran a new and adequate peripheral nerves examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy.

3. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to a TDIU inextricably intertwined with the claims remanded herein.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (holding that two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that the final decision on one issue cannot be rendered until a decision on the other issues has been rendered).  As such, the matter is remanded accordingly.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new etiology opinion from a new examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical disability. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the case. All examination findings, along with the complete rationale for all opinions expressed, should be set forth in the examination report. All tests and studies deemed necessary should be conducted.

After reviewing the claims folder and examining the Veteran, the examiner is specifically instructed to provide the following information:

(a) Is it "at least as likely as" that the Veteran's cervical disability BEGAN IN or is related to his time in the service, yes or no?

(b) Is it "at least as likely as not" that the Veteran's cervical disability was CAUSED BY a service-connected back disability, yes or no?

(c) Is it "at least as likely as not" that the Veteran's cervical disability underwent any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence, due to a service-connected back disability, yes or no?

The examination opinion must reflect consideration of the Veteran's lay statements of record. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.

A complete rationale for all opinions is requested. 

Any opinion expressed must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two." See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity. Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability. Additional disability due to flareups of musculoskeletal disabilities, even if it cannot be quantified, or an incremental increase in pain might constitute an increase in disability, or aggravation, for the purposes of secondary service connection.

2. Afford the Veteran a VA peripheral nerves examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathies. All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated studies should be performed.

The examiner must identify the nerves affected and express an opinion as to the severity of the nerve involvement in terms of being "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," or "severe."

(Continued on the next page)

?

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why that is so.

\ 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.J. Cho

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.