Citation Nr: A25031005
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240318-424774
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The probative evidence of record does not show the Veteran has suffered from an additional disability due to taking prescribed Harvoni for Hepatitis C that was proximately due to carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing treatment, or due to an event not reasonably foreseeable.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1151, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.361.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1976 to December 1976. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the May 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Compensation under 38 USC 1151 for neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood

The Veteran contends that the VA's prescription of Harvoni to treat his diagnosed Hepatitis C caused him to suffer a neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. 

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1151, compensation is awarded for a qualifying additional disability in the same manner as if such additional disability were service connected. For purposes of this section, a disability is a qualifying additional disability if the disability was not the result of the Veteran's willful misconduct, the disability was caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination furnished to the Veteran under the law administered by the Secretary, and the proximate cause of the disability was carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of the Department in furnishing the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination, or an event not reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151.

To establish actual causation, the evidence must show that VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination, resulted in the Veteran's additional disability. Merely showing that the Veteran received care and has an additional disability does not establish cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(1).

The proximate cause of disability or death is the action or event which directly caused the disability or death, as distinguished from a remote contributing cause. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361 (d). To establish that carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on VA's part in furnishing hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination proximately caused a claimant's additional disability or death, it must be shown that the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination caused the claimant's additional disability or death, and that (i) VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider; or (ii) VA furnished the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination without the claimant's, or in appropriate cases, his representative's, informed consent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d)(1).

Whether the proximate cause of a claimant's additional disability or death was an event not reasonably foreseeable is to be determined based on what a reasonable health care provider would have foreseen. The event need not be completely unforeseeable or unimaginable but must be one that a reasonable health care provider would not have considered to be an ordinary risk of the treatment provided. In determining whether an event was reasonably foreseeable, VA will consider whether the risk of that event was the type of risk that a reasonable health care provider would have disclosed in connection with informed consent procedures. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.361(d)(2), 17.32.

In January 2015 VA treatment records, the physician noted the Veteran was presenting for Hepatitis C treatment with Harvoni. The physician noted the Veteran's long history of allergies and sensitivities to various medications, contrast media, etc. The Veteran and the physician discussed treatment with Harvoni, drug interactions with pantoprazole. The Veteran asserted that he rarely took the proton pump inhibitor and if needed only took one daily. The physician noted the Veteran was very clear about the drug interaction with doses greater than 20 mg a day. In a June 2015 VA treatment record, it was noted the Veteran began Harvoni on February 2, 2015. In a May 2015 VA treatment record, the Veteran asserted there was no reaction with Harvoni. In a May 2015 VA treatment record, the treating physician noted the Veteran's weakness was due to his Hepatitis C treatment. In a July 2015 VA treatment record, the Veteran asserted that he thought swelling in his ankles may have been a side effect of the Harvoni. In an additional July 2015 VA treatment record, the Veteran asserted to feeling better after stopping his Harvoni medication. 

In September 2016 correspondence, one of the Veteran's treating physicians noted the Veteran had a number of medical conditions that had been chronically treated and had cognitive difficulties in the past that have been getting better. The physician noted it was plausible that the Veteran could have stated something that his mind produced without his full awareness of it. The physician noted it was plausible that something like this could have happened either as a result of his illness and/or medications he had been on in the past. The physician additionally noted to being unable to provide any further details given that he did not have exact specifics of the situation and was not the Veteran's primary care doctor. 

In August 2017 correspondence, the Veteran was notified of an inquiry being made to Gilead, the developers of Harvoni, and was told there was a registry for people who have had Harvoni for continued monitoring of symptoms or side effects after treatment. The correspondence stated the registry was of study participants and most people that experienced side effects did not achieve a cure, and most side effects involved upset stomach or headache but often the symptoms of the study participants resolved soon after completion of treatment. 

In a September 2018 lay statement, the Veteran asserted that he has suffered from Hepatitis C since April 1979. The Veteran asserted that the Harvoni cured him of Hepatitis C but left him in a worse condition and drastically changed his life. The Veteran asserted that the Harvoni affected his mind and nervous system, his balance, his memory, and his ability to sleep. The Veteran contended that he knew he was very sensitive to chemicals and medicines. The Veteran asserted the drug, Harvoni, damaged him. In a November 2018 lay statement, the Veteran asserted to suffering from loss of balance, insomnia, memory loss, depression, cognitive problems, digestive problems, and achy joints as a result of taking Harvoni in 2015. 

In a March 2019 VA medical opinion, the VA examiner noted to having reviewed the conflicting medical evidence and provided an opinion on symptoms of insomnia, memory, depression, and cognitive problems while deferring to a medical provider regarding loss of balance, digestive problems, and achy joints. The VA examiner noted it was quite possible that the Veteran's reported symptoms were caused by or became worse temporarily as a result of the VA treatment at issue (Harvoni); however, there was no evidence showing that the symptoms were permanent. The VA examiner explained side effects are common with all types of medications, and with adequate intervention and nutritional support, these side effects can often be managed or eliminated. In this case, the VA examiner noted the Veteran was seen by an integrative medicine physician who started the Veteran on supplements and nutritional therapies to address his physical and mental complaints. Per the physician's September 2016 letter, the Veteran's symptoms were showing signs of improvement. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's most recent March 2019 primary care physician note indicated "fuzzy thinking" which could not be attributed to a specific cause in the context of his multiple medical conditions. There was no mention of insomnia or depression in the note. The VA examiner noted there were a number of possible reasons for the Veteran to experience insomnia, [poor?] memory, depression, and cognitive problems. For example, per the November 29, 2018, nutrition note, the Veteran reported as typical diet foods that were processed and high in sugar, known to contribute to poor health, including problems with mood, sleep, and cognition. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's sleep had been noted to improve over time, but noted the Veteran slept approximately twenty hours a week while he was taking Harvoni. The VA examiner noted there was also no evidence to suggest that there was an affective disorder associated with his past use of Harvoni. Previous May 2016 and May 2017 depression screens were noted to be negative. The VA examiner noted that frustration related to multiple medical problems was not a diagnosis and there simply was not overwhelming evidence of record to suggest that there were mental health sequelae, to include insomnia, memory, depression, and cognitive problems, from past use of Harvoni. The VA examiner noted it was outside the scope of a psychologist's practice to opine as to whether the Veteran's reported symptoms resulted from the attending VA personnel's failure to follow the appropriate standard of care. This could only be determined based upon Harvoni guidelines (who should be prescribed the medication, its use, informed consent, explanation of side effects, etc.). If Harvoni is part of the standard of care associated with the Veteran's diagnosis, there was no failure. The VA examiner noted it was outside her scope to determine if the Veteran's reported symptoms of insomnia, memory, depression, and cognitive problems resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider. The VA examiner noted to being able to address side effects and course over time via review of notes (as was done above), however, to determine whether the symptoms were the result of an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen was not the role of a psychologist. If use of the Harvoni was the appropriate standard of care, then side effects from the drug would not be associated with a failure on the part of the VA/healthcare provider. 

The Board finds the March 2019 VA examination offers no probative weight as the VA examiner noted that it was outside of her scope as a psychologist to determine if the Veteran's reported symptoms resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

In a December 2021 VA treatment record, the treating physician noted the Veteran's neuropsychological profile together with his continued functional independence indicated that he met the criteria for mild neurocognitive disorder. The physician noted etiology was not clear at the time and the Veteran had a history of Hepatitis C and hepatic cirrhosis, and these conditions were known to contribute to cognitive impairment. Direct-acting antiviral medications, such as Harvoni, can also have neuropsychiatric effects (e.g., weakness, headache, insomnia, irritability, depression, slowed reaction time), although these effects typically resolve shortly after treatment ends and are much milder side effects associated with older generations of drugs used to treat Hepatitis C. Furthermore, the pattern of the Veteran's cognitive difficulties (i.e., difficulty encoding and consolidating new memories with evidence of conceptual knowledge loss on a clock-drawing task) is not consistent with the frontal-subcortical deficits typically seen in Hepatitis C-related cognitive impairment. The physician noted the Veteran's neurocognitive profile was more consistent with onset of a neurodivergent process, specifically Alzheimer's disease. Finally, anxiety and depression may be secondary contributing factors to the Veteran's cognitive difficulties but did not explain the extent of his memory deficits. Given the possible onset of a neurodegenerative process, the Veteran was at risk for further cognitive and functional decline. 

In a February 2022 lay statement, the Veteran asserted that after a few months taking Harvoni, he began to feel fatigued and developed gastric and insomnia problems. By the fourth month of treatment, the Veteran asserted the side effects had drastically increased and different side effects were becoming apparent. The Veteran asserted that the intern treating him dismissed the Veteran's concerns and eventually was replaced with a liver specialist. The Veteran asserted that all of the reported and experienced Harvoni side effects (gastric, nausea, achy joints) eventually went away, and all but the insomnia which was somewhat better. The Veteran asserted that he also suffered from balance issues and weakness as a result of taking the Harvoni. 

In March 2022, the Veteran's wife submitted a lay statement noting her concern for the Veteran's health and the serious problems he has been experiencing since taking Harvoni in 2015. The Veteran's wife asserted that she noticed the Veteran suffering from side effects from the Harvoni and that the treating physician was not taking the Veteran's complaints seriously. The Veteran's wife asserted the Veteran suffered from digestive problems and difficulty sleeping, as well as extreme behaviour and bizarre thinking. The Veteran began losing his sense of direction and became increasingly agitated, easily irritated, and tremendously anxious. The Veteran's wife contended that the Veteran began suffering from feelings of discouragement and being overwhelmed with loss of balance and weakness problems. The Veteran's wife asserted that the Veteran has been told that his problems will not get better. 

In an April 2022 VA medical opinion, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for any evidence of neurological complaints to include loss of balance, achy joints, and digestive problems. Additionally, there was no evidence of chronicity or continuation of treatment while the Veteran was in service or within a compensable period after service. 

The Board affords the April 2022 VA examination no probative weight. The VA examiner does not address the standards set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 1151. The VA examiner did not address whether the actual cause of the Veteran's disability was caused by VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination. Additionally, there was no discussion of the proximate cause of the Veteran's disability and whether it was foreseeable. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

In a May 2022 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a mild neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood which began in approximately 2015. The VA examiner offered conflicting medical opinions that the Veteran's claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness and the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury event or illness. The VA examiner noted that VA treatment notes dated October 15, 2021, demonstrated a consistent story by the Veteran (i.e., he noticed cognitive challenges subsequent to taking Harvoni medication in 2015). The Veteran's wife's March 2022 lay statement also substantiated this. The VA examiner noted that according to a January 2022 neurological evaluation, the Veteran started outpatient psychiatric treatment in 2016 and reported this timeline was consistent with the initial Harvoni treatment. The Veteran was diagnosed with mild neurocognitive disorder, and a neuropsychology evaluation stated the Veteran's neurocognitive profile was more consistent with the onset of a neurodivergent process, specifically Alzheimer's disease. The physician who performed the neuropsychology evaluation noted the etiology of the Veteran's symptoms was unclear, and that anxiety and depression may be secondary to the cognitive issues and that it was not consistent with the frontal-subcortical deficits typically seen in Hepatitis C-related cognitive impairment. That is not to say the Veteran could be presenting atypically. The VA examiner noted that other evidence noted in support of a positive opinion is sufficient for a positive opinion at this time. When there was conflicting medical evidence, the opinion must be found in the Veteran's favor. 

The Board affords the May 2022 VA examination no probative weight. The VA examiner does not address the standards set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 1151. The VA examiner did not address whether the actual cause of the Veteran's disability was caused by VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination. Additionally, there was no discussion of the proximate cause of the Veteran's disability and whether it was foreseeable. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

In a June 2022 lay statement, the Veteran asserted that nothing in the Harvoni documents had any warning or indication of long-term side effects. The side effects the Veteran was aware of were short term and included headaches, fatigue, insomnia, and digestive. The Veteran asserted the fatigue, gastric issues, and insomnia lingered well after stopping the medication, with only insomnia and lightheadedness being the lingering side effects. The Veteran asserted that cognitive, anxiety, neurological deficits were noticed after the treatment and were never reported as a side effec. 

In a September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with mild neurocognitive disorder due to possible Alzheimer's disease, without behavioral disturbance, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The VA examiner noted that the Hepatitis C virus infection is known to impair the quality of life. Increased levels of anxiety and depression have been found in Hepatitis C infection. The VA examiner opined the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner noted the etiology of mild neurocognitive disorder was expounded upon by his neuropsychologist: "neurocognitive profile is more consistent with the onset of a neurodegenerative process, specifically Alzheimer's disease." The VA examiner noted that Hepatitis C is the direct result of heroin used during the Veteran's brief time in service and his issues surfaced post-military. 

The Board affords the September 2022 VA examination no probative weight. The VA examiner does not address the standards set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 1151. The VA examiner did not address whether the actual cause of the Veteran's disability was caused by VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination. Additionally, there was no discussion of the proximate cause of the Veteran's disability and whether it was foreseeable. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a mild neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The VA examiner noted that the VA diagnosis and treatment was appropriate and timely, accepted appropriate protocols were followed, and the standard of care was met. The VA examiner opined it was less likely than not the claimed condition was caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment, additional disability from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel or additional disability resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, and/or failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress. The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's file, including disability claims and examinations, lay statements, service treatment records, and VA treatment records. The VA examiner noted the Veteran, who had a long history of Hepatitis C and previously declined treatment with interferon, agreed to treatment with Harvoni when it became available through the VA. The Veteran was started on Harvoni in January 2015 by VA hepatology per his request. After three months without reporting any significant adverse effects, the Veteran's Hepatitis C viral load was low, but not undetectable, and he was continued on treatment for an additional twelve weeks. On May 10, 2015, the Veteran acutely injured his right fifth finger and was treated by orthopedics for a fracture. On May 20, 2015, the Veteran presented to the emergency room reporting epigastric burning and dark stool. Diagnostic testing showed no evidence of a gastrointestinal bleed on that date. As the Veteran stopped taking pantoprazole, which was prescribed for gastritis starting in 2014, he was restarted on the medication with instructions to space it out from the Harvoni by twelve hours. On May 22, 2015, the Veteran was in a motor vehicle accident and developed neck and back pain as a result. Secure messaging to the Veteran's primary care physician on May 28, 2015, indicated that pantoprazole was helping the burning in his stomach, and he had not noticed any adverse interaction with Harvoni. On June 23, 2015, the Veteran followed up with the liver clinic, and the only issue reported that date was interaction between Harvoni and doxycycline, which had been prescribed for prostatitis. On this date, the Veteran finished his fifth month of Harvoni treatment. Later the same afternoon, the Veteran was seen at the VA emergency room with lower abdominal pain and was diagnosed with diverticulitis. Cipro and Flagyl were prescribed, and the Veteran initially did not take them as recommended. After encouragement from his primary care physician, two days later, he started the antibiotics, and his abdominal symptoms were resolved at the time of his primary care follow-up on July 1, 2015.  On July 13, 2015, the Veteran informed his primary care physician via secure messaging that he had stopped taking Harvoni five days earlier, as he attributed his gastrointestinal problems to the medication.  

After stopping Harvoni the Veteran continued to experience epigastric burning and lower abdominal pain, which would resolve with treatment for acid reflux and urinary infection, and which would later recur. In addition, the Veteran began to report body aches a week after stopping Harvoni. The Veteran's primary care physician suspected irritable bowel syndrome and referred the Veteran to integrative medicine. With treatment by integrative medicine over the year that followed, the Veteran reported resolution of gastrointestinal symptoms and joint pain. In addition, the Veteran reported in August 2016 that a tooth extraction resulted in resolution of balance difficulty, which was not found to be documented as a chronic problem until after its resolution.  

It should be noted that, prior to starting Harvoni, the Veteran had gastritis confirmed on EGD, as well as numerous food sensitivities resulting in nausea, diarrhea, and recurrent prostatitis. While taking Harvoni, he had recurrence of those conditions which improved with appropriate treatment, but no new chronic gastrointestinal condition is found to have developed as a result of Harvoni.  The Veteran's body aches were documented to have their onset a week after the Veteran stopped taking Harvoni, and it was also noted that the Veteran sustained a right 5th finger fracture and was involved in an MVA in May 2015. The treatment record indicated that the Veteran's joint pain resolved with treatment by integrative medicine in 2016. The Veteran's loss of balance was also documented to have resolved after a tooth extraction in 2016 and was not reported to be an ongoing issue prior to that time. Ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (Harvoni) is generally well tolerated, with the most common side effects being fatigue, headache, nausea, and insomnia.  The available literature is not found to indicate that adverse effects are expected to persist beyond withdrawal of the medication or that new adverse effects would be expected to develop weeks or months after cessation. Based upon the information available at the time, the VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's unspecified loss of balance was caused or aggravated by VA treatment as a result of carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of attending VA personnel. It was less likely than not that additional disability related to the claimed condition resulted from an event that reasonably could have been prevented by a VA healthcare provider. It was less likely than not that failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress.

In a November 2023 VA medical opinion, the VA examiner noted the Veteran was treated in 2015 for Hepatitis C with an antiviral medication (Harvoni) which is    FDA approved for the treatment of Hepatitis C infection. However, the Veteran reported changes in cognition and functioning after this treatment which included dizziness, imbalance, and memory problems. The decline in his functioning, in    turn led to the development of anxiety and depression. In order to investigate the cause of these symptoms, the Veteran was referred for a neuropsychological evaluation and the consult request read as follows: "Has not been able to work for 4 years since getting Harvoni for hepatitis C. Mental fog is slightly worse after COVID." SLUMS (Saint Louis University Mental Status Examination, a screening test for Alzheimer's disease and other kinds of dementia) was 20/30 on April 15, 2021." Pertinent medical history reported "Hepatitis C (treated in 2015), hepatic cirrhosis, COVID-19 (in 2020; not hospitalized), chronic pain, and hearing loss. Chronic Hepatitis C was treated in 2015 with 22 weeks of Harvoni, after which his viral load was undetectable." According to the VA's Hepatitis C informational website, the treatment for Hepatitis C was considered to be successful when the viral load drops to undetectable levels. The information also stated that the treatment for Hepatitis C may require twenty-four weeks of treatment in some patients and that importantly, it needed to be individualized depending on specific Hepatitis C factors in particular patients. The Veteran's neuropsychological evaluation was performed in January of 2022, and he was diagnosed with a mild neurocognitive disorder due to possible Alzheimer's disease, without behavioral disturbance and generalized anxiety disorder (by history). The physicians pointed out that although the cause of his symptoms was not entirely clear, antivirals such as Harvoni could indeed produce similar symptoms, (e.g., weakness, headache, insomnia, irritability/depression, slowed reaction time). However, they also pointed out that the medical literature reports that when these symptoms occur due to treatment with Harvoni, they are milder than side effects reported when using older antivirals and that the side effects (from Harvoni) have been reported to resolve after the treatment ends. In other words, the literature does not support that the side effects become chronic after the treatment concludes. A recent article in    September of 2022, PharmD, also concurs with this statement and reported that "Long-term side effects haven't been reported with Harvoni... Side effects after stopping Harvoni treatment haven't been reported." It was also considered that perhaps the Veteran's deficits could possibly stem from the Hepatitis C itself and/or the hepatic cirrhosis itself. 

Indeed, the medical literature described that "individuals with chronic hepatitis C showed deficits in executive functions, psychomotor speed, memory, and attention." However, it was also noted that the pattern of the Veteran's deficits was not consistent with the deficit pattern commonly found in Hepatitis C-related cognitive impairment. Instead, the physician opined that the results of the Veteran's neuropsychological testing were more consistent with the onset of a neurodegenerative process, possibly Alzheimer's disease, and that the anxiety and depression were secondary. A subsequent Mental Disorders VA examination in May of 2022 concurred overall with the diagnosis rendered by the neuropsychological evaluation and assigned a similar diagnosis: "Mild neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, chronic, New; secondary to Cognitive decline which onset in 2015." Therefore, based on the evidence in the currently available claims file and based on the medical literature, the VA examiner opined, it was less likely than not that the claimed disability of neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment at issue, that the additional disability resulted from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel, that the additional disability resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, and/or, and that the failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress.

The Veteran's VA treatment records document the Veteran's assertions that he believed he suffered multiple side effects, including difficulty with sleep, falling to the right, cognitive problems, dizziness, lightheadedness, balance issues, mental fog, as a result of taking Harvoni for his Hepatitis C. See generally, VA Treatment Records. 

The Board recognizes that the medical evidence of record, note the Veteran's neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood began after taking Harvoni to treat his diagnosed Hepatitis C and the Veteran's belief that it was the Harvoni that caused his symptoms. However, the Board notes this has consistently been documented as reported by the Veteran or by way of history from the Veteran and not an actual opinion as to the etiology or cause of the disorder. 

Therefore, the Board finds the October 2023 and November 2023 VA medical opinions to be of significant probative value in determining that his neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was not the result of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, or error in judgment by VA practitioners, did not result from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, and that there was no failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability that allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress. The Board notes that the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical experts' personal examination of the patient, their knowledge, and skill in analyzing the data, and their medical conclusion. As is true with any piece of evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to these opinions are within the province of the adjudicator. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). Whether a physician provides a basis for his or her medical opinion goes to the weight or credibility of the evidence in the adjudication of the merits. See Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998). Here, the reviewing physicians' opinions were based on review of the Veteran's lay contentions, his reported medical history, and review of the medical evidence of record. Further, a complete and thorough rationale was provided for the opinions rendered and is consistent with the medical evidence of record. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that neurocognitive disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was the result of VA care and prescribed treatment. The Board also recognizes that lay persons are competent to provide medical opinions on some medical issues. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011). However, although the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms, any opinion regarding whether disability is caused by VA practitioner care and resulted in an additional disability requires medical expertise that the Veteran has not demonstrated since such disabilities can have many causes and be treated in many ways. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 (2007). The Board also reminds the Veteran, as stated above, that simply having an additional disability and receiving care is not enough to establish cause. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c)(1).

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that, as the evidence persuasively favors against the claim it is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for compensation under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1151 must be denied. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.361(d)(2), 17.32.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.