Citation Nr: A25031933
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230913-375835
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU), to include consideration of referral to the Director, Compensation Service (Director) for consideration of TDIU on an extraschedular basis is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is service connected for bilateral calcaneal foot spurs with degenerative joint disease (bilateral foot DJD) and plantar corns with a combined disability rating of 30 percent.

2. Referral for extraschedular TDIU consideration is not warranted because there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable because of service-connected bilateral foot DJD or plantar corns.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU, to include as on an extraschedular basis, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b)

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from November 1978 to September 1985.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of history, in a May 2022 rating decision, the RO denied entitlement to a TDIU.  He filed a Supplemental Claim, via VA Form 20-0995, in July 2022, and a formal claim for TDIU, via VA Form 21-8940, in August 2022.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) readjudicated and denied the claim for service connection for TDIU in a January 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran subsequently filed a HLR request, via VA Form 20-0996, in April 2023 and requested readjudication of his claims via the HLR process.  The AOJ issued a July 2023 HLR decision continuing the denial of TDIU based on the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision.  In response to the April 2023 HLR decision, the Veteran submitted a timely Notice of Disagreement, via VA Form 10182, in February 2024, and chose the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

TDIU on an Extraschedular Basis

The Veteran filed a claim for increased compensation due to unemployability in July 2021 and a formal claim for TDIU in August 2022 claiming his disabilities have prevented him from working since February 2012.   

A TDIU is warranted where the combined schedular evaluation for service-connected disabilities is less than total, or 100 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).  VA will grant a total rating for compensation purposes based on unemployability when the evidence shows that the veteran is precluded from obtaining or maintaining any gainful employment, by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  Under 38 C.F.R. § § 4.16 (a), if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more to qualify for benefits based on individual unemployability.  If there are two or more such disabilities, there shall be at least one disability rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) defined the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic.  The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  The non-economic component includes consideration of the following: the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

The sole fact that a veteran is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough.  See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 363 (1993).  "A high rating in itself is a recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain or keep employment."  Id.  The ultimate question, however, is "whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether the veteran can find employment."  Id. 

The Veteran is in receipt of service connection right foot DJD with calcaneal spurs (10 percent), left foot DJD with calcaneal spurs (10 percent prior to October 31, 2022 and 20 percent from that date), and plantar corns (noncompensable) for a combined disability rating of 30 percent.  Therefore, he does not meet the criteria for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis at this time.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16.  

If a claimant does not meet the threshold criteria, a TDIU may still be assigned, but on a different basis.  It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled.  38 C.F.R. §4.16 (b).  The rating boards are required to submit all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards, to the Director for extraschedular consideration.  Id.  The Board does not have the authority to assign an extraschedular TDIU in the first instance.  Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001).  Although the holding of Bowling has been questioned, see Wages v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 233, 239-240 (2015) (Kasold, C.J., concurring) ("The Bowling holding was rendered with little analysis of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b) or its interplay with the statutory scheme for adjudicating claims, which requires decisions of an agency of original jurisdiction to be appealed to the Board and final decisions to be rendered by the Board, see 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104 and 7105. Frankly, Bowling appears to be wrongly decided"), the Court has declined to address whether it should be overruled.  See Stafford v. Wilkie, No. 18-4520, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 662 (Apr. 15, 2020) (nonprecedential panel Order) (dismissing the appeal as moot) and id. at *4 (Greenberg, J., dissenting) ("What evil lurks behind the Court deciding whether Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001) remains good law?").  Thus, the Board cannot address in the first instance whether the Veteran is entitled to TDIU on an extraschedular basis pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  See also Snider v. McDonough, No. 19-6707, 2022 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 775 (en banc) (May 20, 2022) (nonprecedential Order) (denying VA's motion for full-Court review in which it asked the Court to overrule Bowling) and id. at *2 (Toth, J., joined by Falvey and Jaquith, JJ., dissenting) ("I have no issue with the holdings in Ray and Snider as they are necessary to preserve fidelity to our precedent. That said, I'm convinced that the best course of action would be to revisit Floyd and Bowling and progeny to see if they remain viable").

In this situation, the Board's sole inquiry is whether referral for extraschedular consideration is warranted in light of the evidence.  The standard to be applied in this situation is there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities," Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 66.  If there is such evidence, then the proper course of action is to remand the issue of entitlement to a TDIU for referral to the Director for an advisory opinion for extraschedular consideration.  See 38 C.F.R. §4.16 (b).

The Board must apply the extraschedular standard rather than the schedular standard in the first instance when addressing TDIU where the Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria.  Snider v. Wilkie, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021) ("Ray's holding-that the initial extraschedular referral decision under § 4.16(b) addresses whether there's sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable because of service-connected disabilities-applies whether the Board decides to refer or not to refer for extraschedular TDIU consideration because both concern the same decision-whether referral is warranted").

In this case, the Board must determine whether there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his service-connected foot disabilities without regard to consideration of his non-service connected disabilities, which cause significant impairment.  See Pratt v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 269, 272 (1992) ("[e]ven if, as it appears, the B[oard] determined that appellant's unemployability was a result of...non-service-connected [disability,] its task was not finished. The B[oard] was still required to decide, without regard to the non-service-connected disabilities... , whether appellant's service-connected disabilities are sufficiently incapacitating as to render him unemployable").

The Veteran reported completing one year of college with prior employment in the food industry.  He noted in his August 2022 formal TDIU claim that he cannot function in the work force because his body is "racked with severe pain," he cannot stand, walk or use his hands for anything, and his pain resulted in two back surgeries and the amputation of all five toes on his left foot, which is not service connected.  In a July 2012 medical release, a physician stated that the Veteran cannot interact with people due to his bipolar depression, which is not service connected.  The Veteran reported in a May 2013 evaluation note that he worked for a company that owns Pizza Hut and Taco Bell for 23 years and that his most recent job at the time was that of a regional manager for Pizza Hut until he was fired in February 2012 due to "charges of terroristic threats by his fiancé."  On the Veteran's October 2014 Social Security Administration (SSA) letter, his severe impairments were identified to be non-service connected melanoma resection, possible glaucoma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), depression, bipolar disorder, and intermittent explosive disorder, but notably not his service-connected bilateral foot DJD or plantar corns.   

An August 2022 statement from a friend of 22 years noted that the Veteran's medical condition had "gone from good to bad" and continued to decline due to his disabilities and serious pain requiring ER visits, but the Veteran's service-connected bilateral foot DJD and plantar corns were not specifically mentioned or distinguished.  During an October 2022 VA foot examination, the Veteran reported severe daily flare-ups in both feet and difficulty walking or doing any activity.

The Board has considered the physical ability factors noted in Ray, to include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and vision.  See Ray, supra.  The Veteran's bilateral lower extremity functional limitations with physical activities due to service-connected bilateral foot DJD and plantar corns include pain, cramping, numbness, instability, tingling, and difficulty walking.  As such, occupations requiring frequent standing and prolonged walking, such as general labor or manufacturing work, would likely be precluded.  The Veteran would need regular rest breaks.  Nonetheless, engaging in general office work at a fixed location would not be precluded by these physical limitations.  Many office jobs allow for periodic breaks and do not require prolonged standing or walking.

In Withers v. Wilkie, the Court noted that VA has not explicitly defined the meaning of "sedentary employment."  Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139 (2018).  Until VA provides such a definition, "the meaning and relevance of the term will have to be discerned on a case-by-case basis from the medical and lay evidence presented and in light of each veteran's education, training, and work history."  Id. at 149-150.  Here, the Veteran's education, training, and work history as a regional manager demonstrates that he has some capacity to engage in sedentary occupations such as general office work, which primarily involve activities such as sitting at a desk, using a computer, or performing clerical work that would not be impacted by the limitations of his service-connected bilateral foot DJD and plantar corns. 

Based on the above, it does not appear to the Board that there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable because of service-connected foot disabilities.  These disabilities cause impairment but it does not seem reasonably possible that they would render the Veteran unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, to include sedentary employment as outlined above.  He would likely be able to perform sedentary employment as defined above because his service-connected foot disabilities, as opposed to his non-service connected disabilities, do not impair him to a degree making it a reasonable possibility that he would not be able to perform a job similar to the managerial jobs that he has previously held, and he left his most recent managerial job based on factors other than limitations caused by his service-connected disabilities.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran but is bound by the laws and regulations that apply to veterans' claims. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c); 38 C.F.R. § 20.105.  Application of those laws and regulations reflect that referral to the Director under the above standard is not warranted and entitlement to a TDIU on an extraschedular basis must therefore be denied.  As the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to extraschedular referral but rather persuasively weighs against such referral, the benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is not for application as to this matter.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	JR Cummings, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.