Citation Nr: A25031648
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240731-462832
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right tennis elbow is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding whether the Veteran's left knee condition is etiologically related to his active duty service.

2. The evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding whether the Veteran's chronic right knee condition is etiologically related to his active duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Coast Guard from November 2001 to November 2021.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 2023 and April 2024 rating decisions from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In July 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the above-noted rating decisions and filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)).  The Veteran selected the Direct Review Lane by submitting notice of disagreement under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Accordingly, the Board is limited to review of the evidence in the record up and until the date of notice for the August 2023 rating decision for the right elbow claim and up until the date of notice for the April 2024 rating decision for the bilateral knee conditions claims on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the above claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Additionally, the Board notes the April 2024 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received regarding the Veteran's bilateral knee claims and reopened the claims on appeal.  This is a favorable finding for the Veteran, and the Board will not readjudicate the issue of whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted.

Service Connection-Legal Criteria

Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.  

To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Bilateral Knees-Analysis 

At the outset, the Board notes the essential facts of the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for left and right knee conditions are essentially identical.  In addition, the resolution of these claims involves the application of identical law to similar facts.  As such, in the interest of judicial economy these issues will be addressed together.

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral knee conditions which he contends are etiologically related to his active-duty service.  The medical evidence confirms the Veteran has current diagnoses of bilateral knee degenerative arthritis, left knee strain, and right knee post-traumatic arthritis.  See May 2022 and January 2024 VA Knee Conditions examinations.  Therefore, the central issues to be resolved are whether the Veteran's current disabilities originated in service or are otherwise etiologically related to service.  

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not contain complaints of, treatment for, or diagnoses of any bilateral knee conditions.  However, the Veteran and his wife have provided lay statements which document the onset of the Veteran's bilateral knee pain in service, as well as their continuation to present day.

The Veteran was initially provided with a May 2022 VA Knee Condition examination.  Here the Veteran was diagnosed with left knee strain and right knee post-traumatic arthritis.  During the examination the Veteran reported that his bilateral knee pain began in 2001 and that he spent 20 years in the Coast Guard banging his knees into objects while serving on a boat.  

In a December 2023 Lay Statement, the Veteran reported that there was no specific injury regarding his knees in service.  Instead, the Veteran noted that throughout his 20 years in the Coast Guard he crawled through engines on a ship banging his knees.  Further, he noted that the ships he served on routinely encountered large waves which would throw him around the deck and cause him to bang his knees into things.  The Veteran continued that he first began experiencing bilateral knee pain during service and that the pain continued to present day.  He indicated that he would treat his knees with rest, ice, heat, and over the counter pain medications.

The Veteran's wife submitted a December 2023 Lay Statement regarding the Veteran's claimed bilateral knees.  In this statement, the Veteran's wife indicated that she and the veteran were marred in 2010.  She continued that she personally witnessed the Veteran coming home in pain, limping, and complaining that his knees hurt.  She noted that the Veteran would take over the counter pain medication and put ice on his knees when the pain was bad.

The Veteran was next provided with a January 2024 VA Knee Conditions examination and medical opinion.  Here, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral knee degenerative arthritis.  The examiner reported the date of onset for the Veteran's condition to be between 2006 and 2010 with the Veteran reporting constant wear and tear to his knees as well as repetitive knee injuries.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was less likely than not etiologically related to his active service.  The rationale provided was that the Veteran never went to sick call for his bilateral knees.  The examiner also opined that the conditions were less likely than not etiologically related to his service-connected ankle and pes planus disabilities.  The rationale provided was that the Veteran denied a worsening of his knee pain after the ankle and pes planus conditions occurred.

In this case, the Board must determine the value of all evidence submitted, including lay and medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  The evaluation of evidence generally involves a 3-step inquiry.  First, the Board must determine whether the evidence comes from a "competent" source.  The Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (observing that once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible).  The third step of this inquiry requires the Board to weigh the probative value of the proffered evidence in light of the entirety of the record.  The Board also notes that under certain circumstances, lay evidence may be sufficient to establish a nexus.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  

The Board has considered the medical evidence of record.  As noted above, the January 2024 VA examiner provided a negative etiological opinion.  However, the VA examiner's opinion was based on a lack of treatment records reflecting a chronic diagnosis in service.  The Board further notes that pain alone, even without an underlying pathology or diagnosis, can constitute a disability under VA law where such pain results in functional impairment.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Additionally, the Board notes, "symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology."  Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997).  As such, the VA medical opinion that discounted the Veteran's reports of pain during and since service is of little probative value. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (noting that the central issue in determining probative value of a medical opinion is whether the examiner was informed of the relevant facts); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding that a medical opinion must be supported by an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions).

The Board has also considered the Veteran's, and his wife's, lay statements in support of the claim.  The Veteran is competent to report symptoms, such as pain because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  Additionally, the Veteran's wife is competent to report what she directly observed.  Id.  However, they are not competent to offer an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's current disorders due to the medical complexity of the matter involved.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  

In this case, the Veteran has competently and credibly reported that he experienced bilateral knee pain in active-duty service and that his symptoms of pain have persisted ever since.  Additionally, the Veteran's wife has competently and credibly reported witnessing the Veteran take over the counter medication for his knee pain, complain about knee pain in service, and ice his knees while in service.  The Board finds the Veteran's, and his wife's, lay statements credible in this regard.  The Veteran is competent to describe his bilateral knee symptomatology and treatment.  

In light of the foregoing, because of the credible evidence of bilateral knee impairment during and since service, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for left and right knee conditions is warranted because the onset of these conditions was coincident with the Veteran's active-duty service.  See Flynn v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 500, 503 (1994) (noting that "the element of cause and effect has been totally by-passed in favor of a simple temporal relationship between the incurrence of the disability and the period of active duty"); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (service connection connotes many factors but, basically, it means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces).   

As such, the Veteran's claims for service connection for left and right knee conditions are granted

REASONS FOR REMAND

Right Elbow

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicolson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  To be considered adequate, a medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

While there is a July 2023 VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed right elbow condition, the Board finds it to be inadequate for rating purposes.  Specifically, the Board notes that the examiner was requested to opine on whether the Veteran's right elbow condition was at least as likely as not due to or aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder condition.  However, in proffering a negative opinion, the examiner does not provide a "reasoned medical explanation."  Instead, the examiner states that chronicity from the Veteran's service to present day cannot be established.  However, the examiner does not address whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed disability is caused by his service-connected shoulder disability.  Chronicity of treatment from service to present day is not an element of secondary service connection.

Further, in proffering their opinion regarding secondary service connection the examiner did not opine on whether the Veteran's right elbow disability was aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder disability.  Of note, secondary service connection is warranted for a current disability that is either caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.301(a), (b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  As such, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate because it fails to address secondary causation and aggravation.  Atencio v. O'Rouke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018).

For these reasons, the Board finds that the failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  As such, the Board finds the Veteran's claim must be remanded for an examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed right elbow disability, to include development for a theory of secondary service connection.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to address the etiology and onset of the Veteran's claimed right elbow condition.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner, including a copy of this remand.  Any indicated studies should be performed.  

Following a review of the relevant records, lay statements, and the medical evidence of record, the examiner is asked to opine on the following:

-	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balance or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed right tennis elbow is caused or aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder condition.

The Board notes that aggravation need not be a permanent worsening of the disability.  A temporary worsening of a disability may constitute aggravation.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all proffered opinions.  

 

 

A.	C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gresham, Trevor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.