Citation Nr: A25031761
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231025-387078
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating greater than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating greater than 10 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to an award of total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2008 to August 2015, including service in Iraq and Afghanistan.  The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) sincerely thanks the Veteran for his honorable service to our country in a time of war.

This case comes before the Board on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an increased rating for lumbosacral strain, entitlement to an increased rating for radiculopathy, and entitlement to individual unemployability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the applications of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.  Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Schedule, but that findings sufficient to identify the disease and the resulting disability and, above all, coordination of the rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21; Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to an increased rating higher than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

The Veteran seeks a rating higher than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain.

The Veteran first filed a claim for service connection for a back condition in August 2015.  See August 2015 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran's claim was granted in a February 2016 rating decision.  See February 2016 Rating Decision.  Specifically, the Veteran was awarded service connection for a lumbosacral strain, effective August 2, 2015, rated as 10 percent disabling.  Id. 

No appeal, higher level review, or supplemental claim was filed within the year following this rating decision; no relevant records were associated with the file or within the constructive possession of VA.  Therefore, the February 2016 rating decision is final.

The Veteran then filed a claim for multiple new, unrelated conditions, and also included his service connected back condition.  See October 2018 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The AOJ interpreted the Veteran's filing as to his back condition as an increased rating claim and denied that claim in a January 2019 rating decision.  See January 2019 Rating Decision.  

Less than one year later, the Veteran filed a new claim for unrelated conditions which also specifically included an increased rating claim his back condition.  See September 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ.  After further development this increased rating claim was denied in an October 2019 rating decision.  See October 2019 Rating Decision.

Less than one year later, the Veteran again filed a new claim for various disabilities and also specifically included an increased rating claim for his back condition.  See May 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ.  After further development the AOJ increased the Veteran's disability rating for his lumbosacral strain condition from 10 percent to 20 percent, effective May 27, 2020.  See February 2021 Rating Decision.

Following the February 2021 rating decision the Veteran received two new VA examinations relating to his back condition.  See March 2021 VA Examination; July 2021 VA Examination.  The AOJ then issued a rating decision proposing to decrease the Veteran's disability rating from 20 percent to 10 percent.  See August 2021 Rating Decision.  The AOJ in fact reduced the Veteran's disability rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective July 1, 2021.  See July 2021 Rating Decision.

No appeal, higher level review, or supplemental claim was filed within the year following this rating decision; no relevant records were associated with the file or within the constructive possession of VA.  Therefore, the July 2021 rating decision is final.

On August 22, 2023 the Veteran filed a claim form for new benefits but specifically listed an increased rating claim for his back condition.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The AOJ interpreted the Veteran's filing a claim for an increased rating, and after further development denied the Veteran an increased rating for his lumbosacral strain, continuing the 10 percent evaluation.  See October 2023 Rating Decision.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board.  See October 2023 VA Form 10182.

The Board therefore finds the period on appeal stems from August 22, 2023, to include consideration of the one-year look back period, but no earlier.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).

The Veteran received a VA examination for his back condition in September 2023.  

The VA examiner noted that the Veteran experiences flare-ups (increases in the severity of his pain and symptoms of his back condition) but that the examination was not conducted during a flare-up.  The examiner therefore sought information from the Veteran about the severity and frequency of his flare-ups as well as the functional impairment the Veteran experiences during a flare-up.  See September 2023 VA Examination.

Specifically, the examiner noted "Flare-ups of the back occur weekly.  The back flare-ups are moderate to severe. The back flare-ups last 1 hour to all day. The back flare-ups [come on] without a cause.  The back flare-ups are alleviated by lying flat and Ibuprofen and methocarbamol."  Id (emphasis added).

In summary, the Veteran reported that he uses at least two medications to treat his symptoms from flare-ups, that these flare-ups occur at least once per week for up to a full day at a time.

The examiner then provided an estimation of range of motion and an estimation of functional limitation the Veteran experiences during a flare-up.  However, the examiner did not specify whether these estimates consider the effects of the medication the Veteran takes to alleviate his symptoms.

The Board may not consider the ameliorative (beneficial) effects of medication when those effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012); Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025). 

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  Diagnostic Code 5237 does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.  

Once VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one, regardless of whether it was legally obligated to provide an examination in the first place.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves- Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

Here, the September 2023 VA examination is inadequate because it is unclear to the Board whether or not the VA examiner discounted the ameliorative effects of the medications that the Veteran takes to alleviate his symptoms.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025).

It is possible that the Veteran's underlying condition is worse when the Veteran is not experiencing alleviation of his symptoms from medication.  A higher level of disability rating could possibly be obtained when disregarding the ameliorative effects of the medication the Veteran takes to treat his symptoms under this Diagnostic Code.  However, the Board cannot make that medical determination in the first instance.

The Board may only remand for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error on the part of the AOJ, or for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

This claim is remanded to correct a pre-decisional error in VA's duty to assist.  A remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical examination.  The VA has a duty to assist Veterans by providing adequate medical exams.  Reliance by the AOJ on an inadequate medical exam to deny benefits is an example of a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.  A new examination and opinion-based on full review of the record and supported by stated rationale-is needed to fairly resolve the issues on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2018).

The Board sincerely regrets additional delay, but the Board cannot escape the conclusion that any further adjudication of this claim is precluded as a matter of law.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating greater than 10 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity is remanded.

The Veteran seeks a rating higher than 10 percent for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity.

By way of background, the Veteran's claim for service connection for radiculopathy arose out of a VA examination the Veteran received for his already service-connected back condition.  

Specifically, on August 22, 2023 the Veteran filed a claim seeking an increased rating for his back condition.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran was given a new VA examination for his back condition, during which the examiner also diagnosed the Veteran with radiculopathy of the right lower extremity.  See September 2023 VA Examination.

The Veteran was then granted service connection for his radiculopathy condition- rated as 10 percent disabling effective August 22, 2023-in an October 2023 rating decision.  See October 2023 Rating Condition.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board.  See October 2023 VA Form 10182.

The Board therefore finds the period on appeal stems from August 22, 2023, to include consideration of the one-year look back period, but no earlier.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).

The Veteran's radiculopathy condition is rated under 38 CFR 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8525, paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

Under Diagnostic Code 8525, a 10 percent rating is assigned for mild paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 40 percent rating is assigned for moderately severe paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 60 percent rating is assigned for severe paralysis of the sciatic nerve, with marked muscular atrophy.  A 100 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

As described above, the Veteran was diagnosed with radiculopathy of the right lower extremity during a September 2023 VA examination which was not specifically an examination about neurologic conditions.  The examiner did not mention or discuss paralysis symptoms.  See September 2023 VA examination.  

The examiner did however discuss four specific symptoms: constant pain, intermittent pain, parathesis and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.  Id.  For all four symptoms the examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms are "severe."  Id.  The only written explanation the examiner provided regarding the Veteran's radiculopathy is that "the likely cause of radiculopathy is caused by narrowing of the space where nerve roots exit the spine, which can be a result of stenosis, bone spurs, disc herniation."  Id. 

In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal the AOJ explained that the Veteran was assigned a 10 percent rating based on "mild incomplete paralysis" and noted that a higher rating of 20 percent is not warranted unless the Veteran shows "nerve damage is moderate" citing 38 CFR 4.124a as well as 38CFR § 4.120, which discusses evaluations by comparison in rating peripheral nerve injuries.  See October Rating Decision.  

Here the Board notes that the September 2023 VA examiner does not appear to have addressed the issue of nerve damage.

Once VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one, regardless of whether it was legally obligated to provide an examination in the first place.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves- Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

Here, the September 2023 VA examination is inadequate because it does not appear that the examiner provided any explanation as to why the Veteran's symptoms, which were all rated as "severe" in the exam, resulted in a rating corresponding with "mild" symptoms.  

The Board may only remand for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error on the part of the AOJ, or for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

This claim is remanded to correct a pre-decisional error in VA's duty to assist.  A remand is required to afford the Veteran an adequate VA medical examination.  The VA has a duty to assist Veterans by providing adequate medical exams.  Reliance by the AOJ on an inadequate medical exam to deny benefits is an example of a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.  A new examination and opinion-based on full review of the record and supported by stated rationale-is needed to fairly resolve the issues on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2018).

The Board sincerely regrets additional delay, but the Board cannot escape the conclusion that any further adjudication of this claim is precluded as a matter of law.

3. Entitlement to an award of total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he can no longer work due to his service-connected lumbosacral and radiculopathy disabilities.  See October 2023 VA Form 10182.  

The Board notes that there is evidence of record to indicate that the Veteran has been unemployed since May 2022.  See April 2023 VA Treatment Record.

Although the Veteran has not filed a claim for an award of total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU), the Board concludes that it must infer a claim for TDIU as part and parcel of the Veteran's current claims for increased ratings for his lumbosacral and radiculopathy disabilities.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

A TDIU may be assigned when a veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation due to his or her service-connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.  The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component simply means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id.

The Board may assign a TDIU in the first instance only when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of 1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or 2) as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.34l, 4.16(a).  For these purposes, disabilities resulting from common etiology or single accident, or those affecting both upper extremities or both lower extremities, or a single bodily system are considered as one, collective disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Here, the Veteran does not currently meet the scheduler criteria for TDIU.  

However, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims for increased ratings for lumbosacral strain and for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity.  It is possible that further development of these claims could result in the Veteran receiving higher disability ratings which would make him eligible for the scheduler criteria for TDIU.  Remand is therefore necessary because the Veteran's eligibility for TDIU is inextricably intertwined with his lumbosacral strain and radiculopathy of the right lower extremity.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a Veteran's claim for the second issue).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action(s):

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected lumbosacral strain.  The examiner must provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(a.) The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

(b.) The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

(c.) The examiner must consider and discuss the baseline severity of the Veteran's lumbosacral disability without the ameliorative effects of any medication (including over the counter and topical treatment) taken to treat the condition.

If this is not feasible, the clinician MUST provide a detailed explanation and rationale for why this could not be accomplished.  Specifically, if the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the examiner should explain the information necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the RO should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his radiculopathy of the lower right extremity.  The examiner must provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.

3. Send the Veteran a notice letter advising him about what is needed to substantiate a claim for a TDIU and request that he complete a VA Form 21-8940 to obtain relevant employment information and to authorize VA to contact his current and/or former employer(s) for additional information regarding his employment.

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jimenez, Christina

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.