Citation Nr: A25031755
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231227-403251
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

An initial rating in excess of 20 percent for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

An initial rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability is denied.

An effective date earlier than April 25, 2023, for service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his currently diagnosed tinnitus had its onset during his military service. 

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's right ear hearing acuity results in no worse than Level III hearing and his left ear hearing acuity results in no worse than Level VII hearing.

3. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment.

4. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) received the Veteran's intent file on April 25, 2023, related to his claim of entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, and entitlement to service connection for such disorder arose at such time.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303. 3.307; 3.309.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6100.

3. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9413.

4. The criteria for an effective date earlier than April 25, 2023, for service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1969 to December 1971. The rating decisions on appeal were issued in September 2023 and November 2023 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the December VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

In this regard, the Board acknowledges that the VA Form 10182 indicated that the issue the Veteran wished to appeal pertaining to the denial of his claim for anxiety and depression in a January 2018 rating decision. The accompanying argument from the Veteran indicates that he is seeking an earlier effective date for service connection of his unspecified anxiety disorder. 

Additionally, the Veteran indicated a desire to appeal his hearing loss claim adjudicated in the September 2023 rating decision referenced above. In the argument accompanying the Veteran's VA Form 10182, the Veteran also indicates disagreement with the AOJ's decision denying service connection for tinnitus related to his hearing loss. 

Thus, as the Board has a duty to liberally construe VA Forms 10182 and the December 2023 10182 specifically indicates a desire to appeal the September 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions, and the attached argument indicates disagreement with the effective date of the award of service connection and denial of service connection for tinnitus, such matters will be addressed herein.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal regarding the claims for service connection for tinnitus and an increased rating for bilateral hearing loss, and November 2023 for the claims of entitlement to an earlier effective date and initial increased rating for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. 

Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.: see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Where a veteran served for at least 90 days during a period of war or after December 31, 1946, and manifests certain chronic diseases, such as arthritis and other organic diseases of the nervous system, to a degree of 10 percent within one year, from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. Tinnitus is deemed an organic disease of the nervous system where there is evidence of acoustic trauma. Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015).

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus had its onset during service as a result of his in-service noise exposure as a Marine Corps rifleman and has continued to the present time. In this regard, the AOJ favorably found that as a Marine Corps rifleman, the Veteran had a high probability of hazardous noise exposure. 

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus. In this regard, when a condition may be diagnosed by its unique and readily identifiable features, as is the case with tinnitus, the presence of the disorder is not a determination "medical in nature," and is capable of lay observation. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 305 (2007); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002) (holding that lay evidence is competent to establish such disorders as tinnitus, which are characterized by unique and readily identifiable features that are capable of lay "observation"). In a June 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that during service he qualified on small arms and crew served weapons without hearing protection. Moreover, the Veteran reports that he has had constant ringing in his ears since basic training. Additionally, at a July 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported transient head noise monthly. Although the VA examiner opined that such was not clinically significant, the Board finds such opinion inadequate as it fails to consider the Veteran's June 2023 statement that he has constant ringing in his ears. Thus, resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran has a present diagnosis of tinnitus as such is capable of diagnosis based on lay observation alone. Id.

The remaining inquiry is whether his tinnitus is related to his military service, to include his in-service noise exposure. In this regard, in the June 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that during service, he was trained to use small arms and crew served weapons which resulted in constant ringing in his ears that persists to the present. 

Based on the forgoing, the Board finds that the evidence of record, to include the Veteran's competent statements, the credibility of which the Board has no reason to doubt, reflect that his tinnitus had its onset in service. In this regard, when a claim involves a diagnosis based on purely subjective complaints, the Board is within its province to weigh the Veteran's testimony and determine whether it supports a finding of service incurrence and continued symptoms since service. Barr, supra. Therefore, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that his current tinnitus had its onset in service. Thus, service connection for such disorder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

If the criteria and the facts are such that two different ratings are potentially applicable to the disability in question, the lower of those ratings must be assigned unless the veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating.?38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

However, in keeping with the VA's overarching pro-veteran approach to claim adjudication, if there is any reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability, that doubt will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

If the severity of a disability fluctuates over time, the VA may assign multiple ratings to cover different periods. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Breland v. McDonough, 22 F.4th 1347, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2022). See also, O'Connell v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 89, 93 (2007) (assigning multiple ratings is a "sensible mechanism" for ensuring precision while simultaneously accounting for the "dynamic nature" of a disability). This process is commonly referred to as "staging" the ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

When staging ratings, the VA considers the evidence pertaining to the entire period on appeal, assigns a rating to reflect the level of disability for each distinct period, and then assigns the effective dates for each rating. Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 127; Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 509. 

The effective date of a staged rating generally corresponds to the date that level of disability initially became evident. Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015).

The rating process begins when the VA grants service connection, and then assigns an initial disability rating. Once the initial rating is assigned, a veteran may pursue a higher rating by two different methods: (1) filing a timely appeal of the initial rating assigned to the disability based on a contention the AOJ erred in their evaluation of the veteran's disability, or (2) filing a new claim for an increased rating based on a contention the severity of their disability has increased since the initial rating. 

In this instance, the Veteran appealed the initial ratings, and therefore the period on appeal for the Board's consideration is limited to the period between the claim and mailing of the rating decision on appeal.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for bilateral hearing loss.

For the entire since the effective date of service connection, April 25, 2023, the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss has been assigned a 20 percent rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6100.

Disability ratings for hearing loss generally are derived from the mechanical process of applying the rating schedule to the specific numeric scores obtained by audiology testing. See Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.85, 4.86 (2020).

The Rating Schedule for hearing loss includes Tables to determine evaluation percentages. Table VI assigns a Roman numeral designation (from Levels I through XI) to a veteran's hearing loss disability based on the "Pure-tone threshold average" for each ear.  

Pure-tone thresholds are a measure of a veteran's hearing sensitivity to specific calibrated tones, measured in decibels. While the VA measures a veteran's Pure-tone thresholds at seven different frequencies, the Pure-tone threshold average used in Table VI is calculated using only four of those frequencies: 1000, 2000, 3000 and 4000 Hertz (Hz).   

Once a hearing loss level for each ear has been established via Table VI, a disability rating for each ear is determined by plugging the level into Table VII. Specifically, the Roman numeral representing the hearing loss level for the ear with better hearing is located on the horizontal row, and the Roman numeral representing the hearing loss for the ear having poorer hearing is located on the vertical column. The percentage of disability is determined by the point where the horizontal row and the vertical column intersect. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85.

An "exceptional" pattern of hearing impairment occurs when the puretone threshold at each of the four frequencies is 55 decibels or more, or the average puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hz. 38 C.F.R. In such cases, the VA plugs the audiometric data into both Table VI and Table VIA, and uses whichever hearing loss level is higher in Table VII. § 4.86.

The evidence of record relevant to this appeal is comprised solely of audiometric testing performed during a July 2023 VA examination. During this examination, audiometric testing revealed the following pure tone thresholds in decibels at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz, respectively: 45, 70, 75, and 85 and in the right ear, and 55, 75, 75, and 85 in the left ear, demonstrating an exceptional pattern of hearing loss in his right ear. The average decibel loss was 68.75 in the right ear and 72.50 in the left ear. The Veteran had speech discrimination scores of 84 percent in the right ear and 60 percent in the left ear. 

At such time, he reported that he had difficulty hearing his wife speaking especially in the context of background noise. Using Table VI, these findings result in Level III in the right ear and Level VII in the left ear hearing, which equates to a 20 percent rating. However, when considering the Veteran's bilateral exceptional hearing pattern in his left ear and utilizing Table VIA, these findings result VI in the left ear. As VA must apply the level of hearing acuity that results in a higher numeral, then the Board concludes that a Level VII for the left ear, assigned per Table VI, is warranted. 

Applying these findings to Table VII, a 20 percent rating is warranted.

To the extent that the Veteran contends that his bilateral hearing loss is more severe than the currently assigned rating, the Board observes that he, while competent to report symptoms capable of lay observation, to include difficulty hearing and understanding speech, is not competent to report that his hearing acuity is of sufficient severity to warrant a higher rating under VA's tables for rating hearing loss disabilities because such an opinion requires medical expertise (training in evaluating hearing impairment), which he has not been shown to possess. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

Despite the foregoing, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's aforementioned reports of the difficulties associated with his bilateral hearing loss. However, even after considering such contentions as to the effects of the disability on his daily life, the Board finds that the criteria for higher evaluations are not met. See Lendenmann, supra. In this regard, in Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate the functional effects of decreased hearing and difficulty understanding speech in an everyday work environment as these are the effects that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure. The Veteran has not otherwise described functional effects that are considered exceptional, or that are not otherwise contemplated by the assigned evaluation. Id. Thus, his complete disability picture is compensated under the rating schedule.

In closing, the Board observes if going forward his hearing acuity worsens, the Veteran may file a new claim for an increased rating, which will have an effective date corresponding to the receipt of the new claim or when the change in acuity became factually ascertainable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).  

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability. 

The Veteran has been assigned a rating effective April 25, 2023, for his unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability, reduced frustration toleration.  Subsequently, on June 28, 2023, he filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection for anxiety and depression. 

The appeal period before the Board begins on April 25, 2023, the date service connection was awarded for the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability, reduced frustration toleration. For the entire appeal period, such disability has been evaluated as 30 percent disabling pursuant to DC 9413, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

In this regard, such provides a 30 percent rating where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9413.

In this regard, in a May 2023 VA treatment record following a surgery for an unrelated disorder, the Veteran reported anxiety and decreased patience. Specifically stating that he holds his anxiety in and then he screams and curses. The Veteran also reported getting upsent with a priest regarding a mass for a friend and upset with a bed alarm following the surgery. Additionally, the Veteran stated that he would like to begin counseling. However, there is no evidence of record indicating that he began counseling. 

Upon VA examination in October 2023, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with an unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability, reduced frustration tolerance. However, the examiner ruled out a diagnosis of depression as the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology are not sufficient to meet the Diagnostic and Statistics Manual (DSM) - V criteria. This included consideration of screening test results that indicate moderate depression and mild anxiety. The examiner noted symptomatology that includes depressed mood, anxiety, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting. 

Thus, the Board finds that the examiner considered the Veteran's symptoms of depressed mood in the diagnosis for unspecified anxiety disorder while specifically ruling out a diagnosis for depression due to insufficient symptoms to meet DSM-V criteria. 

Furthermore, at the October 202302886-00000219 examination, the Veteran reported that he has been married for over 50 years with two adult sons and four grandchildren. The Veteran endorsed a positive relationship with his wife, hobbies such as gardening and lawn mowing, and friends in the community. The Veteran reported seeing a therapist for one session and being prescribed sertraline since the 1990s that reduce his irritability and anxiety. The Veteran reported that he retired from a position with the United States Postal Service (USPS), but there was no indication that he retired due to his psychiatric disorder. 

Moreover, the Veteran reported stress related to the VA claims process and his finances. Of note, the Veteran did not report symptoms of depression at such examination, but he did report such symptomatology in 2015 and 2016. However, no such reports occurred proximate to the appeal period. 

As such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosis is for unspecified anxiety disorder that manifests as occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks only during period of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication, which corresponds to the 10 percent rating criteria.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology during the appeal period, including, but not limited to, depressed mood, anxiety, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, resulted in, at most, occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.

In this regard, the evidence does not show that the Veteran manifests a greater degree of psychiatric symptomatology that more nearly approximates a higher rating under the General Rating Formula. 

In this regard, he does not exhibit any symptoms that are indicative of a 50 or 100 percent rating. While the examiner noted that the Veteran's symptomatology includes difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, which can be indicative of a 70 percent rating, the examiner also found that the Veteran's symptomatology was controlled by medication noting that the Veteran has been prescribed medication since the 1990s that lessens his anxiety and irritability. Thus, even in consideration of the totality of the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of his psychiatric symptomatology, regardless of the classification under the General Rating Formula, the evidence does not show a greater degree of occupational and social impairment that more nearly approximates a higher rating.

Specifically, with respect to the Veteran's occupational functioning, he has been retired for the entire appeal period following employment with the USPS. The Veteran did not report any issues with his employment. 

As for his social functioning, he has been married for over 50 years with a positive relationship with his spouse. He also reported friends in the community and hobbies such as gardening and mowing the lawn. 

Furthermore, the February 2023 VA examiner, who is a psychologist with the appropriate expertise to evaluate psychiatric disabilities, considered the totality of the Veteran's symptomatology and found that his psychiatric disability resulted in no more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks only during period of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication, which is consistent with the a 10 percent rating assigned under the General Rating Formula even in consideration of the Veteran's reported anxiety and irritation in stressful situations such as surgery recovery or mass for a friend. 

Thus, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's psychiatric disability is not warranted. This appeal is denied.

In closing, the Board observes if going forward the severity of the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder increases, the Veteran may file a new claim for an increased rating, which will have an effective date corresponding to the receipt of the new claim or when the change in the severity of his symptoms or impairments caused by his disability became factually ascertainable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).  

4. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than April 25, 2023, for service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder with irritability.

By way of background, VA received the Veteran's original claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder characterized as PTSD/adjustment disorder, on December 4, 2015, which was denied in a March 2016 rating decision. On December 22, 2017, the VA received another claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, characterized as anxiety and depression, which was denied in a January 2018 rating decision. 

In connection with the issuance of the rating decision issued in January 2018, the Veteran was advised of his appellate rights, but he did not submit a notice of disagreement, appeal, supplemental claim, or request for higher level review in the one-year window following that decision. 

Additionally, no new and material evidence (the standard in effect at the time) was physically or constructively associated with the record within one year of the issuance of such decision, and no relevant service department records have since been received. 

Generally, the effective date of a benefit is either the date the claim for that benefit was received, or the date entitlement to that benefit arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

When the claim on appeal is a supplemental claim rather than the initial claim for the benefit sought, the date the original claim was received applies so long as the Veteran "continuously pursues" the benefit in question by timely and properly filing an appeal or other administrative review option after a VA decision on the initial claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1). 

Here, however, there was no continuous pursuit-rather, there was a lacuna of five years between the denial and the submission of the intent to file a claim seeking to reverse that denial. Thus, the January 2018 rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.156, 20.302, 20.1103. Thereafter, the date the VA received the Veteran's Intent to File a claim-April 25, 2023-is the relevant date for purposes of calculating the effective date of service connection based on the subsequent supplemental claim. This appeal is denied.

Other Considerations

Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any issue other than those addressed in this decision, nor have any other such issues been raised by the record.  

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pettit, Andrew M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.