Citation Nr: A25031642
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-444659
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2001 to September 2006.  

The Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 under The Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) review system.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

Bilateral Knee Conditions

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

Here, the Board finds that the August 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate because it is based on the lack of medical evidence, does not consider the Veteran's lay statements of ongoing bilateral knee pain, and based on an inaccurate factual basis. 

The Veteran contends that he injured his knees during service.  In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records noted a diagnosis of patella-femoral syndrome (PFPS).  See January 15, 2003 Service Treatment Records (STRs).  Also, in a December 2003 STR, the Veteran was treated after he fell on his right knee, during which the Veteran was diagnosed with right patellar contusion.  In an October 18, 2001 STR, the Veteran reported bilateral knee pain and the examiner noted right knee cellulitis.  See STRs.  The Veteran contends that he has had ongoing knee problems since service.  See July 2023 VA Form 526EZ.

In an August 2023 VA examination report, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral PFPS.  See August 2023 VA Knee and Lower Leg Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  In an associated August 2023 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current PFPS is less likely related to the Veteran's in-service diagnosis of PFPS.  The rationale was the lack of continuity of symptoms or treatment since service.  The examiner also stated that during the examination, the Veteran reported that his knees began bothering him in the last the last two years.  The examiner also noted there was only one record for a visit in 2003 for knee pain during service.

However, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate for the following reasons.  First, the examiner's opinion is based on the lack of medical records or treatment since the Veteran was separated from service.  Crucially, the lack of evidence of treatment for the claimed disorder in the Veteran's treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the basis for a negative opinion.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (the lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence incredible or serve as an "absolute bar" to service connection). 

Furthermore, the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's lay statements that he has had ongoing knee pain since his separation of service.  In Miller, the Court held that the duty to assist requires an examiner to "address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate opinion," in part because "medical opinions can inform credibility findings.  See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).  Applying Miller, the Court explained in Smith, that because "medical opinions can inform credibility findings, the duty to assist may require the Board to obtain a medical examination before assessing the credibility of lay evidence."  See Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).  Given such, applying the Court's rulings in Miller and Smith, the Board finds that without consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, the August 2023 VA medical opinion of record, is inadequate.

Lastly, the Board notes that the examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms began two years ago.  However, the examination report does not reflect any statements indicating such.  Also, the examiner noted that there was only one visit during service related to the Veteran's knees.  However, as noted above, the Veteran had at least three visits during service related to his bilateral knees.  These visits include visits on October 18, 2001, January 15, 2003, and in December 2003.  Given such, this opinion is also inadequate because it is based on an incorrect factual premise.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (indicating a medical opinion based on incorrect factual premise is not probative.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty-to-assist-error has occurred and a remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request an addendum VA medical opinion from a qualified medical professional to ascertain the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions.  After review of the record, the examiner is asked to address the following:

A)	Whether the Veteran's left knee condition, to include PFPS, at least as likely as not had its onset in service or is otherwise the result of the Veteran's service, to include his in-service diagnosis of PFPS.

B)	Whether the Veteran's right knee condition, to include PFPS, at least as likely as not had its onset in service or is otherwise the result of the Veteran's service, to include his in-service diagnosis of PFPS.

The examiner is asked to consider and address the following:

A)	The Veteran's in-service diagnosis of PFPS noted on  January 15, 2003 Service Treatment Records (STRs).  

B)	The Veteran's in-service diagnosis of right patellar contusion as noted in a December 2003 STR.

C)	The Veteran's report of ongoing knee problems since service as noted in his July 2023 VA Form 526EZ.

The examiner is reminded that a negative medical opinion may not be rendered solely on (i) the lack of notations indicating diagnosis or treatment for the claimed disorder(s) in the service treatment records, or (ii) general medical literature untethered to this particular Veteran and the facts of his case.  To rely exclusively on the above (i) and (ii) alone or in conjunction with each other will render the opinion inadequate for VA adjudication purposes.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology, to include the Veteran's ongoing reports of knee problems.  S/he should outline that history in the report. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports of symptomatology, a reason for doing so must be provided.

Any opinion expressed by the VA examiner must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Abdelbary, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.