Citation Nr: A25031146
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220411-235015
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a bilateral foot disorder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served on active duty from January 2004 to February 2007.

2. A bilateral foot disorder, diagnosed as hallux rigidus, was not shown in service, was not continuous since service, was not shown to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service, and is not causally or etiologically related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

A bilateral foot disorder was not shown in service, is not causally or etiologically related to service, and cannot be presumed to have been incurred in service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

This decision has been written under the guidelines of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In October 2020, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim. In February 2021, the Veteran requested a Higher-Level Review (HLR). An April 2021 decision noted a duty-to-assist error. In June 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal in which the claim was denied.  

In April 2022, the Veteran appealed to the Board via a VA Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2021 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Turning to the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 under the following circumstances: (1) where a chronic disease or injury is shown in service and subsequent manifestations of the same disease or injury are shown at a later date unless clearly attributable to an intercurrent cause; or (2) where there is continuity of symptomatology since service; or (3) by showing that the disorder manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

Turning first to direct service connection, a June 2021 VA examiner diagnosed bilateral hallux rigidus and left foot arthritis. As such, the first element of direct service connection has been met.

As to in-service incurrence, the service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints of, treatment for, or symptoms related to hallux rigidus or other foot disorders. Notably, the Veteran sought treatment for numerous other illness and injuries, including an upper respiratory infection in February 2003, head trauma with loss of consciousness in July 2003, depression in April 2004, and low back pain in August 2004 but nothing regarding the feet or toes. Also, he endorsed excellent health in a Post-Deployment Health Assessment in July 2006.

Moreover, the Veteran did not indicate any problems associated with the feet in the February 2007 separation examination. Specifically, the Veteran endorsed no foot trouble and no impaired use of the arms, legs, hands, or feet. Therefore, a foot/toe disorder was not shown in service.

To the extent that the Veteran asserts that hallux rigidus is related to service, a June 2021 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders were incurred in or caused by service. In support of this opinion, the examiner noted that with no treatment records while in the service for the bilateral foot conditions, there was insufficient evidence to determine if the current bilateral hallux rigidus was due to the prolonged running while in the service as the Veteran asserted. This evidence does not support the appeal.

Of note, the Veteran provided private medical reports in March and October 2020 that detailed the foot disorders; however, neither offered an opinion as to whether the foot disorders were etiologically related to service. As such, the medical evidence does not support service connection on a direct basis.

As to presumptive service connection, hallux rigidus is a form of osteoarthritis, which is a chronic condition under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309. As such, presumptive service connection will be considered. To that end, no chronic disease or injury was shown in service as discussed above. Therefore, the medical evidence does not support presumptive service connection on a "chronic disease or injury shown in service" basis.

Next, the medical evidence does not support presumptive service connected based on continuity of symptomatology since service. Specifically, the Veteran was discharged from service in February 2007. VA treatment records reflect the first notation of treatment for a left foot disorder in May 2019, nearly 12 years later.

Further, the foot disorder did not manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation of service. As noted, the Veteran separated from service in 2007 but did not report symptoms until 2019, 12 years following service separation. This evidence does not support presumptive service connection on a "manifest within one-year from separation" basis. Therefore, the medical evidence does not support presumptive service connection on any basis.

The Board has considered the Veteran's and his spouse's lay statements that the current bilateral foot disorders were caused by service. While he is competent to report symptoms and she is competent to describe her observations as this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to them through their senses, they are not competent to offer an opinion as to the etiology of the current disorder due to the medical complexity of the matter involved. 

Specifically, the Veteran's statements about pain in the feet do not describe symptoms of a particular disorder of the feet, including arthritis, or suggest a particular etiology of any such disorder.  Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders has been provided by the medical personnel who examined him during the current appeal, and who rendered a pertinent opinion in conjunction with the evaluation. 

Those findings (as provided in the examination report and other clinical evidence) directly address the criteria under which these disorders are evaluated. The VA medical professional explained their reasoning based on an accurate characterization of the evidence. Therefore, the Board attaches greater probative weight to the clinical findings than to their lay statements regarding etiology. 

Also, the Board is not merely relying on the absence of evidence, but also on the contemporaneous medical records that specifically show that the Veteran repeatedly denied foot problems while in service, specifically at separation when it would be more likely for the Veteran to identify all medical problems. 

To the extent that he asserts that he has a chronic foot disorder related to service, the Board finds that the current assertions made for VA compensation purposes are given less probative weight, because they are contradicted and outweighed by the more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence. See Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 390, 394 (1994) (Board decision properly assigned more probative value to a private hospital record that included lay history that was made for treatment purposes than to subsequent statements made for compensation purposes).

In sum, after a careful review of the record, the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim for service connection, and there is no doubt to be resolved. As such, the appeal is denied.  

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Ferguson, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.