Citation Nr: A25031306
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434520
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

An initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

An initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent esophageal disability to include Barret's esophagus is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for gastritis is remanded. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left ear tympanic membrane perforation residuals with otitis media residuals is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The service-connected allergic rhinitis has been shown to be manifested by no more than constant nasal congestion and allergies.

2. The service-connected erectile dysfunction has been shown to be manifested no more than are difficulty initiating and maintaining an erection and the use of prescribed Cialis. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from November 1994 to October 2002. 

In February 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection allergic rhinitis, erectile dysfunction, and gastritis; assigned noncompensable ratings for those disabilities, effective as of August 8, 2023; denied service connection for esophageal cancer; and denied a compensable rating for the service-connected left ear tympanic membrane perforation residuals with otitis media residuals.  In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a recurrent esophageal disability and compensable ratings for the service-connected gastritis and left ear disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptomatology during the relevant period with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

Allergic Rhinitis

The Veteran asserts that a compensable rating for chronic rhinitis is warranted.  He advances no specific contentions in support of his appeal. 

A 10-percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A 30-percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis with polyps.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

In every instance where the rating schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

The report of a September 2023 rhinitis examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained of constant nasal congestion and allergies.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not exhibit a greater than 50-percent obstruction of the nasal passages; complete obstruction of either nasal passage; permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates; or nasal polyps.

The service-connected allergic rhinitis has been shown to be manifested by no more than constant nasal congestion and allergies.  The Veteran was not found to have nasal passage obstruction greater than 50 percent, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, or nasal polyps.  Such symptoms do not meet the criteria for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 6522.  Accordingly, an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

Erectile Dysfunction

The Veteran contends that an initial compensable rating is warranted for erectile dysfunction.  He advances no specific contentions in support of his appeal.

Erectile dysfunction with or without penile deformity warrants a noncompensable rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.  

Special monthly compensation based on the loss of use of a creative organ has been granted.  

The report of a December 2023 examination conducted for VA states that the service-connected erectile dysfunction was manifested by difficulty initiating and maintaining an erection and the use of prescribed Cialis.  

A compensable rating for erectile dysfunction may not be assigned.  Accordingly, the benefit sought on appeal is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent esophageal disability to include Barret's esophagus is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection for a recurrent esophageal disability is warranted as the claimed disability is related to his frequent use of prescribed ibuprofen during active service. 

VA's duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991).  

The report of a December 2023 stomach conditions examination conducted for VA notes that the Veteran complained of "heartburn, stomach bloating, nausea and vomiting, regurgitation, [and] upper abdominal pain."  He was diagnosed with gastritis.  The examiner noted a December 2020 upper endoscopy that revealed diagnosis of Barret's esophagus.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA esophageal examination.  That is a pre decisional error.  

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for gastritis is remanded.

The Board finds that the issue of an initial compensable rating for gastritis is inextricably intertwined with the issue of service connection for an esophageal disability being remanded and must also be remanded.

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left ear tympanic membrane perforation residuals with otitis media residuals is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that a compensable rating for the service-connected left ear tympanic membrane perforation residuals with otitis media residuals is warranted.  

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  

The report of a September 2023 ear conditions examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained that "his ear always feels swollen, and he has decreased hearing in the left ear."  The examining physician failed to specify whether the left ear otitis media was active or inactive and whether there were any chronic residuals of the tympanic membrane perforation.  Considering such deficiencies, the Board finds the examination report is of limited probative value.  Further VA ear examination is required.  That is a pre decisional error.         

The Board also notes that the report of a September 2023 audiological examination obtained by VA diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  The examining audiologist noted that the service treatment records showed "there was significant threshold shift in the left ear."  The examiner concluded that "the left-ear hearing loss is at least likely as not (50% probability or greater) caused by or a result of an event in military service."

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA esophageal examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the nature and etiology of any identified esophageal disability.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all esophageal disabilities found.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any identified esophageal disability had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA ear examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the nature and severity of the service-connected left ear tympanic membrane perforation residuals and otitis media residuals.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, to include an audiological evaluation, and the findings reported in detail.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.C., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.