Citation Nr: A25031667
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240521-441145
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

An evaluation in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive evidence is against finding that the Veteran's mental health disorder caused total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for major depressive disorder have not been met or approximated. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes (DC) 9413-9434. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from January 2006 to August 2011. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

As the Veteran selected the direct review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

When a Veteran files a claim for an increased rating, he or she is presumed to be seeking the maximum benefit under any applicable theory, including TDIU. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 45354 (2009). In light of this principle, entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) has been found to be an inferable issue anytime a veteran is requesting increased benefits. Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118 (1991). As explained in further detail below, the Board finds that evidence of record suggests that during the period on appeal the Veteran was unable to work due to her service-connected mental health disorder, and therefore the Board infers the issue of TDIU. However, in this case there is no lay or medical evidence that the Veteran is housebound in fact, requires aid and attendance, or that his disabilities result in loss of use of a limb, blindness or deafness. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), (l), (k); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a), (b), (i). As such, the Board will not infer the issue of entitlement to SMC at this time.

As it relates to the issue of entitlement to a TDIU, the Board finds that there has been a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and further evidentiary development is still required before the claim can be adjudicated.

Increased Ratings - General

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38U.S.C. §1155; 38C.F.R. §§3.321(a), 4.1.

If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § § 4.7. All reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. §5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § § 4.3.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. §4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period. This practice is known as staged ratings. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Legal Standards: Acquired Psychiatric Disorder 

The Veteran's posttraumatic stress disorder is rated under Diagnostic Code 9413-9434. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Anxiety Disorder and Depressive Disorder are rated using the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).

In assigning hyphenated diagnostic codes, the number assigned to the residual condition on the basis of which the rating is determined will generally represent injuries. Diseases will be identified by the number assigned to the disease itself, with the residual condition added, preceded by a hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

Under the General Formula, a 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance or minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives and own occupation or name. Id.

Symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. They are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-44 (2002). Rather, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. A Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Facts and Analysis

The Veteran is seeking an increased rating for her service-connected mental health disorder, claiming that the condition is more severely disabling than the currently assigned 70 percent rating. As the issue of an increased rating stems from a non-initial increased rating claim, the period for consideration before the Board dates back to the one year prior to the date of the non-initial increased rating claim, here October 19, 2023. Hart v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007). Therefore, the Board has assessed and weighed the relevant evidence during the period on appeal.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental conditions examination in November 2023. The examiner, a psychologist, diagnosed major depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder. The examiner indicated that it was not possible to differentiate between what symptoms were attributable to each diagnosis. The Veteran reported that since her last examination, she got a divorce in late 2021. She had full custody of her two young children. The Veteran reported having some time to be social and maintain contact with her family and friends. She reported having previously been employed as an Occupational Therapy Assistant but had recently quit because she could not handle the stress. She had to take several mental health days prior to quitting. The Veteran was in the process of getting back into therapy for treatment of her mental health disorder. She endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, flattened affect, disturbances of mood and motivation, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation with no active plan or intent, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The Veteran was on time and cooperative for her appointment. She was described as alert and oriented to all spheres, with good insight and judgement. The examiner noted that she had a good recall for recent and remote events. She was described as neatly dressed with good grooming. She was tearful throughout the examination and her affect was blunted. The examiner opined that the mental health disorder manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

1. An evaluation in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder, severe, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder is denied. 

The Board initially notes that the Court has held that the symptoms enumerated under the schedule for rating mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular disability rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

After review of the evidence, the Board is unable to find that the persuasive evidence of record supports a rating higher than the current 70 percent for the Veteran's mental health disorder. The Board finds the substantial weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating at any time during the appeal period, as the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder symptoms do not more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment. At no point during the appeal period has such symptomatology as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; or disorientation to time or place. The Board notes that during the November 2023 examination the Veteran was described as alert and oriented to all spheres, with good insight and judgement. She was able to recall remote and recent events well. The Board acknowledges during the appeal period that the Veteran has reported intermittent difficulty with maintaining activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, the Board also notes that during the November 2023 examination the Veteran was described as neatly dressed with good grooming. Thus, while the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran and acknowledges the impact that her mental health has had upon her and her family's life, the evidence of record does not support a rating higher than 70 percent.

In so finding, the Board has considered the lay statements of record. The Board finds that though the Veteran is competent to report her observable symptoms, she is not competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). The identification of a disability and evaluation of the severity of her mental health disorder requires medical expertise that the Veteran has not shown she possesses. The medical findings, as provided in the examination reports, directly address the criteria under which her disability is rated. The Board finds that evidence is the most persuasive and outweighs lay statements in support of her claim for a higher rating.

Thus, a rating higher than 70 percent for the mental health disorder is denied. Accordingly, as the persuasive evidence of record is against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not for application, and the claim must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board is responsible for identifying duty to assist errors that were made by the AOJ, prior to the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

When the Board has jurisdiction over a claim for an increased rating, the Board must consider whether entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is raised by the record, regardless of whether the appellant has specifically pled it. As discussed above, evidence of record shows that during the November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she had to take several mental health days prior to eventually quitting her job, as she could not deal with the stress. Therefore, as noted in the introduction of this Board decision and remand, the Board finds that a claim for TDIU is inferred by the record. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 45354 (2009); Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991). The Board notes however that the AOJ failed to develop or adjudicate the inferred claim for a TDIU. These deficiencies constitute a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). As the record is insufficient to evaluate the inferred claim of TDIU must remand for further development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and obtain a VA Form 21-8940 regarding the Veteran's educational and employment history and obtain any other records pertinent to the inferred TDIU claim.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If VA does not receive the requested information, the issue will be adjudicated based upon the evidence of record.

2. Thereafter evaluate the Veteran's claims file for the potential for a TDIU.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Nettey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.