Citation Nr: A25031410
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240802-461371
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for a bilateral hearing loss disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left upper extremity neurological disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity neurological disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity neurological disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity neurological disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record during the relevant period weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's hearing acuity has been manifested by worse than a numeric designation of Level I in the right ear and Level I in the left ear or that either ear has exhibited an exceptional pattern of hearing loss.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a compensable initial evaluation for a bilateral hearing loss disability have not been met.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.3, 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100, 4.86.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1969 to August 1973.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  Id. 

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records.  Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further that they have included or identified relevant evidence.  VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified.  The duty to assist is not a one-way street.  If a veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991).  Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist.  No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development.  Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records.  Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

38 C.F.R. § 3.103 provides that a Veteran, upon request, is entitled to a hearing prior to VA's adjudication of an initial or supplemental claim.  The Board observes that notice regarding the opportunity for a hearing at the AOJ was not provided in this case.  In Bowen, the Court found that there was no due process violation in the denial of the Veteran's requested hearing before the AOJ because the Veteran had subsequently been offered the opportunity to have a hearing before the Board.  Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253 (2012).  Here, the Veteran was offered a choice of three dockets in the AMA framework to include the Board hearing docket.  Although the issue in Bowen was not one of notice, the Board cannot discern a basis to find that the underlying holding and logic of Bowen would not lead to the same finding of a lack of prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.

Increased Rating Claim

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).? 38?C.F.R. Part 4.? The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.? The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.1.? Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.7.? When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.3.????

Bilateral Hearing Loss Disability

In the April 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection effective February 3, 2023, and assigned a noncompensable evaluation.  The Veteran argues a compensable initial evaluation is warranted.  See August 2024 VA Form 10182. 

Evaluations of defective hearing range from noncompensable to 100 percent based on organic impairment of hearing acuity as measured by the results of a controlled Maryland CNC speech discrimination test together with the average hearing threshold level measured by pure tone audiometry tests in the frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 cycles per second (Hertz).  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100. 

To evaluate the degree of disability from bilateral service-connected hearing loss, the schedule establishes 11 auditory hearing acuity levels designated from Level I for essentially normal hearing acuity through Level XI for profound deafness.  38?C.F.R. § 4.85, Tables VI and VII. 

An exceptional pattern of hearing impairment occurs when the pure tone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz) is 55 decibels or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a).  In that situation, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIA, whichever results in the higher numeral.  Id.  Further, when the average pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIA, whichever results in the higher numeral, and that numeral will then be elevated to the next higher numeral.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86(b). 

A January 2024 examination reveals that the Veteran reported "problems hearing in groups and in noise."  The Veteran's Maryland CNC Word List speech recognition score and pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows: 

January 2024 	HERTZ 	 	 

? 	1000 	2000 	3000 	4000 	Avg 	CNC 

RIGHT 	20	25	60	70	43.75	100%

LEFT 	25	35	55	95	52.50	100%

 

Applying the results to Table VI, the findings yield a numeric designation of Level I in the right ear and Level I in the left ear.  Entering the resulting bilateral numeric designation of Level I for the right ear and Level I for the left ear to 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Table VII, equates to a noncompensable disability rating under Diagnostic Code 6100.  An exceptional pattern of hearing impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.86 has not been shown in either ear.

Based on the evidence above, a compensable initial evaluation for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.  

The Board expressly acknowledges its consideration of the lay evidence of record when adjudicating this claim, including the Veteran's statement that he has "problems hearing in groups and in noise," and his spouse's statement that the Veteran can't hear certain tones.  The Veteran is competent to report difficulty hearing, and his wife is competent to report witnessing his inability to hear certain tones; however, disability ratings for hearing loss are derived from a mechanical application of the rating schedule to the numeric designations resulting from audiometric testing.  See Lendenmann v. Principi, 3?Vet. App.?345 (1992).   The rating criteria contemplate speech reception thresholds and ability to hear spoken words on Maryland CNC testing.  The functional impact that the Veteran and his spouse have described is contemplated by the rating criteria.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28?Vet. App.?366 (2017).  The Veteran's main complaint is reduced hearing acuity and clarity, which is what is contemplated in the rating assigned.  See Rossy v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?142, 145 (2017). 

Finally, the Board recognizes that the Veteran's spouse reported in an August 2023 statement that the Veteran experiences constant ringing and cricket sounds in his ears and that the Veteran reported in his August 2023 statement that he continues to experience ringing noise in his ears.  While the Board has considered these statements, the Veteran is already receiving a 10 percent rating for tinnitus based on these symptoms, and therefore, these statements may not form the basis for a compensable initial evaluation for a bilateral hearing loss disability.

As explain above, a compensable initial evaluation for a bilateral hearing loss disability is not warranted, and the claim must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

"	Bilateral Upper and Lower Extremity Neurological Disabilities:  The Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  See August 2023 FDC.  The record contains April 2024 and January 2024 VA opinions as well as an August 2023 private opinion; however, these opinions do not contain an adequate rationale.  A remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to evaluate his claims for bilateral upper and bilateral lower extremity neurological disabilities.

Following an examination and review of the record, the examiner should provide the following:

(a)	Identify any left and right upper extremity neurological disabilities, to include pain amounting to functional impairment of earning capacity (which is deemed a disability for VA purposes).  

A January 2024 examination contains a diagnosis of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  A June 2023 private treatment record documents a diagnosis of neuropathy affecting, in pertinent part, the Veteran's hands.

(b)	For all disabilities found, as defined in (a) above, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability/disabilities had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service to include as due to the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs during his active service.  Why or why not?

In providing any opinion, the examiner must consider whether any disability is related to: (i) TERA participation; (ii) performing minor surgery as a Corpsman during service; and/or (iii) very loud noises and vibration.

(c)	Identify any left and right lower extremity neurological disabilities, to include pain amounting to functional impairment of earning capacity (which is deemed a disability for VA purposes).  

A January 2024 examination reveals a diagnosis of bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  In January 2017 and June 2023 private appointments, the Veteran complained of numbness and tingling affecting his feet and toes; the examiner assessed diabetic neuropathy (January 2017) and neuropathy (June 2023).

(d)	For all disabilities found, as defined in (c) above, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability/disabilities had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service to include as due to the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs during his active service.  Why or why not?

In providing any opinion, the examiner must consider whether any disability is related to: (i) TERA participation; (ii) the Veteran constantly being on his feet going up and down stairs performing nuclear drills; (iii) the Veteran constantly standing in Navy issued boots; (iv) an in-service left knee injury; and/or (v) very loud noises and vibration.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy.  See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b.  Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. 

The examiner is informed by the Board that chronicity is not required to find a nexus to service or for service connection to be granted.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

3. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. O'Connell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.