Citation Nr: A25031349
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452694
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia disorder is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the rating period on appeal, the Veteran's insomnia disorder has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal, with anxiety and chronic sleep impairment, without occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the Schedule For Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the veteran's condition.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In view of the number of atypical instances it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified.  Findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom, and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will, however, be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 593 (1991).  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

In an October 2022 rating decision, service connection was established for insomnia disorder, rated 30 percent disabling, effective August 18, 2022 pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.  In July 2023, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking an increased rating which was denied in a September 2023 rating decision.

The Board first observes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that the frequency, severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Indeed, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, an evaluation of 30 percent is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

An evaluation of 50 percent is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms such as the following: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Based on review of the evidence of record, the Board has determined that a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia disorder is not warranted.

A September 2022 C&P examination reflects a diagnosis of insomnia disorder due to chronic pain.  With regard to the best summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment, the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  It was noted that service connection is in effect for disabilities of the cervical spine, radiculopathy, bilateral upper extremities, and tinnitus.  The Veteran reported that his current emotional health is "pretty good but the pain causes me not to be able to sleep on my side and I am a side sleeper."  He endorsed frequent moods including depression, anxiety, stress, and excessive anger.  He reported sad feelings, problems with sleep, chronic fatigue, loss of appetite, weight gain, agitation, and decreased sexual interest.  He reported having panic attacks a few times a week characterized by a racing heart and pit in his stomach.  He denied thoughts of suicide and denied experiencing any hallucinations or delusions.  The examiner noted that current psychosocial stressors include past trauma, chronic pain, inability to be productive, unemployment, health problems, living alone, inactivity, physical restrictions, disabling condition, and no health insurance.  The examiner indicated that his symptoms of insomnia disorder are anxiety and chronic sleep impairment.  With regard to behavioral observations, he appeared to be a reliable historian.  His orientation was within normal limits. Appearance was tidy and hygiene was appropriate.  Behavior was appropriate.  He maintained good eye contact during the exam.  His energy level was within the normal limits.  His mood was euthymic.  His affect was congruent to mood.  He was content during the interview and did not show any signs of distress. Communication was within normal limits.  Speech was within normal limits. Concentration of the clamant was within normal limits.  Judgment was not impaired.  Abstract thinking was normal.  Memory was within normal limits. Suicidal/homicidal ideation was absent.

An August 2023 C&P examination reflects a diagnosis of insomnia disorder. With regard to the best summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment, the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran reported living alone and has not been in a significant relationship in the last 6 months but casually dates.  He has three children that live with their mother in a different state whom he sees regularly and maintains a relationship with.  He got emotional support and socialized with family that live in the area.  He described an adequate social life that he was working to improve. He largely socialized with colleagues from work.  He has been exercising more lately and enjoys shooting, darts and music.  He had worked as an air marshal for the last 21 years.  He had no stress related to work.  He had a supportive boss and could take time off due to stress if needed.  He had not been in individual psychotherapy but was in family therapy for a few months post-divorce and had some couples counseling for 6 months prior to the divorce.  He has not been in any therapy for 5 years.  He has been taking Escitalopram for the last year through his private physician.  He is unsure how much it helps, but notices if he does not take it.  He had tried other antidepressants in the past.  He felt depressed every 6 weeks for 5 days where he would feel negative, down, irritated, and anxious.  He felt it was a bit of an accumulation of stress or irritation as he internalizes anger and frustration. He would get depressed for a few days.  He had never attempted suicide or had suicidal ideation.  He will isolate when depressed.  He had anxiety daily that would come on over the course of the day with no notable triggers.  He denied physiological symptoms, other than tightness in his chest and mildly increased heart rate.  He more thinks of worrisome thoughts such as about finances and about his children. He will talk to himself to reduce anxiety, and breathing exercises have helped more, and he will do them when not in public and once or twice a day.  He denied significant compulsions but does like things orderly and everything has its place.  He denied significant impairment or time involved or straightening.  He normally got 5 hours of sleep and 7 once a week on a day off and did not feel rested unless he gets 7 hours of sleep.  He denied issues falling asleep, but his sleep is interrupted every night and usually 4 or 5 times a night.  He has GERD that wakes him once or twice a month.  Pain only wakes him rarely, as he can sleep comfortably in his recliner when elevated.  He can usually return to sleep in 20 or 30 minutes.  He had tried several over-the-counter sleep aids but that all have negatively in some and alcohol works better.  Other than snoring, he denied sleep related behaviors.  He denied mania, psychosis or cognitive impairment.  His symptoms were anxiety and chronic sleep impairment.  Behavioral observations reflect that he was casually dressed and groomed.  He presented in an anxious mood with congruent affect.  He had appropriate eye contact with speech in the normal range for fluency, rate and volume.  He was alert and oriented to all spheres.  He expressed logical and coherent thoughts with no indication of psychosis.  Judgment was intact with average insight exhibited.  He was considered a reasonable historian.  The examiner commented that the Veteran reports some symptoms of anxiety and depressed mood that did not cause sufficient impairment to warrant a diagnosis.

After review of the competent and probative evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's insomnia disorder is most nearly approximated by the current 30 percent disability rating in effect.  Both C&P examiners determined that there was occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms that decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  His insomnia disorder was manifested by anxiety and chronic sleep impairment.  While the Veteran reported to the September 2022 examiner that he had panic attacks a few times a week characterized by a racing heart and pit in his stomach, the examiner did not find that his insomnia disorder was manifested by panic attacks that occur weekly or less often nor panic attacks more than once a week.  He did not have any impaired memory or judgment.  He did not have suicidal or homicidal ideations.  While he reported occasional depression and anxiety, it did not warrant a separate diagnosis per the August 2023 examiner.  As detailed, his thought process was coherent and logical, and he had adequate insight.  Moreover, he did not have delusions or hallucinations.  He reported a relationship with his children, casually dating, emotional support from friends, participation in hobbies, and limited stress at work with a supportive boss.  Overall, the Board finds that the frequency and severity of the Veteran's insomnia disorder symptoms do not more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity such as to enable assignment of the next-higher 50 percent evaluation.  Accordingly, the claim for increase is denied.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.