Citation Nr: A25031521
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-410497
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) at the housebound rate is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran is not in receipt of a 100 percent rating for a single service-connected disability. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC at the housebound rate are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350(i).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from April 1966 to February 1970.

In October 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ and VA Form 21-4138 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability seeking a TDIU. A July 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to a TDIU. The Veteran subsequently filed an August 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review. A December 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to a TDIU. In January 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 appealing the issue to the Board and selecting the direct review docket. In a March 2024 decision, the Board of Veterans' Appeals granted entitlement to a TDIU. The Veteran subsequently appealed the decision to the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. In a November 2024 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), the parties agreed that a remand was warranted as the Board failed to address the Veteran's entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate. The Board shall comply with the November 2024 JMPR herein.   

Entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to SMC based on housebound criteria. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate is not warranted as the Veteran is not in receipt of a 100 percent rating for a single service-connected disability.

The November 2024 CAVC JMPR stated that the Board failed to address whether the Veteran could show entitlement to a TDIU based solely on his service-connected depressive disorder, despite only finding entitlement to a TDIU due to his service-connected depressive disorder. Because the Board never addressed the possibility of SMC(s), CAVC remanded the Veteran's claim to allow the Board to provide adequate reasons or bases in addressing the issue of entitlement to SMC(s), which was raised by the record. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir.  2009).

Additional compensation will be warranted on the basis of being housebound where the Veteran (1) has, in addition to a single, permanent service-connected disability rated 100 percent disabling, additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently rated as 60 percent or more disabling which are separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems (known as "statutory housebound"), or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i). One is permanently housebound when substantially confined to his or her dwelling and the immediate premises or, if institutionalized, to the ward or clinical area, and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his or her lifetime. 38 C.F.R. § 3.351(d). A TDIU may meet the requirement of a disability rated at 100 percent disabling for purposes of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), for entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate, if the TDIU is based on a single condition. See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 293 (2008).

In the instant case, the Veteran is service connected for diabetes mellitus type II evaluated at 20 percent, diabetic neuropathy of the left leg evaluated at 20 percent, diabetic neuropathy of the right leg evaluated at 20 percent, right upper extremity carpel tunnel evaluated at 20 percent, chronic right wrist sprain with degenerative arthritis evaluated at 10 percent, tinnitus evaluated at 10 percent and noncompensable bilateral hearing loss. As the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (other than service-connected depressive disorder) are rated as 60 percent or more disabling when combined, if TDIU could be granted solely based on service-connected depressive disorder, entitlement to SMC(s) would be warranted. 

However, the Board finds that the evidence of record demonstrates that service-connected depressive disorder alone does not support a grant of a TDIU. Instead, the combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude him from maintaining regular, substantially gainful employment and, therefore, a TDIU was not warranted on the basis of a single service-connected disability. 

More specifically, for entitlement to a TDIU, attention must be given to: (a) the veteran's history, education, skill and training, (b) the veteran's physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory and visual, and (c) whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as memory, concentration, and ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers and demonstrate reliability and productivity. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

In consideration of the factors listed above, in the instant case, the Board finds that a TDIU was warranted based upon the combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and not only service-connected depressive disorder. Turning to the evidence of record, the April 2023 VA examination for mental disorders found that the Veteran's depressive disorder manifested in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency, and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine and behavior, self-care and conversation. The Veteran's psychiatric symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, disturbances of motivation or mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting. Regarding individual unemployability, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's anxiety and depressed mood might result in difficulty paying attention to tasks. Additionally, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's irritability can cause him to isolate, and he can have difficulty working with the public, co-workers, and supervisors. Physically, the VA examiner noted, the Veteran reported having "unsteady legs," his right wrist "falls asleep," difficulty standing and sitting for extended periods and difficulty carrying heavy objects.

It follows that the impact of the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder as related to employability, to include issues with memory, concentration, difficulty in adapting to and handling workplace stress and difficulty working with others, would impact the Veteran's reliability and productivity in the workplace. However, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms alone would not completely preclude substantially gainful employment with reasonable accommodations such as breaks, additional guidance from supervisors and extended deadlines. 

Further, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not impact the Veteran's physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue. Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 58. Importantly, the Veteran's occupational history primarily involves telephone installation and repair. See April 2023 VA Examination for Mental Disorders. Therefore, the Veteran's occupational history and experience included primarily physical work involving lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, and reaching. The Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder symptoms would not preclude the Veteran from continuing his work in telephone installation and repair because the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms noted above would not have precluded physical work. Instead, the Board finds that the Veteran was precluded by continuing in this line of work due to a combination of his service-connected disabilities including diabetic peripheral neuropathy of both the right and left leg, right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome, and chronic right wrist sprain. More specifically, the Veteran's tingling and numbness in the legs, numbness and tingling in his dominant right hand, flare-ups of wrist pain causing functional loss and loss of grip strength in the right hand would prevent the Veteran from performing physical occupational tasks such as standing, walking, grasping, and lifting heavy objects. See April 2023 VA Examinations for Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy, Peripheral Nerves Condition, and Wrist Conditions. Similarly, in the April 2023 VA examination for mental disorders, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported having "unsteady legs," his right wrist "falls asleep," difficulty standing and sitting for extended periods and difficulty carrying heavy objects. 

Therefore, in considering the nature of the Veteran's occupational history involving physical work, the functional loss as a result of the Veteran's service-connected diabetic peripheral neuropathy of both the right and left leg, right upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome, and chronic right wrist sprain significantly supports the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU. Importantly, the Board finds that the combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude the Veteran from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment. Therefore, the Board finds that a TDIU would not be warranted based upon service-connected depressive disorder alone. While the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms such as issues with memory, concentration, difficulty in adapting to and handling workplace stress and difficulty working with others, would impact the Veteran's efficiency in the workplace, such alone would not completely preclude the Veteran's ability to continue the type of work in which the Veteran has experience.

Based upon the foregoing, as the Board finds a grant of a TDIU was not warranted based upon the single service-connected disability of depressive disorder, and instead was warranted based upon the disability picture caused by a combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, entitlement to SMC at the housebound rate is not warranted. 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.