Citation Nr: A25031435
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240506-438057
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic left foot disorder, to include left foot tendinopathy, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified sleep-wake disorder is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

A chronic left foot disorder was not shown in service or for several years thereafter; and, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's current left foot disorder, to include left foot tendinopathy, is etiologically related to any in-service injury, event, or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a chronic left foot disorder, to include left foot tendinopathy, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2015 to December 2018.

The present appeal arises from a March 2024 initial rating decision that denied service connection for left foot pain and a sleep disturbance disorder. The Veteran appealed that decision by filing VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in May 2024. He elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, consideration may only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for unspecified sleep-wake disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for left foot pain, to include left foot tendinopathy.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left foot condition. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his current left foot pain, described as "discomfort," is due to or related to a left foot injury incurred in service when a water buffalo fell on his foot in the field at Ft. Riley. See September 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). Following a review of the evidence, the Board finds the competent medical evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for left foot pain, to include left foot tendinopathy. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim(s) of the veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

The Veteran has been diagnosed with a left foot current disability based on the March 2024 VA examiner's diagnosis of bilateral tendinopathy. See March 2024 C&P Exam. The VA examiner found the Veteran's bilateral tendinopathy chronically compromises the Veteran's weight-bearing range of motion. A finding was also made that the Veteran exhibited functional loss in his left foot due to pain. Therefore, the first Shedden element is met.

As to the second element, the March 2024 AOJ found that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) support of finding of an in-service event, injury, or disease based on the Veteran's complaints of foot pain from January 2015 to December 2018. See Rating Decision - Narrative. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). However, the STRs are silent for complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis of an injury to the left foot during active service. The Board recognizes that the Veteran complained of and received treatment for right foot pain in September 2017 due to shin splints and in July 2017 due to an injury in the field after a water buffalo reportedly ran over his right foot. See September 2023 STR. [Service connection for the residuals of a right foot injury was granted in the March 2024 rating decision.] In that regard, the STRs lack evidence of injuries to the Veteran's left foot. Even when the Veteran was treated for the injuries to his right foot or his left ankle, he did not complain of corresponding left foot pain. Thus, while the Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of and treatment for right foot pain in service as favorably found by the March 2024 AOJ, the Board finds the Veteran's STRs lack evidence of treatment, complaints of, or a diagnosis of a left foot injury during active service. 

The remaining question is whether the Veteran's current left foot disorder, to include pain and left foot tendinopathy, was caused by, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active military service. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left foot tendinopathy is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. See C&P Exam. The examiner explained that no nexus or chronicity of care can be established for the Veteran's left foot tendinopathy as the Veteran's STRs, medical records, and separation examinations are silent for left foot pain - even though the Veteran reported and referred to his pain and injuries to his right foot during service. The VA examiner indicates the evidence shows the Veteran's service-related injuries are limited to his right foot disabilities. 

The Board finds the VA examiner's opinion adequate for decision-making purposes because it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and the opinion contained a clear conclusion with a reasoned explanation consistent with the record connecting the two. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). Notably, the Board finds the VA examiner's rationale persuasive in regard to the Veteran's in-service complaints of foot pain. While it is true the Veteran reported an injury to his foot due to a water buffalo incident in the field, the Veteran's complaints of pain and treatment were limited to his right foot. The Veteran did not complain of and was not treated or assessed for a left foot injury due to the water buffalo incident at Ft. Riley. Likewise, this was true even when the Veteran reported right foot pain due to shin splints in September 2018. The Board also notes that at separation from service, the Veteran reported "foot trouble" but noted that his foot trouble was limited to his right foot by circling an "R" next to his note of foot trouble. See September 2024 STR.

Careful consideration has been given to the Veteran's lay contentions of record suggesting that the Veteran's left foot disability is related to his service. The Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms in which are capable of lay observation, such as left foot pain; however, he is not competent to provide a medical conclusion linking the two. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The medical evidence does not support the conclusion, nor is the Veteran shown to possess the complex medical knowledge, training, or expertise outside ordinary capacity to make such a link. Id. The affords the greater probative weight to the competent March 2024 medical opinion. 

Thus, for the reasons and bases discussed, the evidence for the claim versus the evidence against this claim is not in "approximate" balance (i.e., nearly equal). Instead, the most probative and, therefore, most persuasive evidence is against this claim. See Lynch; see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). Service connection for left foot pain, to include left foot tendinopathy, is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for unspecified sleep-wake disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for unspecified sleep-wake disorder. Specifically, he contends his sleep disturbances are related to sleep deprivation and sleep disruptions during military service. See March 2024 C&P Exam. 

The VA has a duty to assist veterans and must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when such examination or opinion is necessary to decide the claim. 38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d)(1). When the VA obtains a medical opinion, it must be an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024. A negative opinion was provided as to whether the Veteran's unspecified sleep-wake disorder was caused by or is the result of his service-connected tinnitus. However, for reasons that are not clear, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertion that his unspecified sleep-wake disorder had its initial onset in service or was otherwise etiologically related to his active service. 

By failing to obtain an adequate examination addressing the raised theory of direct service connection, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Remand is necessary to cure this defect.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified VA examiner for an opinion regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for unspecified sleep-wake disorder. The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner. All necessary tests and studies should be accomplished, and the examiner should provide a complete rationale for the conclusion reached. The need for a full, in-person examination shall be left up to the discretion of the examiner.?

Following a review of the record and, if applicable, an in-person examination or telephone interview, the VA examiner shall opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's unspecified sleep-wake disorder had its initial onset or is otherwise etiologically related to a period of active service? 

In rendering the requested opinion, the VA examiner must specifically consider and discuss, but is not limited to, the relevant lay evidence of record, including: 

"	The Veteran's report of "frequent trouble sleeping" upon separation from military service;

"	The Veteran's statement that he was deprived of his sleep during military service;

"	The Veteran's description of military duties, to include being on call in the unit armorer; and 

"	The Veteran's report of having difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep at least monthly.

The examiner must fully explain the rationale for the opinion, with citation to supporting data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, they should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation. 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michelle B., Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.