Citation Nr: A25031598
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-470177
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS, to include as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service in the Army from February 1969 to January 1971.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).

On August 30, 2024, the VA received a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) to the August 2024 rating decision in which the Veteran selected to have a hearing by a Veterans Law Judge.  The Veteran appeared for a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge on December 10, 2024.  Consequently, the Board may consider evidence submitted through the August 20, 2024, notification of the August 2024 rating decision in this case, and any evidence submitted at the hearing and within 90 days of the hearing.  The Board will not consider evidence added to the record in between the date of the August 2024 rating decision notification and the date of the hearing or added to the record more than 90 days after the date of the hearing.  If evidence was added to the record during an ineligible period identified above, the Board has not considered that evidence.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Under the AMA framework, when there are pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors, it is permissible for the Board to have them corrected before deciding the claims on appeal.  The Veteran's appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS is remanded to correct a duty-to-assist error that occurred prior to the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS, to include as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability, is remanded.

The Board finds that a remand is necessary before a decision on the merits of the claim can be reached.

The Veteran contends that he has lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS that is secondary to his service-connected right knee disorder.

An August 2023 rating decision denied service connection for back pain as secondary to the service-connected disability of right knee degenerative arthritis.

An August 2024 rating decision denied service connection for lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS.  As a favorable finding, the decision notes that the Veteran had been diagnosed with lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS and that the Veteran was service connected for the claimed primary disability of right knee degenerative arthritis.  The RO found that new and relevant evidence had been received to reconsider the service connection claim.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104(c).  

A December 1978 separation military report of medical history documents the Veteran's report that he had not ever experienced recurrent back pain or swollen or painful joints.  A December 1978 military separation examination reports the Veteran's spine was normal.

A November 2003 VA neurology consult reports the Veteran had a 20-year history of low back pain and neck pain.  The Veteran reported the lower back problems started about 20 years ago after a "lifting injury."  He experienced excruciating lower back pain acutely at the time, and then the lower back pain and leg pain persisted.  He underwent two lower back spinal surgeries.  The first one was done in 1985 and did not help him much.  He underwent a second microscopic lumbosacral spine surgery in 1995.  The second surgery helped for some time, but the lower back pain recurred after he had to do some lifting and other physical chores at work.  The Veteran stated that the lower back pain and pain in the legs became especially severe and persistent since last December.

A November 2006 VA neurology note reports that the Veteran developed severe lower back pain radiating down both legs after lifting a heavy appliance in 1984.  He was in traction for one month and limped for about three months.  He underwent back surgery a few months later that provided 60 percent pain relief.  He remained with proximal leg weakness and lateral left thigh/leg numbness.  In 1994, he returned to work, bent down, and again had sudden/severe lower back pain with similar symptoms as before.  According to the Veteran, he had repeat surgery at the same level with some pain relief.  One month later, he returned to work but continued to have constant back pain and bilateral lower extremity weakness along with new intermittent right lower extremity numbness.  In April 2005, he had a femoropopliteal bypass.  Since that time, he reported experiencing constant marked numbness of the entire right leg and foot.  He remains with intermittent lower back pain that radiates down both thighs, resulting in a limp favoring the right lower extremity.

The Veteran was provided with a VA back conditions examination in July 2023.  The Veteran reported that the onset of his back disorder was in 1969 when the brakes failed on a truck and hit a ditch causing him to be tossed off the floor of the back of the truck directly onto his low back region.  Since that initial injury, the Veteran reported the condition has worsened.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's back disorder is condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected knee disability.  As rationale, the examiner explained that recurrent injuries involving the Veteran's right knee and low back directly resulted in his arthritic conditions of these joints.  It was reported that the injuries occurred during active duty, including flag football, basketball, and a truck accident.  The examiner reported the probability of this causation is greater than 50 percent in my opinion.  The back condition is related to falls on his back and physical work during military service, which affected his lumbosacral spine and bilateral knees sometimes together and at alternate times as well.  Therefore, the examiner concluded the Veteran's knee arthritis is not causing the diagnosed back conditions

The Veteran was provided with another VA back conditions examination in February 2024.  According to the Veteran, he injured his back in Germany when he hit the interior of a truck after the brakes gave way while he was coming down a mountain road.  He reported that he was never treated for the injury in the military.  He later had three back surgeries, with the first surgery taking place in 1985.  He reported having drop foot on the right and bilateral radiculopathy.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's back disorder is condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As rationale, the examiner explained that the Veteran has been treated by the VA since 2004 and there are no notes that reference an accident in Germany during active duty.  Based on the chart and his medical records his back is less than likely as not due to his military service.

Although an opinion as to secondary service connection for the Veteran's lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS was provided in July 2023, the examiner addressed only causation and did not address aggravation as set out in the regulations under 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.310(b).  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (VA medical opinions on secondary service connection must sufficiently address both causation and aggravation).

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issues because there is no opinion as to whether the Veteran's lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS is aggravated by his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine.

Therefore, remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error that occurred prior to the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  By this remand, the Board makes no determination, express or implied, concerning the credibility of any lay statements on file.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Return the claims file, including a copy of this remand, to the examiner who provided the July 2024 medical opinion, or to another appropriate medical professional if that individual is unavailable, to provide an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS.  If the examiner determines that an additional examination is necessary to provide a reliable opinion, such examination should be scheduled.  The examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's claims folder via VBMS or some other document viewer.  

2. Based on the review of the record, the examiner should provide an addendum opinion on the following: Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbosacral degenerative arthritis with IVDS is aggravated by his service-connected right knee disability?  

3. In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider the medical records and lay evidence of record.  A complete and clearly stated rationale for any opinion is requested.

4. After the development described above, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issue on appeal.

 

KELLI A. KORDICH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Moore, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.