Citation Nr: A25031474
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240719-456348
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for hypothyroidism is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the U.S. Army from June 1978 to June 1999.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

1. Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for hypothyroidism is remanded.

The Veteran was service-connected for hypothyroidism in a May 2022 rating decision and is currently evaluated as 0 percent disabling, effective January 28, 2021. 38 C.F.R. ยง 4.119, DC 7903.

While the Veteran was formally diagnosed with hypothyroidism in 2013, the Veteran has displaying symptoms of hypothyroidism since 1999, within one year of his discharge from service. See April 2022 VA medical opinion, March 2022 private medical opinion. 

The issue of the Veteran's entitlement to a compensable rating for hypothyroidism is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a). Specifically, a new medical opinion is needed to adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with his hypothyroidism. The AOJ obtained a December 2022 VA examination prior to the August 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, this examination report did not adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with his hypothyroidism. A remand is necessary to afford the Veteran with an adequate examination regarding the severity of his service-connected hypothyroidism.

The Veteran contends that his hypothyroidism caused him to develop peripheral neuropathy and reports first experiencing symptoms, including tingling in his feet, in 1999. He reports that he currently experiences constant pain in his feet and that they "feel like they are on fire." Additionally, he reports experiencing fatigue, weight gain, and dry skin as a result of his hyperthyroidism. See December 2022 VA examination, November 2021 lay statement. 

Symptoms of myxedema can include cold intolerance, muscular weakness, cardiovascular involvement, and mental disturbance. However, the December 2022 VA examiner did not address whether noted symptoms were related to myxedema and the Veteran's hypothyroidism, instead finding that the Veteran did not have any symptoms attributable to a hypothyroid condition. The AOJ obtained an addendum January 2023 VA medical opinion, however that opinion found no association between the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy and his hypothyroidism because peripheral neuropathy was diagnosed in 1999 and his hypothyroidism was diagnosed in 2013. The January 2023 VA addendum opinion failed to address the medical records indicating the Veteran's hypothyroidism first began in 1999. Accordingly, the December 2022 VA examination and January 2023 VA medical opinion are both inadequate. 

The Board does not have the requisite information to rate any of the residual symptoms or diagnoses under an appropriate diagnostic code that were caused or aggravated by his hypothyroidism. As such, a remand is also required to determine the nature and severity of the above findings. Considering the above, the Board does not have sufficient evidence to properly rate the Veteran's current hypothyroidism in relation to his various endocrine and neurological system disabilities. Accordingly, a remand is required to develop such evidence. It is unclear from the record whether certain symptoms were attributed to or are compensated by the Veteran's other service-connected disabilities.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected hypothyroidism. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. All relevant records, to include a copy of this remand as well as the claims folder, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination or review.

The examiner is asked to respond to the following:

a)	Identify all symptoms that are claimed as a result of hypothyroidism and specifically state whether or not those symptoms are present.

b)	Note the Veteran's current symptoms associated with hypothyroidism. Does the Veteran have, or has he ever had, myxedema?

c)	Discuss the presence of muscle and joint soreness, peripheral neuropathy, fatigue, and obesity, and whether they are due, at least in part, to hypothyroidism, or if they are entirely due to separate etiologies.

d)	Perform all appropriate separate VA examinations for the body systems affected by residuals of hypothyroidism.

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should provide an opinion as to why this is so and must state whether there is additional evidence that would permit the necessary opinion to be made.

The examiner should not consider the effect of any medications that the Veteran may be taking for his hypothyroidism.

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Finkelstein, Benjamin A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.