Citation Nr: A25031149
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250210-516298
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cause of death is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had honorable active service with the United States Air Force from February 1962 to May 1965. The VA has conceded that the Veteran was exposed to Agent Orange through his service in Thailand. 

In May 2003, the Veteran passed away from metastatic thyroid cancer. See Death Certificate. 

In May 2024, the Veteran's spouse, through her representative, submitted a supplemental application for service connection for the Veteran's cause of death. Attached to the supplemental application, the Veteran's spouse included articles about thyroid cancer and agent orange exposure. The Veteran's spouse is hereinafter called the Appellant.

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim above, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board finds that there is an implied waiver and proceeds with the claim before allowing the expiration of the time to change the AMA "lanes", from the Direct Review option. In making this determination, the Board notes that the Veteran's spouse has advanced her case on the docket - indicating that she wants this case decided as quickly as possible. 

Service connection for cause of death 

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Appellant.

The Appellant submitted articles with her claim appearing to indicate that agent orange is linked with or at least associated strongly with thyroid cancer. While the VA obtained a new opinion in January 2025, that opinion failed to address the articles provided with the supplemental application. The expert only stated that there was no relationship between thyroid cancer and herbicide exposure and cited a very general Cleveland Clinic web resource without addressing any of the specific evidence as to the Veteran's cancer before his passing or addressing the specific arguments provided by the Appellant.

As such, the Board finds that the addendum opinion was inadequate and that a new opinion must be obtained. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist the Appellant with her claim.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's metastatic thyroid cancer before his passing. Review the relevant records, including a copy of this remand. The examiner must address the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's metastatic thyroid cancer was etiologically related to his service, including specifically his conceded exposure to herbicide agents like Agent Orange during his verified service in Thailand? It is not sufficient to state that the condition is not listed in the regulations as a presumptive condition related to Agent Orange exposure.   

The examiner in providing their opinions must address the May 2024 research articles submitted with the supplemental claim (Correspondence received May 2024).   

In addressing the research articles and other evidence, the expert should specifically address the Veteran's medical condition prior to his passing. It is not sufficient to generally state that thyroid cancer has no link to herbicide agents, like agent orange. The examiner should fully assess the evidence as it related to this Veteran. 

As noted, the articles presented with the supplemental application stated that there was a potential relationship between agent orange and thyroid cancer. The expert should consider these articles along with the evidence and any other research and then provide a well-reasoned opinion as to whether it is at least approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's metastatic thyroid cancer was linked to his conceded agent orange exposure in service.   

(b.) A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should provide an explanation stating why this is so.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Parnell, C. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.