Citation Nr: A25031994
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240913-472461
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to service-connected disability is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1978 to September 1981, with additional service in the Marine Corps Reserve.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2024 by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

As a matter of background, VA initially denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA in November 2021. In November 2022, the Veteran submitted his Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995), and in March 2023, as relevant, an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) again denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA. In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996), and in August 2023, an AOJ found that a duty to assist error had occurred. In August 2024, per mandated special review, an AOJ found new and relevant evidence had been received but continued the prior denial of service connection for OSA as secondary to an acquired psychiatric disorder.

In September 2024, the Veteran filed a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In September 2024, he waived his right to select a different review option. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38C.F.R. § 20.301. Therefore, any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to service-connected disability.

As an initial matter, in an August 2024 rating decision, an AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's primary disability is service-connected. In particular, the AOJ noted that the Veteran is service-connected for acquired psychiatric condition to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. Moreover, the AOJ determined that, per a November 2022 VA examination, the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by such favorable findings absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

In November 2022, VA received the Veteran's Supplemental Claim, along with his statement wherein, as relevant, he reported his belief that his OSA is related to his service-connected PTSD, with obesity as an intermediate step. Per the Veteran, he never experienced any sleep apnea symptoms or sleep issues prior to service, and he was in good health.  Also, in November 2022, the Veteran submitted medical literature regarding the relationship between PTSD and sleep disorders. 

In January 2023, a VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. In support of such determination, the examiner noted the Veteran's service dates, a VA examination from November 2022 documenting a diagnosis of OSA, as well as a history of PTSD. Per the January 2023 VA examiner, although there is an association with individuals having OSA and PTSD and other psychological disorders at the same time, OSA is caused by dynamic narrowing of the upper airway, such as closure of the oral pharynx, during sleep and is not caused by a psychological condition such as PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. The examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. 

Thereafter, in March 2023, a VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As a rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran's Form DD-214 shows active military service from 1978 to 1981. Also, the examiner stated that a medical note from August 2013 documents a diagnosis of PTSD. According to the March 2023 examiner, the most common causes of obesity are overeating and physical inactivity. The examiner noted the Veteran's body mass index (BMI) in January 2023 was 24.7, demonstrating a healthy weight range. Further, the examiner described that, ultimately, body weight is the result of genetics, metabolism, environment, behavior, and culture. Also, the examiner noted physical inactivity was relevant, stating that sedentary people burn fewer calories than people who are active.  Nonetheless, per the March 2023 VA examiner, objectively, the Veteran was not obese. Based on such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder, less likely than not caused the Veteran to become obese. 

In a separate March 2023 VA examination for OSA, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. As a rationale, the examiner referenced that the Veteran's Form DD-214 shows active military service from 1978 to 1981. The VA examiner again referenced that a medical note in August 2013 documented a diagnosis of PTSD and that a November 2022 VA examination documents confirmed sleep apnea, per a sleep study test conducted in January 2016. According to the examiner, the most common causes of obesity are overeating and physical inactivity. Moreover, the examiner restated that in January 2023, the Veteran's BMI was 24.7, which represented a healthy weight range. The examiner again described that body weight is the result of genetics, metabolism, environment, behavior, and culture, and noted that sedentary people burn fewer calories than people who are active. Regardless, per the examiner, the Veteran does not have obesity. As such, the examiner determined that the claimed obesity was not caused or aggravated by the service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. Per the examiner, although there is an association with individuals having OSA and PTSD at the same time, OSA is caused by dynamic narrowing of the upper airway, such as closure of the oral pharynx, during sleep and is not caused by a psychological condition such as PTSD. Based on such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder.

In addressing aggravation, the March 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. In support of such determination, the examiner remarked that the Veteran's Form DD-214 shows active military service from 1978 to 1981, that a medical note in August 2013 documents a diagnosis of PTSD, and that a VA examination from November 2022 documents confirmed sleep apnea, per a January 2016 sleep study. The examiner again identified the most common causes of obesity as overeating and physical inactivity; however, the examiner noted, per a January 2023 record, that the Veteran was not obese. Consequently, the VA examiner opined that the claimed obesity was not caused or aggravated by the service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder.  Thus, the examiner stated the Veteran's sleep apnea was not caused by claimed obesity. 

Additionally, the March 2023 VA examiner indicated an inability to determine a baseline level of severity of the Veteran's OSA based upon medical evidence available prior to aggravation or the earliest medical evidence following aggravation by his service-connected acquired psychiatric condition.  Regardless of an established baseline, the examiner indicated the Veteran's OSA was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected acquired psychiatric condition.  

In his May 2023 Request for Higher-Level Review, the Veteran, through his representative, asserted that the March 2023 VA examination was inadequate. In this regard, the Veteran's representative asserted that the VA examiner failed to reconcile his opinion with the medical literature of record showing a connection between PTSD and sleep apnea. Further, the Veteran's representative asserted that the March 2023 VA examiner failed to relate generalized medical literature supporting his negative opinion with the claimant's specific medical history. In addition, as asserted in the May 2023 Request for Higher-Level Review, the March 2023 examiner failed to establish a baseline level of severity for the Veteran's sleep apnea before opining on aggravation, instead merely concluding that the "medical evidence is not sufficient to support a determination of a baseline level of severity". Moreover, the Veteran's representative stated that, despite the fact that the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2016, the examiner determined that weight gain was not an intermediate step because the Veteran's BMI in January 2023 was 24.7, thereby ignoring earlier medical records. For instance, the Veteran's representative noted records dated April 2016 reflecting a BMI of 28.2.

In August 2024, the Veteran was afforded another in-person VA examination related to his OSA. Per the August 2024 VA examiner, the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. In rendering such opinion, the examiner noted the Veteran's service dates and referenced the November 2022 VA examination wherein the examiner listed OSA as the diagnosis. Per the August 2024 examiner, OSA is a condition that is defined as multiple episodes of partial or complete closure of the upper airway that occur during sleep and lead to breathing cessation. The examiner stated that this can result in symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, restlessness, and snoring. Further, per the examiner, obesity is the most significant risk factor that leads to the development of OSA. According to the examiner, the Veteran is service-connected for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. However, per the August 2024 examiner, there is insufficient evidence and a lack of peer-reviewed medical literature that establishes a direct causal relationship between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and the development of his OSA. Therefore, the examiner opined the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his acquired psychiatric condition to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder.

Additionally, the VA examiner stated the Veteran's claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. As a rationale, the examiner noted the Veteran's service dates and that he is in receipt of service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder. However, per the examiner, there is insufficient evidence that his listed service-connected conditions or obesity preexisted his enlistment into active service. Therefore, the examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression during service by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  

Upon review, the Board finds that the August 2024 examiner's opinion is inadequate for the purpose of adjudicating the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA based on its merits. First, the Board finds the August 2024 VA examiner's opinion is conclusory and without a supporting rationale, as the examiner simply stated there is insufficient evidence and a lack of peer-reviewed medical literature that establishes a direct causal relationship between the service-connected condition and development of OSA. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (finding a medical opinion inadequate where "the examiner did not provide any rationale for his opinion that was specific to [the appellant's] particular medical condition and circumstances"). In addition, in addressing obesity as an intermediary step, the August 2024 VA examiner erroneously only relied on records from January 2023, which reflected a BMI of 24.7, to find that the Veteran was not obese. However, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's stated BMI in his earlier medical records, to include records from April 2016 reflecting a BMI of 28.2, to determine whether the Veteran had previously been obese. Notably, the August 2024 examiner specifically relied on the finding that the Veteran was not obese when providing the unfavorable opinions. Moreover, the Board notes the August 2024 VA examiner found the Veteran's OSA pre-existed service, which is not supported by the evidence of record.  Furthermore, the aforementioned opinions do not provide sufficient rationale for the conclusion that a service-connected disability did not aggravate the Veteran's OSA.  Thus, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an addendum opinion that adequately addresses the relationship between the Veteran's OSA and his service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder, as well as the Veteran's claimed obesity as an intermediary step.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate VA clinician for an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's OSA. Following a review of the record, the clinician should address the below inquiries:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not the Veteran's OSA is caused by his service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder? 

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not the Veteran's OSA is aggravated by his service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder?  

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder, caused him to become obese OR aggravated his obesity?

i.	If so, was the resulting obesity a substantial factor in causing OR aggravating the Veteran's OSA, and 

ii.	Would the Veteran's OSA not have occurred OR worsened but for the obesity caused by his service-connected PTSD, major depressive disorder, and secondary substance abuse disorder?

In rendering the requested opinions, the clinician should consider the Veteran's entire evidence of record, to include an April 2016 record reflecting a BMI of 28.2.  In addition, if the examiner relies upon medical literature in supporting the opinion, the clinician should cite it in full and discuss the applicability of the principles to the Veteran's specific case.  A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Spielmann, Jill F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.