Citation Nr: A25031233
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 241010-484225
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for pancreatic cancer, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and/or herbicide agent exposure, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's pancreatic cancer was not incurred during service, is not otherwise related to his active duty service, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and/or herbicide agents, and did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for pancreatic cancer, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and/or herbicide agent exposure, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1168, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1969 to July 1973.  In October 2024, he submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) appealing a July 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In his October 2024 NOD, the Veteran elected the Hearing Lane and in March 2025, the Veteran testified before a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board may consider evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 rating decision on appeal; evidence submitted by the appellant or his representative at the hearing, to include testimony provided at the hearing; and evidence submitted by the appellant or his or her representative within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  During the hearing, the Veteran waived the remainder of the 90-day period to submit additional evidence and submitted evidence immediately following the hearing; thus, the Board will proceed with adjudication.  If evidence was added to the record after July 25, 2024, but before the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

In the July 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ determined that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and that his participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded, specifically personnel records show that he performed service at Camp Lejeune for at least 30 days between August 1, 1953 and December 31, 1987, and that evidence shows he performed service in Vietnam.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence in these findings, the Board is bound by them.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Service Connection

Entitlement to service connection for pancreatic cancer, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and/or herbicide agent exposure, is denied.

Here, the Veteran asserts that his pancreatic cancer is due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune during his active service.  See December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Additionally, the evidence of record suggests his pancreatic cancer may be due to herbicide agent exposure.  See private opinion received by VA in December 2024 and March 2025.  

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury which was clearly present in service or for a disease diagnosed after discharge from service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R.    § 3.303.  Establishing service connection generally requires medical evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Lay evidence may be competent, in some cases, to establish that a disability began during service or is connected to service.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  However, competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question is one requiring medical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Certain chronic diseases, including malignant tumors, will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A Veteran, or former reservist or member of the National Guard, who had no less than 30 days (consecutive or nonconsecutive) of service at Camp Lejeune during the period beginning on August 1, 1953 and ending on December 31, 1987 shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to the contaminants in the water supply, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the individual was not exposed to contaminants in the water supply during that service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(7).  If the Veteran served during the time frame specified, certain diseases shall be service connected, even though there is no record of such disease during service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f).  

The Veteran's diagnosed pancreatic cancer is not among the conditions deemed presumptively associated with exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  Id.  However, if the Veteran is shown to have actually been exposed to contaminated water there, service connection may be granted if medical evidence establishes a causal link between his brain tumor and exposure to contaminated water in service.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (when the evidence does not warrant presumptive service connection, an appellant is not precluded from establishing service connection with proof of direct causation).

Moreover, a Veteran, who during active military, naval, or air service, served in the Republic of Vietnam during the period from January 9, 1962 to May 7, 1975, shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to certain herbicide agents, to include the commonly referred herbicide agent, Agent Orange, absent affirmative evidence to establish that the Veteran was not exposed.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1116(f); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(6)(iii).  The Veteran's service personnel records confirm that he served in the Republic of Vietnam from during the applicable period.  Accordingly, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents during his active duty service.

If a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, certain diseases are presumed to be service connected if the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6) are met, even though there is no record of the disease during service, provided that the rebuttable presumption provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d) are also satisfied.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Certain listed medical conditions may be granted service connection on a presumptive basis due to such exposure, including chloracne.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Effective January 1, 2021, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 added three disorders to the list of presumptively associated diseases with exposure to herbicide agents.  Specifically, it amended 38 U.S.C. § 1116(a)(2) to include parkinsonism, bladder cancer, and hypothyroidism as diseases presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents.  Notably, pancreatic cancer is not on the list of presumptive diseases associated with herbicide agent exposure.

However, although service connection is not available in this case on a presumptive basis, service connection is still possible on a direct basis if the evidence establishes a causal link between the Veteran's pancreatic cancer and his active duty service, including the conceded inservice exposure to herbicide agents. Combee, supra.

Additionally, on August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted and created new examination requirements where toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) are implicated.  38 U.S.C. § 1119.  The PACT Act directs that in certain circumstances, when a veteran is found to have been involved in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, VA must obtain an adequate opinion addressing whether such toxic exposure caused a diagnosed disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.  Participation in a TERA can be explicitly or implicitly raised.  In this case, an April 2023 VA Memorandum indicates that the Veteran participated in a TERA and noted conceded exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, specifically Perchloroethylene(PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene, and herbicide agents, specifically 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), and the February 2024 VA examiner considered these conceded exposures in rendering an opinion.  Accordingly, the AOJ has obtained a medical opinion in compliance with 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

Here, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of pancreatic cancer.  See December 2023 VA examination report; see also July 2024 rating decision favorable findings.  Thus, element one of direct service connection is met.

Regarding the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for diagnosis, symptoms, or treatment of pancreatic cancer, and in this regard the Veteran does not assert in-service incurrence of his prostate cancer.  However, the Board concedes in-service exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune - Perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene - and exposure to herbicide agents, including 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD).  See April 2023 VA Memorandum; see also July 2024 rating decision favorable findings.  Therefore, an in-service injury in the form of exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and herbicide agents is shown, and element two of direct service connection is also established as to an in-service injury only.

Regarding the final element, nexus, there is conflicting evidence.  Against the claim are the opinions of the January 2024 and February 2024 VA examiners.  Specifically, after a thorough review of the claims file, the January 2024 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's diagnosed pancreatic cancer was incurred in or otherwise related to service.  In support of this opinion, the examiner cited to medical literature and stated that pancreatic cancer's etiology is not well established, with most of pancreatic cancer being sporadic.  To this end, the examiner stated that while the Veteran did have an older sister who had pancreatic cancer, her genetic markers were negative, and that further information on the Veteran's pancreatic cancer was not present to determine etiology.  Thus, the examiner concluded that since most cases of pancreatic cancer are sporadic, it is less likely than not that pancreatic cancer was a result of service.  This opinion is of limited probative value, as it does not address the Veteran's relevant medical history, or his in-service exposures.

Also against the claim is the opinion of the February 2024 VA examiner, who after a thorough review of the claims file, opined that the Veteran's pancreatic cancer was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Specifically, the examiner reviewed all available documentation of record, including the medical literature submitted by the Veteran, and noted the Veteran's conceded exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, including PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene, and herbicide agents, including 2,3,7,8 - TCDD.  The examiner also noted the method and frequency of the exposures, specifically presumed constant/ near constant inhalation exposure, possible intermittent oral or dermal herbicide exposures and presumed daily oral, dermal exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune, and presumed constant/ near constant inhalation exposure, possible intermittent oral or dermal herbicide exposures.  To this end, in support of his opinion, the examiner highlighted that the Veteran is a current smoker.  Thereafter, the examiner cited to medical studies that indicated self-reported regular exposure to pesticides was associated with increased odds of pancreatic cancer (OR 1.21, 95 % CI 1.02-1.44); that regular exposure to asbestos (OR 1.54, 95 % CI 1.23-1.92), benzene (OR1.70, 95 % CI 1.23-2.35), and chlorinated hydrocarbons (OR 1.63, 95 % CI 1.32-2.02) also was associated with higher odds of pancreatic cancer; and that chromium and nickel exposures were not significantly associated with pancreatic cancer.  The examiner then cited to another medical article, which stated that the most consistently reported occupational risk factors for pancreatic cancer, include exposure to chlorinated hydrocarbon compounds, pesticides, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), metals, nitrosamines, radiation, various airborne particles, and employment in sedentary occupations.  Per the examiner, the study concluded that the strongest and most consistent findings linking occupational exposures with pancreatic cancer risk to date are from chlorinated hydrocarbons and PAHs, such as those present in tobacco smoke.  To this end, the examiner stated that, while in this case, there is indication of benzene exposure as well as herbicide agent exposure, both studies above indicate tobacco intake as a substantially more powerful causative agent for developing pancreatic cancer.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's previous and current tobacco intake is a far more likely source for his pancreatic cancer, indicating that the claimed pancreatic cancer is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Lastly, in reaching his conclusion, the examiner stated that "there are always many and potentially significant unknown exposures.  However, in these cases, our focus is on known or likely exposures."  

The Board finds the February 2024 VA examiner's opinion is of high probative value, as it is well-reasoned and based on records review and relevant medical principles.  Critically, the February 2024 VA examiner noted the Veteran's relevant medical history and considered detailed information on his exposures to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and herbicide agents, along with relevant medical treatise articles.  

The Board acknowledges there are two favorable private opinions of record.  In January 2024, A.P., M.D., notes the Veteran's in-service chemical exposures, states generally that those chemicals have been linked to pancreatic cancer, and indicates that such exposure "may have been a major factor in his diagnosis of pancreatic cancer."  Dr. A.P.'s use of speculative langue, alone, renders this opinion non-probative.  See Bostain v. West, 11 Vet. App. 124, 127-28, quoting Obert v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 30, 33 (1993) (a medical opinion expressed in terms of "may" also implies "may or may not" and is too speculative to establish a causal relationship); see also Warren v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 4, 6 (1993) (a doctor's statement framed in terms such as "could have been" is not probative). Notably, this examiner does not address the Veteran's smoking history.  

Additionally, the Board finds the private favorable opinion by Nurse Practitioner (NP-C) M.M. received after the Board hearing is of limited probative value. Specifically, M.M. noted treatment of the Veteran in primary care for pancreatic cancer, peripheral vascular disease, posttraumatic stress disorder, squamous cell skin cancer, hypothyroidism, and pulmonary nodules.  She then stated that after a review of the Veteran's records, the listed diagnoses are "highly likely due to exposure to Agent Orange."  In support, she noted that many listed diagnoses such as skin cancers, peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, and ischemic heart disease are more than likely caused by Agent Orange, and that Agent Orange has been linked to "many cancers" and other disease "because it is reported that the United States sprayed 20 more than the manufacturer's recommended amount in the environment."  Notably, she does not mention pancreatic cancer specifically, or cite to any medical literature in support a nexus between the Veteran's herbicide agent exposure and pancreatic cancer.   She notes that Public Health and the VA have linked diagnoses such as skin cancer to agent orange.  She notes that the Cleveland Clinic posed an update in February 2023 regarding the effects of Agent Orange online, but in no way indicates that this update indicates a relationship between pancreatic cancer and agent orange exposure.  

M.M.'s opinion is of limited probative value.  Critically, she in no way discusses the Veteran's relevant medical history, particularly his smoking history, and why that is not the more likely cause of his pancreatic cancer over his in-service exposures, given the literature cited by the February 2024 VA examiner.  M.M. also generally refers to other disabilities that have been presumptively linked to herbicide agent exposure to support a nexus between pancreatic cancer and agent orange, including cancers such as skin cancer, but does not explain how this allows for link between pancreatic cancer and agent orange exposure.

The Board acknowledges that during the March 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran's spouse testified that M. M. knew about the Veteran's smoking history.  While this may be the case, M.M. does not address the Veteran's smoking history in her opinion, nor does she explain why his in-service exposures are more likely the cause of his pancreatic cancer over his smoking, given the literature demonstrating tobacco smoke as a more likely cause.  See Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294 (2012) ("an adequate medical report must rest on correct facts and reasoned medical judgment so as inform the Board on a medical question and facilitate the Board's consideration and weighing of the report against any contrary reports."); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its being factually accurate, fully articulated, and having a sound reasoning for the conclusion); Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185 at 187 (1999) (the probative value of a physician's statement is dependent, in part, upon the extent to which it reflects "clinical data or other rationale to support his opinion.").  Accordingly, M.M.'s opinion is less probative than the opinion of the February 2024 VA examiner.

There is no other competent opinion in support of a nexus.  In this regard, neither the Veteran nor his spouse is competent to opine as to the etiology of his pancreatic cancer, as such determination requires medical expertise that they are not shown to possess.  Jandreau, supra.  Accordingly, for reasons outlined above, the Board finds the February 2024 VA examiner's unfavorable opinions to be the most probative evidence of record regarding nexus.  Thus, the third element of service connection is not established, and the claim is denied on this basis.

Finally, presumptive service connection for chronic disease is not established, as the Veteran was first diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2023, decades after service.  Moreover, the Veteran and his spouse assert his symptoms onset a few months prior to his diagnosis.  See Board Hearing Transcript at 6.  As the Veteran himself denies experiencing any in-service pancreatic cancer symptoms, and indeed those symptoms did not emerge until decades after service, service connection for chronic disease based on continuity of symptomatology is not established.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

The Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, and is persuasively against the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  Accordingly, for reasons outlined above, entitlement to service connection for pancreatic cancer is denied.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asante, Ruby

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.