Citation Nr: A25031884
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-451941
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right heel disability, diagnosed as residuals status post right Achilles tendon repair and removal of a bone spur, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his right heel disability is aggravated by abnormal weightbearing caused by his service-connected lumbar spine disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right heel disability as secondary to service-connected lumbar spine disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1988 to September 1992.

The Rating Decision on appeal was issued in June 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of a March 2024 Rating Decision.  In June 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the Higher-Level Review Rating Decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2024 decision, but confirmed and continued the denial of the claim.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the March 2024 decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review, then the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, then the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, then VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

By way of history, the Veteran initially filed a claim of entitlement to service connection for a right heel disability in March 2020.  In an April 2021 Rating Decision, the AOJ denied the claim of entitlement to service connection for residuals status post right Achilles tendon repair and removal of a bone spur.  Thereafter, in a June 2022 supplemental claim, the Veteran again sought entitlement to service connection for a right Achilles tendon/heel disability, arguing that his service-connected back and left knee disabilities resulted in an abnormal gait which aggravated his right heel disability.  However, the AOJ again denied the claim in an October 2022 Rating Decision.  The Veteran immediately filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of the denial of the right Achilles tendon/heel claim.  In a December 2022 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision, the AOJ acknowledged that a "difference of opinion" had been asserted and remanded the matter for additional development.  After obtaining an addendum VA medical opinion in June 2023, the AOJ again denied the claim.  The Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, in July 2023, but the AOJ again denied the claim in an October 2023 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision.  In October 2023, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for entitlement to service connection for residuals status post right Achilles tendon repair and removal of a bone spur, arguing that his secondary service connection theory was never fully addressed.  The AOJ again denied the claim in a March 2024 Rating Decision, and the Veteran promptly submitted another VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, in March 2024.  In response, the AOJ issued a June 2024 Higher-Level Review Rating Decision which confirmed and continued the previous denial.

The Board acknowledges the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) decision in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) that found under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2), the Board generally may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  In this case, as the Board is fully granting the benefit sought, the Board finds that adjudicating the appeal without seeking waiver of the ability to switch dockets is harmless.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a right heel disability.  In his June 2022 supplemental claim, the Veteran asserted that his heel disability was aggravated by an irregular gait resulting from his service-connected low back and left knee disabilities.  

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Secondary service connection is granted where a service-connected disability causes or aggravates a nonservice-connected disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).  The threshold legal requirements for a successful secondary service connection claim are: (1) evidence of a current disability for which secondary service connection is sought; (2) a disability for which service connection has been established; and (3) competent evidence that the disability for which service connection is sought is proximately due to, or aggravated by, the service-connected disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

The Board notes that the Veteran is already service connected for lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome, as well as associated radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities involving both the sciatic and femoral nerves.  Significantly, a July 2023 VA Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions examination report indicated that the Veteran's back disabilities were productive of muscle spasm and guarding resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour.

The Veteran was afforded a VA Ankle Conditions examination in August 2022, at which time he was diagnosed as having right tendonitis (Achilles/peroneal/posterior tibial).  

An etiological opinion was obtained in March 2023, at which time the clinician opined that the diagnosed Achilles tendonitis was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected back disability.  In support of this opinion, the examiner explained that:

Medical literature reports that the etiology of Achilles tendonitis is related to the anatomy of the foot and other intrinsic factors such as age, metabolic dysfunction, and some of the extrinsic factors include obesity, steroids, medications, improper footwear and stretching. There is no objective evidence that his service connected degenerative disc disease (DDD), lumbar, with spurring lumbar spine, old compression injury, spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome caused his achilles Tendon- a nexus is not made.

Crucially, however, the March 2023 clinician then opined that:

The changes to weight bearing from his service connected degenerative disc disease (DDD), lumbar, with spurring lumbar spine, old compression injury, spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome more than likely aggravated his Achilles tendon beyond the natural progression by putting additional strain on it   further inflaming and aggravating the tendon.

In summary, although the March 2023 VA clinician found that the Achilles tendonitis was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome, the examiner found that the Achilles tendonitis was more likely than not aggravated by his service-connected back disability.

Despite the positive opinion, the AOJ requested that an addendum opinion be obtained in June 2023.  Specifically, the AOJ stated that the previous March 2023 medical opinions contained conflicting information, as the clinician had checked the box indicating that the Veteran's Achilles tendonitis was at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition, but then opined that there was no objective evidence that the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disabilities caused his Achilles tendonitis.  Significantly, however, the AOJ made no mention whatsoever of the March 2023 clinician's other conclusion that the abnormal weightbearing caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disabilities more than likely aggravated his Achilles tendonitis.

Nonetheless, a new clinician provided a response to the AOJ's addendum request in June 2023, simply stating that, "Please disregard the previous erroneous response of 4a 'YES - The condition IS related'. The correct response is 4b. 'NO - The condition IS NOT related'.  The rationale remains unchanged."  Like the AOJ addendum request, the June 2023 clinician also ignored the opinion of the March 2023 clinician which concluded that the abnormal weightbearing caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disabilities more than likely aggravated his Achilles tendonitis.  This suggests to the Board that the June 2023 clinician merely considered the AOJ's narrowly-tailored inquiry relating to which box was checked on the Disability Benefits Questionnaire and did not consider the entirety of the previous March 2023 opinion, nor the record as a whole.

In response, in his July 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Veteran emphasized that the AOJ failed to ask the clinician who provided the June 2023 addendum opinion to comment on the previous March 2023 clinician's conclusion that the abnormal weightbearing caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disabilities more than likely aggravated his Achilles tendonitis.  Moreover, the Veteran emphasized that the clinician who provided the March 2023 opinion also completed a second Disability Benefits Questionnaire on the same day in which she checked the box indicating that the Veteran's Achilles tendonitis was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  Crucially, however, the clinician provided the same conclusions on this second form: that the Achilles tendonitis was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome, but was more likely than not aggravated by his service-connected back disability.  As such, the Veteran argued that there was no contradiction in the opinions, as the March 2023 clinician unequivocally concluded on both of the March 2023 VA Disability Benefits Questionnaires that the Achilles tendonitis was more likely than not aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome.

The Board agrees and finds that service connection for the right heel disability as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome is warranted.  The Veteran has been diagnosed as having residuals status post right Achilles tendon repair and removal of a bone spur as well as lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome (to include radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities involving both the sciatic and femoral nerves).  The Veteran has already been service connected for lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome, which was determined to be productive of muscle spasm and guarding resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour.  Moreover, the March 2023 VA clinician concluded on two separate Disability Benefits Questionnaires that the changes to weight bearing from the Veteran's service-connected degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine (with spurring, old compression injury, spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome) more than likely aggravated his Achilles tendonitis beyond the natural progression by putting additional strain on it, further inflaming and aggravating the tendon.  Additionally, there is no evidence to the contrary to suggest the Veteran's tendonitis was not aggravated by his service-connected lumbar spine symptomatology.  Although the AOJ obtained a June 2023 addendum opinion, this opinion did not address (and, therefore, did not contradict) the conclusions of the March 2023 clinician regarding aggravation of the Achilles tendonitis by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disabilities.  To the contrary, the June 2023 clinician merely stated that, "The rationale remains unchanged," with respect to the March 2023 opinion.

Based on the foregoing, and resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for a right heel disability as secondary to service-connected lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylosis and intervertebral disc syndrome is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

The Board notes that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b) contemplates a baseline to assess the severity of a nonservice-connected disability that is aggravated by a service-connected disability. However, the Board determines that this is more akin to a downstream rating aspect of the claim that should be addressed in the first instance by the AOJ following implementation of this decision. 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Flamini, Anthony

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.