Citation Nr: A25031696
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439510
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Florida Army National Guard and the Nevada Army National Guard from November 1998 to September 2003, which included a period of initial active duty for training (ACDUTRA) under 10 U.S.C. § 672(d) from May 1999 to August 1999 and a period of active duty from September 2001 to November 2002. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision.

In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA 10182 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

A June 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current left knee disorder was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  She found that there was a lack of substantiating evidence to support a nexus between the current diagnosis of a left knee strain and his military service.  She acknowledged that the Veteran had complained of left knee pain in August 1999 and July 2002; however, she noted that subsequent assessments and examinations in August 2002 and December 2002 were negative for left knee complaints.  The examiner also stated that there were no further complaints in the service treatment records or after his separation from service to suggest a chronic left knee condition.  Thus, she concluded that, without a chronic left knee condition, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.  

Nevertheless, the Board notes that the Veteran had reported having left knee pain for four months when he was seen in July 2002, and the June 2023 VA examiner did not identify any post-service event, illness, or injury that may have been the cause of the Veteran's current left knee disorder.  Nor did she discuss how the current disorder generally presents or develops.  Moreover, the examiner did not address the Veteran's contention that he developed his left knee disorder due to his training and duties in service or discuss whether such activities may have led to the later onset of his current left knee disorder.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

The Board further notes that the June 2023 VA examiner did not provide a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's current right knee disorder.  A September 2022 VA examiner had opined that the disorder was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  She stated that the medical records were silent for any right knee condition; however, she did not provide any other rationale.  Indeed, the examiner did not address the Veteran's contention that he developed a right knee disorder due to his military training and duties.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any right and left knee disorders that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and statements.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a right or left knee condition that is causally or etiologically related to a period of qualifying active service, to include any injury, symptomatology, training, or duties therein.  It should be noted that he had a period of initial ACDUTRA from May 1999 to August 1999 and a period of active duty from September 2001 to November 2002. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's reports that he injured his knees in service and his contention that his current knee disorders are related to his physical training and duties in service.  He or she should also address the service treatment records documenting a diagnosis of left knee tendonitis in August 1999 and complaints of left knee pain present for four months in July 2002.

The examiner should discuss how any current knee disorder generally presents or develops.  

A clear rationale for all opinions should be performed.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deverter, Rebecca M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.