Citation Nr: A25031241
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-464164
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative joint disease and/or right shoulder strain, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1980 to October 2004.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the August 2024 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability per a private sleep study and that based on the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia and his MOS, his participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) (job related exposures such as fuels, fumes, oils, and lubricants) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

By way of background, a February 2020 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  In July 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application seeking review of his previously denied claim.  An October 2022 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had not been received to reconsider the Veteran's claim.  The Veteran submitted another VA Form 20-0995 in October 2023.  A November 2023 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had not been received to reconsider the Veteran's claim.  In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review (HLR) of the November 2023 denial.  An April 2024 HLR decision identified a duty to assist error.  The identified development was completed and in August 2024, the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal which found that new and relevant evidence had been received to reconsider the Veteran's claim but continued the prior denial.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the initial rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  As the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative joint disease and/or right shoulder strain, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea which he asserts onset in-service and has persisted since.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he has had sleeping issues such as heavy snoring since the 90's.  The Veteran reports that back then, he had no idea what sleep apnea was and knew nothing about it, so he never thought of going to the doctor for his snoring problem.  The Veteran recalls that he and his fellow servicemembers all snored and thought it was just a normal thing.  The Veteran reported that he suffered while in-service and continues to suffer with sleep issues.  See July 2022 VA Form 20-0995.  Alternately, the Veteran generally asserts that his sleep apnea is caused or aggravated by his service-connected lumbosacral strain with degenerative joint disease and/or right shoulder strain.  See October 11, 2023, Memorandum for the Record

The Veteran's spouse reports that back in the 90's the Veteran would snore very loudly.  She further recalled that the Veteran would stop breathing for approximately one minute at a time while snoring, sounded as if he was choking and gasping for air, and would be very tired in the mornings and after work.  She recalled that when the Veteran retired in 2004, he was still snoring loudly at night and finally went to see a doctor about his loud snoring in 2011 at which time he was diagnosed with sleep apnea.  Id.

The AOJ obtained a VA examination and opinion in November 2023.  The examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion but did not address the required aggravation prong.  The Board finds the November 2023 medical opinion to be inadequate because the examiner did not address the aggravation prong for secondary service connection.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

In light of the Veteran's TERA participation, the AOJ obtained a negative opinion for the Veteran's sleep apnea in November 2023.

Finally, in May 2024, the AOJ obtained an opinion addressing entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as directly related to the Veteran's active service.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his active service.  The examiner acknowledged the reports of the Veteran's spouse, but did not address the Veteran's statement that his symptoms onset in-service and have persisted since.  The examiner found that the evidence does not sufficiently demonstrate that sleep apnea is caused by and continued from military service.  He noted, STRs do not show frequent complaints of or chronic sleep apnea symptoms while in service and that there are no relevant findings or diagnosis during military service.

In fact, the Veteran's STRs contain a number of instances of treatment for sore throat, cough, headaches, and upper respiratory infection.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Moreover, in providing his negative opinion, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay report that his symptoms onset during active duty and have persisted since.

In light of the above, the Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an opinion that is adequate to decide the Veteran's claim.

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician (preferably an M.D., if available), to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.

The examiner should respond to the following:

(a)	Opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea onset during active-duty service or was otherwise etiologically related to service? The examiner should note that the absence of documented evidence of sleep apnea during service should not serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion.

(b)	Opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected lumbosacral strain?  

(c)	Opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was aggravated (worsened in severity) by his service-connected lumbosacral strain?  

(d)	Opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected right shoulder strain?

(e)	Opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was aggravated (worsened in severity) by his service-connected right shoulder strain?  

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner must specifically consider and address the following pertinent evidence:

"	STR noting sore throat and diagnosis of upper respiratory infection.  See December 20, 1984 STR

"	STR noting cough for 7 days, upper respiratory infection, and yellowish phlegm and cough.  See June 13, 1991 STR

"	STR noting dry throat, cough, and headache.  See February 24, 1995 STR

"	STR noting treatment for a sore throat.  See April 24, 1997 STR 

"	Undated STR wherein the Veteran endorse headache, productive cough, and sore throat.  See STR p. 55 of 162

"	The Veteran's statement that his snoring onset in the 90's during active service and has persisted since.  See July 2022 VA Form 20-0995

"	Statement from the Veteran's spouse that the Veteran would stop breathing for approximately one minute at a time while snoring, sounded as if he was choking and gasping for air, and would be very tired in the mornings and after work.  She recalled that when the Veteran retired in 2004, he was still snoring loudly at night and finally went to see a doctor about his loud snoring in 2011 at which time he was diagnosed with sleep apnea.  Id.

"	Statement from Army legal assistance attorney, Y.C., that the Veteran showed symptoms of sleep apnea during the time he was serving in the Air Force.  See October 11, 2023 Memorandum for the Record (labeled as Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility)

"	Statement from Y.C. that after the Veteran's marriage in 1986, that his wife started noticing that he would frequently stop breathing for minutes and snore too loudly.  Id. 

Any conclusion or opinion offered must be accompanied by a complete medical rationale, citing to established medical principles and relevant medical evidence, such as examination findings, service treatment records, or other pertinent evidence in the record, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements in support of his claim is credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the remand directives could impact that determination.  Although the Board is requesting a medical opinion regarding the claim, this is for thoroughness and not based on a finding as to credibility.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board                                                                    C. Gates	

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.