Citation Nr: A25031806
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240322-426945
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED) is dismissed.

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for an eye disability, to include dry eye syndrome, bilateral myopia, and bilateral astigmatism, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The claim for service connection for ED noted on the Veteran's March 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) is not an appealable adjudicative action. There is no rating decision within one year of the March 2024 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) that specifically denied the Veteran service connection for ED. Thus, the Board does not have jurisdiction over the issue of entitlement to service connection for ED.

2. The Veteran's reported psychiatric symptoms have been evaluated as part of his service-connected depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder rendering the service connection claim for PTSD moot.

3. Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder symptoms did not more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Regarding a claim of entitlement to service connection for ED, the Board does not currently have jurisdiction to address this issue. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.201, 20.202, 20.203.

2. The claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD is dismissed as moot. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.101; Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998).

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from July 2017 to April 2020.

This appeal, except for the issues of service connection for PTSD and ED, comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of May and June 2023 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 (increased rating for depressive disorder and service connection for left knee and right shoulder disabilities) and June 2023 (eye disability) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to an increased rating for the service-connected depressive disorder, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's right shoulder, left knee, and eye disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In addition, the Board has recharacterized the issue of service connection for dry eye syndrome to account for all eye disabilities revealed in the record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

Dismissals

Service connection for ED is dismissed.

On the March 2024 NOD, the Veteran specifically indicated that he intended to appeal the claim of service connection ED. He referenced a "2023-12-01" rating decision, which is not of record.

After a thorough review of the record, the Board concludes that there is no December 1, 2023, rating decision that has been properly and timely appealed to the Board; nor a rating decision that specifically addresses service connection for Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) framework, an appeal consists of: (1) a rating decision issued by a VA RO, followed by (2) a properly completed VA Form 10182 submitted to the Board within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of decision. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202, 20.203.

A notice of disagreement must be properly completed on a form prescribed by the Secretary. The notice of disagreement "must identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees." The term issue means an adjudication of a specific entitlement as described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.151 (c). The Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal, but the Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (a).

Here, a review of the Veteran's claims file shows that there was no rating decision, adjudication, or notification of such a rating action or adjudication issued on December 1, 2023. There is also no rating decision of record that directly addresses service connection for ED. There is also no informal or formal claim for ED in the Veteran's claims file. To date, and contrary to what the Veteran indicated in his March 2024 NOD, there is no evidence of a December 1, 2023, rating decision in the claims file. 

In sum, there is no rating action or adjudication within a year of the March 2024 NOD which addresses service connection for ED. Accordingly, there is no proper appeal regarding a December 1, 2023, rating decision, or for service connection for ED, as noted on the March 2024 VA Form 10182; thus, the claim of entitlement to service connection for ED is dismissed.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is dismissed.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ to apply for service connection for several issues, to include PTSD and other psychiatric conditions. In February 2023, he was afforded a VA examination for mental disorders, where he was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder and unspecified depressive disorder; a diagnosis of PTSD was not noted at that time. In a May 5, 2023, rating decision, the AOJ granted the Veteran service connection for unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder. The decision notes, in parentheses, that the claim was for PTSD, sleep disturbances, paranoid reaction, and anxiety. 

The Board points out that regarding psychiatric disorders, it is possible that a service connection claim for one psychiatric disorder could at some point be considered separate from another service connection claim for a different psychiatric disorder. See Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2009) ("We recognize that bipolar disorder and PTSD could have different symptoms and it could therefore be improper in some circumstances for VA to treat these separately diagnosed conditions as producing only the same disability."). That is not the case here, however, as the AOJ granted service connection for unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder, also claimed as PTSD, and rated the Veteran based on all reported symptoms at the VA examination, indicating that it was inclusive of all the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms. Additionally, the Veteran reported the same in-service incident for PTSD and depressive disorder.  In other words, there is no indication, either lay or medical, that there are symptoms of another psychiatric disorder that are distinct from the one for which service connection has been granted. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998).

Absent evidence of a mental disability with distinct symptomatology from the already service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder, consideration of service connection for PTSD is not warranted. Such an action would amount to impermissible pyramiding, and VA is prohibited from awarding disability benefits for two separate diagnoses that produce the same manifestations of a disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Therefore, the Board finds that the claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD must be dismissed as moot because service connection has already been established for unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder and the Veteran is rated upon the psychiatric symptomatology shown. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. 

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Increased Rating-Unspecified Depressive Disorder with Alcohol Use Disorder

In a May 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder, with an evaluation of 30 percent effective January 23, 2023. He is presumed to be seeking a higher rating, based on his March 2024 NOD, on which he indicated that he is appealing the disability evaluation for PTSD. [As noted herein, the Veteran is not service-connected for PTSD; however, the Board interpreted the Veteran's appeal, concerning his disagreement with the "disability evaluation for PTSD," to mean that he is seeking a higher rating for his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder.]

The Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is evaluated under DC 9435. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The psychiatric symptoms listed in the rating criteria are not exclusive but are examples of typical symptoms for the listed percentage ratings. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). In particular, the criteria of DC 9435 provide for a 30 percent rating where the evidence shows occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

The criteria provide for a 50 percent rating where the evidence shows occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The criteria provide for a 70 percent rating where the evidence shows occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence) spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria provide for a 100 percent rating where the evidence shows total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

After careful review of the record, the Board finds that a rating greater than 30 percent for the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is not warranted. In this regard, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2023, where the examiner indicated that the Veteran's depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder reflects a mental condition that has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication. The Veteran's symptoms are depressed mood and impaired judgment. He reported that he lives alone in his own apartment, with no pets. He stated that he has close friends and that he considers his friend's father as his father. He also reported having no children, but that he has a girlfriend who he hopes to marry. However, he stated that he has no contact with his biological family due to their substance abuse. The Veteran reported that he works as a biological engineer safety specialist contractor; that he enjoys the work and hopes to become a full-time employee. The examiner noted that the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and event. The Veteran's grooming was good; he was noted to be neatly dressed. His eye contact was normal. His mood appeared euthymic; affect was broad. It was noted that the Veteran displayed no signs or symptoms of hallucinations or delusions. His thoughts were organized and goal-directed. His speech was coherent and fluent. The Veteran denied current suicidal and homicidal ideations. He reported having supportive friends and a spiritual viewpoint.

Given the above, the Board finds that for the entirety of the appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder symptoms, to include depressed mood and impaired judgment, more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating and are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 50 or 70 percent rating. The results of the February 2023 VA examination fail to show that the Veteran's depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity at any time during the appeal period. The medical records, to include the VA examination report, reveal no evidence that the Veteran has significant difficulty with speech, insight, or judgment. 

The Board notes that the VA examiner listed one symptom that is within the 50 percent rating criteria-impaired judgment. However, there is no indication that this results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity to warrant a 50 percent rating at any point during the appeal period. From all accounts, the Veteran appears to maintain positive relationships with his girlfriend and friends. He specifically reported having supportive friends and that he hopes to marry his girlfriend. He also reported that he enjoys his contract job as a biological engineer safety specialist, and that he hopes to become a full-time employee with his current company. There was also no evidence of suicidal or homicidal thoughts, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, memory impairment, panic attacks more than once per week, obsessional rituals, impaired impulse control, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, or intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. Importantly, the February 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder reflects a mental condition that has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication; however, the Veteran was assigned a 30 percent rating for the symptoms of depressed mood and impaired judgment. Accordingly, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is not warranted at any time during the appeal period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9435.

Additionally, neither the Veteran nor his attorney has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of his depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder, but not to identify a specific level of disability. The medical findings in this case directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated, and the objective medical evidence is accorded greater weight than the subjective complaints of increased symptomatology. Therefore, a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted. As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's contentions, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection for Right Shoulder, Left Knee, and Eye Disabilities

The Veteran is seeking service connection for his right shoulder, left knee, and eye disabilities, claiming that these disabilities are related to his active service. The Veteran explained, "Along with my left knee that is the worst, I have wrist, elbow, and shoulder pains from doing excessive manual labor and physical training, that leaves me out of a lot of jobs and hobbies now." See January 2023 Claim. The Veteran also explained that both of his eyes "are getting worse and worse from sun, bright light, and flash exposer in the military." Id. The Board finds that remand of these disabilities is required to correct duty to assist errors-to afford the Veteran VA medical examinations and obtain adequate medical opinions.

Right Shoulder and Left Knee

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reveals that he was diagnosed with a right shoulder disability as recently as September 2019, just within approximately seven months of leaving service in April 2020. Specifically, he was diagnosed with "other instability, right shoulder." It was noted that the Veteran reported with posterior shoulder pain and strain "after heavy load flat bench press." The Veteran reported that this happened two weeks prior but that he had no relief of the pain. It was also noted that the Veteran was examined for both his right shoulder and left knee. The Veteran stated that his left knee pain had been present for two years. He also reported having a popping noise when bending the left knee.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his shoulders in February 2023, where the examiner concluded that the Veteran does not have a right shoulder condition. The Board finds that further clarification is necessary, as the Veteran was clearly noted to have a right shoulder condition shortly before leaving service, and there is no indication of whether this diagnosed right shoulder condition was healed or was acute. There is no mention of this in the examination report; neither did the examiner address the Veteran's reports of the continuation of symptoms. The Veteran maintains that he has a right shoulder condition, to include right shoulder pain, which started in service and has continued to the present. 

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a claim, that examination or medical opinion must be an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The examination must be based on a factually accurate medical history. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). As the VA examination for the Veteran's right shoulder does not address the diagnosis of a right shoulder disability in service, and the Veteran's reports of the continuity of symptoms, the Board finds that it is not adequate. Further, as the Veteran complains of pain in his right, the Board notes that the Court of Veterans Claims (Court) has ruled that pain alone can constitute a disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Thus, remand is required to afford the Veteran another VA examination to fully address his right shoulder condition. The Board also notes that an inadequate VA medical examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination to address his left knee condition. VA is required to afford a veteran an examination where there is an indication of a currently diagnosed disorder, or symptoms thereof; an in-service event or injury; and a nexus between the two. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). As noted herein, the Veteran's STRs reveal evidence of a left knee disability, to include continued complaints of left knee pain, which he continues to experience. Considering the foregoing, the Board finds that a VA examination is warranted for this disability. Id. The Board notes that not affording the Veteran a VA examination when one is required, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error in this case, for which remand is necessary.

Eye Disabilities

In February 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his eyes. The examiner noted that the Veteran has dry eye syndrome and myopia. The examiner opined that "the claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression during service by an in-service injury, event, or illness." The examiner further stated, "Rationale is that retractive error is a non-ratable developmental disorder, and the DES was not located in the supplied STRs."

The Board notes that this opinion is inadequate and cannot be used to make a well-informed decision on the Veteran's claim. Notably, while stating that the Veteran has both dry eye syndrome and myopia, the examiner did not specify which one of those conditions clearly and unmistakably pre-existed service. Also, the STRs reveal diagnoses of dry eye syndrome, bilateral myopia, and bilateral astigmatism; however, the examiner did not address the diagnosis of bilateral astigmatism.  

Further, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement on the Report of Medical History associated with his enlistment examination in May 2017, that he has "bad vision and had to get glasses in 2013." However, the Veteran underwent several eye examinations in service, with some showing normal findings, and others showing abnormal findings. At separation, he reported "loss of vision in either eye," as documented on the Report of Medical History in December 2019. The Veteran also explained that both of his eyes "are getting worse and worse from sun, bright light, and flash exposer in the military." See January 2023 Claim. The evidence seems to indicate that the Veteran's eye condition may have worsened (or been aggravated) in service, contrary to the conclusion of the VA examiner. As such, another VA examination is necessary for clarification. See Barr, supra; see also Nieves-Rodriguez, supra.

The Board also notes that "congenital or developmental defects, to include refractive error of the eye... are not diseases or injuries within the meaning of applicable legislation." See Cork v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 401, 406 (2006); Winn v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 510, 516 (1996); VAOPGCPREC 82-90; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (c), 4.9. VA's General Counsel has explained that there is a distinction between a congenital or developmental "disease" and a congenital "defect" for service connection purposes, stating that diseases are capable of improving or deteriorating whereas defects are stationary in nature. See VAOPGCPREC 82-90. Determining if a veteran's disability is a congenital defect or disease, is a medical question. Id. 

However, congenital diseases may be recognized as service-connected if the evidence reveals aggravation in service within the meaning of VA regulations. 38 C.F.R. § 3.306. Moreover, although congenital or developmental defects are not service connectable, service connection may be granted for additional disability due to disease or injury superimposed upon a defect during service. VAOPGCPREC 82-90.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for appropriate VA examinations to determine the nature and etiologies of any right shoulder and left knee disability, to include pain. The examiner should review the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and indicate such on the examination report. Any testing deemed necessary should be conducted, and the results should be noted in the examination report. All relevant right shoulder and left knee pathology shown on examination should be annotated in the examination report. 

After review of the claims file, and an interview with, and examination of, the Veteran, the examiner is asked to:

a.	Identify and diagnose any right shoulder disability, to include right shoulder pain, that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.

If the examiner finds there to be no pathology to attribute the Veteran's right shoulder symptomatology, to include pain, the examiner should address the functional effects or limitations of the Veteran's right shoulder pain, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity.

b.	Identify and diagnose any left knee disability, to include left knee pain, that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.

If the examiner finds there to be no pathology to attribute the Veteran's left knee symptomatology, to include pain, the examiner should address the functional effects or limitations of the Veteran's left knee pain, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity.

c.	Then, as to each diagnosed right shoulder disability, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity, indicate whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include complaints of right shoulder pain and a diagnosis of "other instability, right shoulder" documented in the Veteran's service treatment records.

d.	Also, as to each diagnosed left knee disability, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity, indicate whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include complaints of left knee pain documented in the Veteran's service treatment records.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. These reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the clinician finds any medical reason to reject the lay reports, then an explanation must be provided.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why.

2. Also, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his eye disabilities. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this Remand, and note such review on the examination report. All appropriate tests and studies must be conducted, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following:

a.	Identify and diagnose any eye disability that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.

b.	For each diagnosed eye condition, state whether the diagnosis is a congenital disease or defect, as those terms are understood within the context of VA benefits?

i.	If the diagnosis is a congenital disease, did the condition clearly and unmistakably pre-exist the Veteran's service?

ii.	If the diagnosis clearly and unmistakably pre-existed service, was it clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service?

iii.	If the diagnosis is a congenital defect, was it subject to a superimposed injury during the Veteran's period of service?

iv.	If the diagnosis is found to not have clearly and unmistakably pre-existed active service, opine whether any of the diagnoses noted in (a.) was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

The examiner must address the Veteran's reports that his eyes "are getting worse and worse from sun, bright light, and flash exposer in the military".

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. These reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the clinician finds any medical reason to reject the lay reports, then an explanation must be provided.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.