Citation Nr: A25031538
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 200724-101052
DATE: April 4, 2025

ISSUES

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative disc disease L5-S1 ("back disability").

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for headaches.

REMAND ORDERS

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for back disability is REMANDED.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for headaches is REMANDED.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1989 to July 1999. The matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2020 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the July 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2020 RO decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran appealed a March 2024 Board decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims ("Court"). The parties filed a Joint Motion for Partial Remand in which they agreed that the Board decision should be partially vacated and remanded for further action by the Board. The specific directives are discussed in further detail below.

REASONS FOR THE REMAND

As discussed below, the Board finds that there are pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors in this case, and that VA examinations and opinions are required, on remand, to cure the errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The law establishing the modernized review system abrogated the Secretary's duty to assist for cases on appeal to the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e)(2). But the duty to assist remains in full force when a claim is before the RO for adjudication. Id. § 5103A(e)(1). And if the Board identifies a duty-to-assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the decision on appeal, it must remand the matter to the RO to cure the error. Id. § 5103A(f)(2)(A).

Analysis-Back Disability

The Veteran contends that his service-connected back disability manifested in symptoms that require a disability rating greater than 20 percent for the period on appeal.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2020 in which he reported "lower back pain described as throbbing, shooting that radiates to both lower extremities causing numbness and tingling." Regarding flare ups, the Veteran reported "unbearable pain that sharp, shooting in his lower back. He has limited [range of motion] and finds it difficult to perform get in and out of his car and sit for prolonged periods" (alteration added). While the examiner did note that the Veteran reported pain, the examiner stated the Veteran's pain during flare ups "does not result in / cause functional loss."

When this claim was before the Board in March 2024, the Board found the VA examination "adequate for review and entitled to substantial weight" because it determined that the examiner "t[ook] into consideration functional loss or impairment, flareups, and repetitive use." However, as the parties agreed in the October 2024 Joint Motion for Partial Remand, the Board "failed to address the inconsistencies in the [VA] examiner's findings regarding functional loss and whether the examiner adequately assessed functional loss in accordance with DeLuca v.  Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206 (1995)" (alteration added). The parties also agreed that "the Board's statement of reasons or bases failed to adequately address whether Appellant's pain leads to functional loss, and whether the reported symptoms result in the functional equivalent of ankylosis in accordance with Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 12 (2021)." 

In evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, it is necessary to consider, along with the schedular criteria, functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, and weakness. DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. at 202. Limitation of motion of a joint can result in functional loss so severe that it is equivalent to ankylosis. Chavis, 34 Vet. App. at 12 (2021).

The question for the Board is whether deciding the claim without obtaining a VA examination that comports with the requirements of DeLuca and Chavis constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, for which the Board must remand the claim to cure. Accordingly, the locus of the inquiry is on what was before the RO at the time of the decision on appeal.

Here, the June 2020 VA examination does not sufficiently address the Veteran's statements regarding functional loss when experiencing flare ups. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).

 Further, while actual ankylosis was not noted in the evidence, the Veteran reported "aching, sharp, shooting low back pain that makes it difficult to move" that sometimes required "his wife had to assist him out of the car [due to] debilitating low back pain" (alteration added). However, the examiner failed to discuss whether these symptoms amounted to the functional equivalent of ankylosis, such that a separate rating would be warranted. See June 2020 VA Examination; Chavis, 34 Vet. App. 12. 

For the reasons set forth above, based only on the evidence of the record at the time the RO issued the rating decision on appeal, the Board concludes a VA examination in accord with the caselaw should have been afforded prior to a decision being made on this claim. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought). 

The Board concludes that the error must be cured, on remand, by affording the Veteran an examination that comports with the requirements of DeLuca and Chavis, as outlined below.

Analysis-Headaches

The Veteran contends that his service-connected headaches manifested in symptoms that require a disability rating greater than 30 percent for the period on appeal.

The record includes a headache diary dated December 11, 2019, to January 7, 2020, which documents headaches varying in intensity between four and eight on a scale of one-to-ten, with ten being the most severe. The Veteran rated six headaches as a 4, nine headaches as a 5, three headaches as a 6, and one headache as an 8.  The headaches rated between 4 to 6 lasted two to six hours; the headache rated 8 lasted eleven hours.

The record also includes a January 2020 Disability Benefits Questionnaire completed by a non-VA medical provider.  The Veteran reported that his headaches had worsened, and that the duration of typical head pain was less than a day.  The medical provider indicated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain; did not have very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine headache pain; and did not have very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain. The medical provider noted, however, that the Veteran's headaches have caused him to miss work.

In April 2020, a VA examiner completed a records review in conjunction with a telephone interview with the Veteran. The Veteran reported that his headaches had progressed with increased frequency such that he was experiencing chronic headaches with multiple flare ups per week; he also reported taking medication to manage his headaches. According to the Veteran, his headaches manifested in constant, stabbing headache pain on both sides of his head that worsened with physical activity and lasted approximately two hours to a day. He also described symptoms of photosensitivity, vision changes, and general weakness. 

When discussing frequency, the VA examiner noted the Veteran's headaches manifested as prostrating attacks over the last several months "with less frequent attacks." The VA examiner did not provide further detail about frequency or the meaning of the phrase "with less frequent attacks." Further, despite noting that the Veteran is unemployed, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's headaches did not manifest as "very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine and non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability." The examiner did not clarify or provide context regarding these seemingly contradictory facts.

When this claim was before the Board in March 2024, the Board found "the VA examinations and opinions, the headache diary, and the non-VA medical provider's examination and opinion are all consistent . . . and indicate that the Veteran's headaches lacked the requisite frequency (at least greater than once a month), did not render him entirely powerless, and were not productive of severe economic inadaptability." However, the parties agreed in the Joint Motion for Partial Remand that on remand "the Board's statement of reasons or bases should adequately address all symptoms in its application of the rating criteria, in accordance with Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 72-73 (2020)."

Diagnostic Code 8100, which outlines the rating criteria for migraine headaches, contemplates more than just headache symptoms and requires that the Board consider all the symptoms the veteran experiences because of migraine attacks, and then rate those symptoms based on the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of the attacks. Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 73 (2020). Thus, symptoms other than headaches, such as various non-headache symptoms like dizziness, nausea, vertigo, mood swings, sleep impairment, etc., are adequately contemplated by the migraine headache rating criteria. Id. at 73.

The question for the Board is whether deciding the claim without properly considering the Veteran's non-headache symptoms constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, for which the Board must remand the claim to cure. Accordingly, the locus of the inquiry is on what was before the RO at the time of the decision on appeal.

As noted above, the April 2020 VA examiner found that the Veteran's prostrating attacks manifested "with less frequent attacks," and that that the Veteran's headaches manifested as very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine and non-migraine pain not productive of severe economic inadaptability despite his unemployment. 

In providing this opinion, the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's statements that he experienced headaches with photosensitivity, vision changes, and general weakness approximately three times per week, or whether the frequency, duration, or severity of these headaches resulted in the Veteran's unemployment. 

The RO did not seek clarification from the examiner regarding these details. As such, the Board does not have sufficient detail to interpret the April 2020 VA examiner's findings, and it is unable to fulfil the remand directives of the Court without an adequate examination.

Because the RO failed to obtain an adequate examination before adjudicating the claim, it failed to fulfill its duty to assist, and a remand for a new VA examination is warranted. See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311-12.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of his service-connected back disability for the period on appeal. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluation.

The examiner is reminded to consider the Veteran's lay statements, including those about functional impairment, when providing the addendum opinion. The examiner should also provide an opinion on whether any of the Veteran's symptoms amounted to the functional equivalent of ankylosis, such that a separate rating would be warranted

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

2. Request an addendum opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected headaches for the period on appeal. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluation.

The examiner is reminded to consider the Veteran's lay statements, including those about frequency of prostrating attacks, when providing the addendum opinion. The examiner should also clarify whether the Veteran's prostrating headaches resulted in his unemployment during the period on appeal

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinions in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.P. Blackburn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.