Citation Nr: A25031608
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452864
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 60 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent for headaches is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From October 2, 2020, the Veteran's GERD and IBS symptoms have been manifested with other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

2. From October 2, 2020, the Veteran's headache symptoms have been manifested with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating of 60 percent for GERD and IBS have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Codes 7319-7346 (May 21, 2001).    

2. From October 2, 2020, the criteria for entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent for headaches have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty with the Army from June 2000 to February 2015, to include meritorious service in Afghanistan.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an August 2023 rating decision.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2023 rating decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  The AMA Direct Review does not allow submission of any additional evidence in support of an appeal.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed as of the August 2023 rating decision.  Therefore, the Board has only considered the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the August 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

In rating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the higher rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time, based on the facts found.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App.  505 (2007).  A claim for increased rating remains in controversy when less than the maximum available benefit is awarded AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35 (1993).  Reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 60 percent for GERD and IBS

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 60 percent rating for his GERD and IBS as his symptoms are productive of severe impairment of health.  See Third Party Correspondence, February 2022.  

The Veteran's GERD and IBS are currently rated 10 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Codes 7319-7346.  The Board notes that hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the rating assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  The hyphenated disability will be rated by analogy under a diagnostic code for a closely related disability that affects the same anatomical functions and has closely analogous symptomatology.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27.  Moreover, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, "[a] single evaluation will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation."

Here, the Board finds that Diagnostic Code 7346, hiatal hernia, reflects that predominant disability picture for the combined symptoms of the Veteran's GERD and IBS.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  It is also significant to note that Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia allows for a maximum 60 percent schedular rating while Diagnostic Code 7319 for irritable colon syndrome only allows for a maximum 30 percent schedular rating.  Id.    

Under Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia, a 10 percent rating is warranted with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  Id.

The Rating Schedule does not define "considerable" or "severe" impairment of health."  In the absence of an express definition, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words using their ordinary dictionary meanings at the time the regulations were promulgated.  See Nielson v. Shinseki, 607 F.3d 802, 805-06 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  The Board further finds that these terms are unambiguous and, therefore, a plain dictionary meaning is an appropriate definition.  See Kisor v. Wilkie, 139 S. Ct. 2400, 2415 (2019).  "Considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree."  Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/considerable (last visited April 1, 2025).  "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful."  Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe (last visited April 1, 2025).  The Board further finds that that rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence for "equitable and just decisions."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

The rating criteria for the digestive system were amended effective May 19, 2024.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: The Digestive System, 89 Fed. Reg. 19735 (Mar. 20, 2024).  However, the Board will not apply the amended criteria because "the case law is clear that a regulation is not to be applied retroactively unless the regulation is intended to be retroactive."  Ervin v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 318, 322 (2011) (citing Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F. 3d 1327, 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2003)).  As there is no indication in the Supplementary Information to the Final Rule or elsewhere that the amendments were intended to be retroactive, and the evidence window in this case ends prior to May 19, 2024, assigning a rating based on the amended criteria would result in impermissibly applying the criteria retroactively because such application could only be based on evidence added after the evidence window closed.

The evidence relevant to the severity of the Veteran's GERD and IBS includes VA examinations and the Veteran's statements.  

The Veteran was afforded an Intestinal Conditions Disability and Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) in February 2021.  The Veteran was diagnosed with IBS and reported experiencing diarrhea four days out of the week accompanied by flares up with anxiety.  He also reported experiencing severe cramping, constipation, bloating, gas, and an urge to use the bathroom.  The Veteran stated that he plans his day around use of the bathroom.  The examiner determined that the Veteran uses continuous medication to control his symptoms.  The examiner also determined that the Veteran's IBS is manifested by frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.  The DBQ also indicated that the Veteran has weight loss attributable to his intestinal condition with a baseline weight of 255 pounds (lbs.) and a current weight of 225 lbs.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's IBS impacts his ability to work as the Veteran reported losing 1 to 2 weeks of work in the past 12 months due to symptoms of his condition.  The Veteran reported that he has to go to bathroom constantly throughout the day which affects his work, and he experiences constipation that makes it hard to concentrate.  

The Veteran was also afforded an Esophageal Conditions DBQ in February 2021 where he reported experiencing moderate to mild acid reflux once or twice per day and at night, regurgitation that causes choking which happens twice a week, nausea, and a feeling like something is in his throat.  His current symptoms of GERD include regurgitation, heart burn, and acid reflux.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's GERD requires continuous medication as the Veteran takes over-the-counter Prilosec and Tums.  However, the examiner opined that the Veteran did not have esophageal stricture or any signs or symptoms attributable to an esophageal condition.  To conclude the examination report, the examiner did opine that the Veteran's claimed esophageal condition impacts his ability to work as he reported losing 2 to 4 weeks of work in the past 12 months due to difficulty sleeping at night which made it harder to concentrate and focus on work and resulted in daytime fatigue.   

In an August 2021 private medical evaluation completed by G.U., APRN, she determined that the Veteran has a diagnosis of GERD manifested by symptoms including pyrosis, regurgitation of food from the stomach up into the esophagus, dysphagia, substernal, pain, emesis, and nausea.  

The Veteran was again afforded an Esophageal Conditions DBQ in June 2023 where he was diagnosed with GERD and reported experiencing heartburn and belching nearly every evening prior to bedtime.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's take continuous medication, antacids, for his GERD and has symptoms of pyrosis and regurgitation attributable to his GERD.  However, the examiner opined that the condition does not impact his ability to work.  

Throughout the review period, the Veteran has provided several statements regarding his GERD and IBS symptoms and how they impact his ability to function in daily life.  

In an October 2020 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran reported experiencing multiple symptoms of GERD on a weekly basis including heartburn, acid reflux, difficulty swallowing, a feeling of food coming back up into the throat, regurgitation, nausea, and vomiting.  He stated that he must use Tums and Rolaids two to three times per week to control his severe heartburn, and that he also must avoid certain foods, large meals, eating late in the day or at night, or lying down soon after eating otherwise his regurgitation is worse.  The Veteran also reported experiencing chest pain when his GERD is flaring up.  He stated that his sleep habits are affected by his current symptoms of GERD and that he requires multiple pillows to prop his head up to fall asleep.  He further reported that he is not able to sleep more than four straight hours due to being awakened from his symptoms, and his lack of sleep results in daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, irritability, depressed mood, frequent yawning, difficulty concentrating, weight gain, memory issues, and speech issues.  The Veteran stated that his GERD symptoms have had a profound effect on his life and overall health and well-being.

As for his IBS, in a separate October 2020 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran reported experiencing diarrhea every few days when having an episode.  He reported needing to use the restroom four times in single day.  He also reported that he is not always able to control the timing of bowel movements.  Other symptoms associated with his IBS include abdominal pain, cramping, bloating, and constipation.  To avoid flare-ups, the Veteran alters or restricts his diet and tries to minimize his stress level.  The Veteran stated that he treats hiss IBS with probiotics, glutamine, ginger, and supplements.  The Veteran reported that his IBS hinders and restricts him from going out in public, feeling comfortable work, traveling, enjoying social events, or participating in recreational activities whenever a restroom is not easily accessible.  He also stated that he feels the constant need to be near a restroom.

After careful consideration of the evidence and resolving any doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms of his IBS and GERD are more nearly approximate to a 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7346 throughout the review period.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R.§ 4.3.  

The VA examinations and lay statements revealed that the Veteran's IBS is manifested by symptoms of frequent episodes of diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramping, bloating, constipation, and weight loss.  In the October 2020 statement, the Veteran stated that his IBS hinders and restricts his ability to engage in ordinary activities of daily life due to a constant feeling of having to use the restroom.  Furthermore, the February 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's IBS impacts his ability to his work as he lost one to two weeks of work in the past 12 months due to having to go the restroom constantly and an inability to concentrate.  

As for the Veteran's GERD, VA examinations, the private medical evaluation, and lay statements revealed that his condition is manifested by daily symptoms of regurgitation, nausea, heartburn, acid reflux, pyrosis, dysphagia, substernal pain, and emesis.  In the October 2020 statement, the Veteran asserted that he has difficulty sleeping due to his GERD which impacts his ability to function and work during the day.  He stated that his daytime fatigue results in trouble thinking, mood changes, irritability, depressed mood, frequent yawning, difficulty concentrating, weight gain, and memory issues, and speech issues, and severely impacts his overall health and well-being.  Moreover, the February 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD impacts his ability to work as he lost two to four weeks in the last 12-month period because of his inability to concentrate and focus at work.  

The Board finds that the combination of the Veteran's IBS and GERD symptoms are productive of severe impairment of health due to the severity, frequency, and duration of the associated symptoms, and further finds that the combination of associated symptoms are more nearly approximate to a 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7346.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  

Although the VA examiners determined that the Veteran's IBS and GERD were   not productive of severe impairment of health, the Veteran has credibly contended that his IBS and GERD symptoms have a profound effect on his life and overall health and well-being and have resulted in difficulties with his employment due to needing to use the restroom constantly and daytime fatigue.  The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report his observable symptoms, and that his statements offering details regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of his symptoms are more probative than the opinions of the VA examiners with regard to evaluating the disability on appeal.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-470 (1994) ("Competent testimony is thus limited to that which the witness has actually observed, and is within the realm of his personal knowledge.")    

The Board has also considered that the Veteran takes continuous medication for his GERD and IBS, that medication is not contemplated by either Diagnostic Code 7319 or Diagnostic Code 7346, and that "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria."  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

Accordingly, an initial 60 percent rating for GERD and IBS is warranted throughout the review period and is thereby granted from October 2, 2020.  This is the maximum schedular rating allowed under the pre-amended version of Diagnostic Code 7346, and there is no potentially applicable diagnostic code that would warrant a higher rating.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent for headaches

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 50 percent rating for his service-connected headaches.  See Supplemental Claim Application, February 2022.   

The Veteran's migraine headaches are currently evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.214a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months.  A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted for very frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  

The rating criteria of Diagnostic Code 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30?Vet. App.?245, 252 (2018).  This renders 38?C.F.R. §§?4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

Additionally, prostrating means "causing extreme exhaustion, powerlessness, debilitation or incapacitation with substantial inability to engage in ordinary activities."  Completely prostrating means extreme exhaustion or powerlessness with essentially total inability to engage in ordinary activities.  See VA Adjudication Manual, M21-1MR, Part III, Subpart iv, Chapter 4, Section N, Topic 7, Block b.  Although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, it is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 and conduct its own analysis before determining whether the M21-1 provisions may be relied upon to support its decision, thereby fulfilling part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases for its decision.  See Overton v. Willkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263-64 (2018).

In Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) decided that "the phrase 'characteristic prostrating attacks' plainly describes migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality."  

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46 (2004).

In Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020), the Court held that Diagnostic Code 8100 contemplates all migraine symptoms.  Therefore, to evaluate migraines under Diagnostic Code 8100, VA must consider all symptoms experienced due to migraine attacks and then rate the symptoms based on the frequency, duration, and economic impact of those attacks.  The Court commented that this analysis is similar to that used to assign ratings for psychiatric disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Evidence relevant to the severity of the Veteran's headaches includes VA examinations and lay statements.

During a February 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported experiencing pain on both sides of his face with noise and light sensitivity.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches are manifested by pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain localized to one side of the head.  Other non-headache pain symptoms associated with his headaches include nausea, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's symptoms last less than one day and are located on the right side of the head.  The examiner opined that the Veteran does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain, but did determine that his headaches impact his ability to work.  The examiner noted that the Veteran lost two to four weeks of work in the last 12 months due to his condition and has difficulty concentrating with headaches.  

Another VA examination was obtained in June 2023.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that every few months, he gets an attack of headaches on the right side of his head with nausea and sensitivity to light.  He reported that he treats his attacks with paracetamol.  The examiner determined that symptoms associated with his headaches include constant pain and pain localized on one side of the head.  Non-headache pain symptoms include nausea and sensitivity to light.  The examiner determined that the headaches last less than one day and are located on the right side of the Veteran's head.  The examiner again opined that the Veteran does not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain, but did determine that the Veteran's headaches impact his ability to concentrate at work when he has an attack.  

In an October 2020 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated that gets headaches three to four times per week and they occur at various times during the day.  He reported that his headache pain generally occurs around the temple region, on both the right and left side of head, the front of his head, and on his forehead.  The Veteran stated that his headaches can last for varying amounts of time depending upon the severity, and at least a couple of times per month his headaches knock him out of commission to the point that he is totally incapacitated and bedridden for two to four hours.  During headaches, the Veteran experiences radiating pain, a hot sensation on his head, noise and light sensitivity, vertigo, dizziness, and throbbing pain.  The Veteran further reported that his symptoms are worse when he is anxious or depressed or his neck is sore.  After a night of not sleeping well, his headaches tend to be more severe.  He stated that he uses Tylenol to treat his headaches.  The Veteran also stated that he has missed events and activities due to his headaches because they render him unable to function at all during the time of headaches.  Additionally, he reported that in the last 12 months, he has missed almost a week of work.

After careful consideration of the evidence and resolving any doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence supports finding that the Veteran experienced very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability throughout the review period, warranting an initial evaluation of 50 percent under Diagnostic Code 8100 from October 2, 2020.  

Although the February 2021 and June 2023 VA examiners determined that the Veteran's headaches were not characteristic of prostrating attacks, in the October 2020 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran competently and credibly stated that when he has headache attacks, he is left "totally incapacitated and bedridden for 2 to 4 hours."  See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469-70.  Moreover, the VA examiners opined that the Veteran's headaches do impact his ability to work as he has difficulty concentrating during his headache attacks.  The Board finds that the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's headaches are capable of producing severe economic inadaptability as his headaches are capable of limiting his ability to work as they leave him totally incapacitated.  Pierce, 18 Vet. App. At 445-46.  Additionally, the evidence supports finding that the Veteran's headaches are "very frequent" and "prolonged" to warrant a 50 percent rating as they occur at least weekly and last two to four hours.  Accordingly, entitlement to an initial increased rating of 50 percent for headaches is granted.

(Continued on the next page)

?

   

The Board notes that the Veteran is now in receipt of a 50 percent rating for his headaches, which is the highest schedular rating available under Diagnostic Code 8100.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.