Citation Nr: A25031621
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-421021
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee impairment is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for focal barbae is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder impairment is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to compensable rating for bilateral anterior blepharitis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus is at least as likely as not related to his active duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1131 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service in the United States Navy from November 2006 to November 2011 and Naval Reserve service from November 2011 to October 2014.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019. 38C.F.R. §19.2.

The AMA modernized review system applies to all claims for which VA issues a notice of an initial decision on or after the February 19, 2019, effective date of the modernized review system. The AMA may also apply to claims where the claimant has elected review of a legacy claim under the modernized review system. 38C.F.R. §§3.2400, 19.2.

The Veteran's February 2024 VA Form 10182 appeals a February 2024 rating decision. The Veteran selected the Direct Review option; thus, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131 ; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). To establish entitlement to service-connected compensation benefits, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement." Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that "[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional." Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) ("[T]he Board cannot determine that lay evidence lacks credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence").

Service connection must be considered on the basis of the places, types, and circumstances of his service as shown by his service records, the official history of each organization in which he served, his medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; and Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran has asserted that he has tinnitus as a result of acoustic trauma sustained while in active service. The Veteran contends that he was exposed to hazardous noise in the form of engine noise in service. The Veteran is competent to report an occurrence of in-service acoustic trauma. The Board notes that the Veteran's Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) was Maintenance Technician; this MOS would expose the Veteran to hazardous levels of noise. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has presented sufficient evidence showing that there was an acoustic trauma in service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a)

Regarding a nexus between the events in service and his current tinnitus, the Board notes that in a May 2023 VA examination the VA examiner provided a negative opinion. However, the examiner did not take into account the Veteran's January 2023 statement that his tinnitus began in service and continued thereafter.

The Board notes that lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. In fact, competent medical evidence is not necessarily required when the determinative issue involves either medical etiology or a medical diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The Veteran is competent to identify tinnitus, and his statements have been found credible. An in-service incurrence of tinnitus is thus established.

Considering the evidence in the totality the Board finds that the question of whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to his in-service acoustic trauma is approximately balanced, and as such, the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5107 apply. Consequently, giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that a nexus is established. See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee impairment is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for focal barbae is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder impairment is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for migraine is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss remains denied. is remanded.

10. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability is remanded.

11. Entitlement to compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

12. Entitlement to compensable rating for bilateral anterior blepharitis is remanded.

Upon review of the claims file the Board has found that a pre-decisional error occurred in that pertinent known service treatment records and social security administration medical records were not obtained in accordance with VA's duty to assist. Additionally, the VA did not notify the Veteran that private medical records he identified were not obtained. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Before adjudication can proceed with the above claims these pre-decisional error should be rectified.

The Veteran's service treatment records from his Reserve service were not collected an associated with the claims file in accordance with VA duty to assist. While the Veteran has detailed Reserve service from November 2011 to October 2014 and there are personnel files to corroborate his claim, the Veteran's service treatment records for this period are limited to a handful of mainly dental records from 2014.

The Board also notes that there is evidence of Social Security Administration documents, and the claims file contains no evidence of any effort to obtain these documents. Namely, the claims file contains a January 19, 2023 correspondence from an Attorney who is representing the Veteran before the Social Security Administration. Importantly, VA's duty to assist the Veteran particularly applies to relevant evidence known to be in the possession of the Federal Government, such as Social Security records. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(2). Therefore, because the records from the SSA may contain pertinent information to all the Veteran's claims, VA is obligated to obtain them

The Veteran identified private treatment records which he thought worthwhile for the VA to review in support of his claims, the AOJ did not collect these identified records and did not notify the Veteran of the records he identified, but were not collected; thus, depriving him with the opportunity to acquire the records himself or further direct the private medical record holder. 

Specifically, the Veteran in an August 2022 "Authorization for Release of Information" identified a private medical care provider and date of treatment from June 2020 to August 2020. However, VA was not able to collect these records after multiple attempts as documented in an October 2022 Report of General Information. Importantly, the VA did not notify the Veteran that records were not collected from this provider. The last correspondence the Veteran received regarding the collection of this evidence was from September 2022 wherein VA informed him that they would make additional attempts to obtain the records.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request from the appropriate institutions or agencies or other source(s) a copy of the Veteran's complete service personnel records, and any other records necessary to verify all dates of active-duty service, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA. Follow the procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c) with regard to requesting records from Federal facilities.

Of particular interest is the Veteran identified Reserve service from November 2011 to October 2014.

All records and/or responses received should be associated with the claims file.

Thereafter, prepare a report for the record specifying verified periods of active-duty service, ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA.

2. Request from SSA all of the records related to the Veteran's claim for SSA disability benefits, including medical records and copies of any decisions or adjudication, and associate them with the claims folder. All negative responses should be properly documented in the claims file, to include preparing a memorandum of unavailability and following the procedures outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (e), if appropriate.

3. Contact the Veteran and request that he identify the names, addresses, and approximate dates of treatment for all VA and non-VA health care providers who have treated him for his disabilities. The Veteran should be requested to sign any necessary authorization for release of medical records to VA, and appropriate steps should be made to obtain any identified records.

In particular, the Board is interested in private medical records the Veteran identified in his August 2022 "Authorization for Release of Information" from his private medical provider June 2020 to August 2020.

If any requested records are not available, or the search for any such records otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file. If the records are unavailable, notify the Veteran in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

4. After completing the above action, and any other development as may be indicated by any response received as a consequence of the actions taken; re-adjudicate the claims.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Acosta, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.