Citation Nr: A25031037
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-468734
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's bilateral hearing loss did not begin during active service or within one year of service, nor does the evidence show that the symptoms have continued since service or that it is otherwise causally related to military service.

2. The Veteran's tinnitus did not begin during active service or within one year of service, nor does the evidence show that the symptoms have continued since service or that it is otherwise causally related to military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1955 through November 1958 in the United States Air Force.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.? 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement: VA Form 10182 and selected the hearing docket. In December 2024, the Veteran testified before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge. A transcript of that hearing is of record.? 

Given the Veteran's Hearing Docket selection, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the July 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his representative, at the Board hearing or within 90 days following the Board hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the August 2024 rating decision was issued and prior to the December 2024 Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the date of the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302, 20.801.?? 

Service Connection

Legal Criteria 

VA provides compensation for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. This is referred to as "service connection." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).??? 

Direct Service Connection

Generally, in order to be entitled to service connection there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12?Vet. App.?341 (1999). When these elements are satisfied, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.?? 

Presumptive Service Connection

Certain disabilities, such as organic diseases of the nervous system, which presumably includes sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus, are presumed to be service connected if manifested to a compensable degree within one year following separation from service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

Secondary Service Connection

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to or the result of, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) a current disability exists, (2) the Veteran has a service-connected disability; and (3) the current disability was either (a) caused by; or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). Recently, in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals held 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. Therefore, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause (or aggravating factor), not the contributing cause (or aggravating factor), to establish secondary service connection. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Legal Criteria

For the purposes of applying the laws administered by VA, impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz (Hz) is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

Factual Background

A January 1954 entrance examination reveals that the Veteran's audiogram results were not reported.

A March 1957 audiogram indicates pure tone thresholds, in decibels, as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	 10	0	0	X	5

LEFT	5	0	5	X	0

However, the Board notes that the March 1957 hearing conservation audiological results do not indicate whether they were recorded using the American Standards Association (ASA) units or those issued by the International Standards Organization-American National Standards Institute (ISO-ANSI). However, since the audiogram was performed prior to January 1, 1967, the Board will presume it was recorded in ASA units. For service department audiograms which use the ASA standards, the Board will convert those standards to the ISO-ANSI units using the following guidelines: 

Hertz 	500 	1000 	2000 	3000 	4000 

Add 	15 	10 	10 	10 	5 

Thus, using the above ISO-ANSI guidelines, the Veteran's converted results for the March 1957 audiogram are as follows: 

	500 Hertz 	1000 Hertz 	2000 Hertz 	3000 Hertz 	4000 Hertz 

Right 	25 	10 	10 	X 	10

Left 	20	10 	15	X 	5

A November 1958 separation examination audiogram indicates pure tone thresholds, in decibels, as follows:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	0	0	0	0	0

LEFT	0	0	10	0	0

As with the March 1957 audiogram, the November 1958 separation audiogram is presumed to be in ASA units and will be converted to ANSI-ISO units using the conversion table. The Veteran's converted results for the November 1958 audiogram are as follows:

	500 Hertz 	1000 Hertz 	2000 Hertz 	3000 Hertz 	4000 Hertz 

Right 	15 	10 	10 	10	5

Left 	15	10 	20	10	5

The Veteran's VA treatment records show an April 2012 audiogram with the following pure tone thresholds, in decibels:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	65	55	70	X	85

LEFT	55	65	70	X	90

Post-service records include an April 2012 record in which an audiologist noted the Veteran reported difficulty hearing when more than one person is speaking and having to turn the TV up loudly to hear. He also reported hearing difficulties for "quite a while." The Veteran also indicated post-service noise exposure at his occupation working on machinery. The audiologist further noted that the Veteran denied having previously used hearing aids. Additionally, the pure tone threshold results were judged as being of "fair" reliability due to slightly elevated pure tone average in comparison to the Veteran's speech reception threshold, despite reinstruction.

In May 2012 the Veteran was seen by the VA audiology clinic where he was fitted for hearing aids. The audiologist noted that the Veteran was a new aid user and was being issued binaural hearing aids.

In October 2013 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus. The examiner found that the results of the audiogram were not valid for rating purposes due to the unreliability of the results. The examiner noted that the responses were inconsistent despite reinstruction and that the Veteran's speech reception thresholds were significantly better than the pure tone averages.

A January 2016 private medical record indicates that the Veteran denied hearing loss issues at the time of his visit.

A May 2017 private medical record indicates that the Veteran denied hearing difficulty at the time of his visit.

A January 2019 VA Audiology note reveals that the Veteran had lost his hearing aids approximately 3 years prior and was being tested for new aids. The audiologist noted that amplification devices were not recommended at that time due the Veteran's test results being borderline for hearing acuity and that his hearing difficulty is mostly in groups or background noises which aids do not help with. Additionally, it was noted that the Veteran had no difficulty carrying on a conversation at normal levels that day. The audiologist also noted that hearing aids were not being recommended due to the Veteran not using the previous ones consistently and having lost them 3 years prior without attempting to get new ones.

In August 2019 the Veteran was seen by his VA provider for a follow up visit. At this time the provider noted that the Veteran was having a difficult time hearing during the visit and the provider advised the Veteran to obtain another audiology appointment. The Veteran "adamantly declined" an audiology appointment.

A February 2020 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran again declined an audiology assessment.

A June 2021 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran stated he had been wearing hearing aids for 20 years previously but was told his hearing was within normal limits at his last audiology appointment. The provider indicated that the Veteran appeared to have difficult hearing and recommended a follow-up with audiology, but the Veteran again declined.

An August 2021 VA treatment record indicates that an updated audiogram was again recommended but the Veteran declined and reported that he did not want a hearing test.

A November 2021 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran again refused to see the audiologist despite being recommended to do so. The Veteran indicated to the provider that his refusal to see audiology was a "long story and he does not want to get into it."

A July 2022 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran again declined to have an assessment done by audiology as he was upset and did not want to go there again.

A January 2023 statement from the Veteran's wife indicates that she has noticed issues with the Veteran's hearing for as long as she has known him. She indicates that since before they were married he has been hard of hearing. She also notes that he cannot hear sounds such as beeping from the smoke detectors when the batteries need to be replaced, the floors and doors squeaking, has to use a headset to hear over the phone, and has to have the TV volume up loud.

In March 2023 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus. The audiogram results indicate the following pure tone thresholds, in decibels:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	45	50	60	80	90

LEFT	50	55	70	80	85

The March 2023 audiologist noted the Veteran reported difficulty hearing when more than one person is speaking and having to turn the TV up loudly to hear. At this time, he denied post-service noise exposure despite indicating that he worked on machinery as an electrician after service for many years. The audiologist noted that the results from the pure tone threshold tests were not valid for rating purposes as they are inconsistent with organic hearing loss. The examiner further noted that the Veteran was difficult to test, and much time was spent in an attempt to obtain valid test results. Additionally, it was noted that the Veteran communicates in the clinic much better than the results suggest.

In July 2024 the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for hearing loss and tinnitus. The audiogram results indicate the following pure tone thresholds, in decibels:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	60	60	80	85	85

LEFT	45	55	75	80	80

In December 2024 the Veteran testified at a Board hearing regarding his bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. During his testimony, the Veteran went into great depth describing his military service and noise exposure. The Veteran also testified that he began experiencing hearing difficulties immediately upon his discharge. He noted that he could not understand conversations due to hearing difficulties when there was more than one person speaking. The Veteran also stated that he applied for a job with General Motors in the 1960's and was told he had a hearing problem when applying for that job. The Veteran testified that he was already wearing hearing aids, not given by the VA, in the 1960's due to his hearing issues. The Veteran also testified that he began wearing hearing aids sometime in the 1990's to early 2000's that had been issued by the VA.

In March 2025 the Veteran submitted a scientific article entitled "Does Exposure to Noise During Military Service Affect the Progression of Hearing Loss with Increasing Age." This article discusses the possible effect military noise exposure has on delayed onset hearing loss. The authors found that noise exposure during military service accelerates the progression of hearing loss for frequencies where hearing loss is absent or mild at the end of military service and occurs over a wide range of frequencies. Additionally, the authors note that further studies are necessary to determine whether exposure to other types of sounds, for example at rock concerts or from work in heavy industries, affects the progression of hearing loss.

Analysis

Direct Service Connection

The Veteran has met the first element of direct service connection, a current disability. The July 2024 rating decision identified a favorable finding for the diagnosis of a current disability, specifically bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Likewise, the Veteran has met the second element of direct service connection, an in-service event or injury. The July 2024 rating decision identified a favorable finding for in-service noise exposure due to the Veteran's MOS. The Board is also bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The remaining question for the Board is whether the Veteran has met the third element of direct service connection, a nexus between the in-service event and the current disability. For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that the Veteran has not met this element.

The July 2024 VA examiner provided an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's hearing loss was the result of military noise exposure. In support of this opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran's service treatment records show no indications of hearing loss while in service. The examiner went on to state that while the noise exposure has been conceded this does not automatically provide a nexus between the military noise exposure and the Veteran's current hearing loss. The examiner, though not specifically mentioning each piece of relevant evidence, noted that the Veteran's record had been reviewed. Additionally, the Veteran's lay statements regarding his noise exposure, the onset of the symptoms, and the statements from his wife were noted has having been reviewed and considered. The examiner also notes the Veteran's post-service noise exposure as a machinery repairman.

The Veteran's attorney argues, in the March 2025 brief submitted, that the opinion of the examiner is inadequate for failing to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his hearing loss. However, the examiner clearly notes the Veteran's statements and those contained within his wife's statement. The attorney further argues that the examiner disregarded the Veteran's statements by not opining on them. However, in the course of providing a medical opinion, examiners are not to opine on the credibility of a Veteran's lay statements but rather only offer an opinion as to whether there is a medical reason to accept or discount them. In this case, the examiner merely refrained from opining on whether the Veteran's statements as to the onset of his hearing loss were credible. As there is no mention of whether they should be discounted or not, the Board assumes there is no medical basis for which to either accept or discount them.

In the March 2025 scientific article submitted by the Veteran, it is argued that military noise exposure can accelerate hearing loss. While the Board finds this article to be informative on the issue at hand, it does not provide specific information relevant to the Veteran. The Board, on its own, cannot make a medical determination regarding the etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss based upon this research. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 1990. As this article does not speak directly to the facts of this particular Veteran's case, it does not provide an adequate nexus between the Veteran's hearing loss and his military service. While the Veteran's attorney argues that a remand is necessary based upon this theory of entitlement, the Board is constrained by applicable laws under which to remand. The article was submitted in March 2025, well after the rating decision on appeal was issued, and thus it would not be considered a pre-decisional duty to assist error on the part of the VA Regional Office to have not requested a medical opinion which considers it.

Thus, the Board finds the medical opinion of record to be adequate for adjudication purposes. Having found no link between the Veteran's current hearing loss and his military service, the third element of direct service connection has not been met.

Presumptive Service Connection

The Veteran's claim for service connection also raises an additional theory of entitlement, presumptive service connection pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

Bilateral sensorineural hearing loss presumably falls within the category of an "other organic disease of the nervous system" within the chronic diseases enumerated. Thus, the Veteran's claim is entitled to consideration under this theory as well.

In considering presumptive service connection for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss, the Board finds that service connection on this basis is not warranted. As discussed above, the Veteran's hearing loss did not manifest while in service or within the one-year presumptive period following service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. As hearing loss and/or tinnitus were not noted in service and characteristic manifestations of the disease process were not identified or suspected, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) is not for application.  

While a layperson is generally able to describe symptoms of a disability that come to him through his senses, here the Board finds that such descriptions are not believable. To begin, the Veteran has asserted that his hearing loss has been ongoing since he left service. Further, the Veteran's wife has asserted that he has had difficulty with his hearing for as long as she has known him. However, neither the Veteran nor his wife are competent to diagnose the Veteran with a hearing loss disability for VA purposes. See Jandreau v Nicholson, 493 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence of laypersons to testify as to symptoms). While they are competent to state the symptoms being experienced, the VA uses medical evaluations to determine whether hearing loss has risen to the degree of a disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. Thus, without an audiological evaluation with reported pure tone thresholds, it cannot be determined whether the Veteran's difficulty hearing was a disability for VA purposes or not. Additionally, on many occasions the Veteran refused to have an audiological consult, which would have been beneficial for the VA to help determine when his hearing loss disability actually began and track the deterioration of said disability.

Further, the Board finds that the Veteran is not a particularly accurate historian. During his December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran stated that he had been wearing hearing aids on his own since the 1960's and that he had been issued aids from the VA between the years of the 1990's to early 2000's. However, during his May 2012 VA visit with the audiology clinic, he denied having previously used hearing aids and was considered a "new aid user." Additionally, during his April 2012, October 2013, and March 2023 VA appointments, the results of the Veteran's hearing evaluations were all judged to be either "fair" or entirely invalid. The examiner's all noted that the Veteran's hearing in the office and his speech reception threshold appeared higher than what the audiogram results were depicting. This raises the question as to the credibility of the Veteran's test results.

The Board also noted that in January 2016 and May 2017 private medical records the Veteran denied hearing difficulty at his appointments. During his January 2019 audiology visit with the VA, the Veteran's hearing was determined to be "borderline" as a candidate for hearing aids and he was recommended as not needing aids at that time.

Thus, reviewing all the evidence collectively, the Board notes a pattern of the Veteran's hearing declining and improving throughout the years, refusals to have audiograms performed, and statements regarding hearing aid usage which do not align with the evidence. 

For the reasons above, entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss on either a direct or presumptive basis are denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is denied.

Factual Background

A March 1957 service treatment record of hearing conservation data indicates that the Veteran was not experiencing symptoms of tinnitus at the time.

An April 2012 VA treatment note indicates that the Veteran denied tinnitus symptoms.

During an October 2013 VA examination the Veteran reported constant tinnitus. The examiner noted that the Veteran could not specify when it began but noted that it had been present for "a long time." During this examination, the VA examiner opined that the tinnitus was less likely than not due to military service as the Veteran had no complaints of tinnitus during service and had previously denied tinnitus symptoms in his April 2012 VA appointment.

In a September 2014 correspondence, the Veteran stated that when he was first asked about tinnitus, he was asked specifically whether he had a ringing in his ears, such as like a bell. The Veteran responded "no" to this because it did not sound like a bell. However, the Veteran notes that he went on to state that he did experience a buzzing or roaring noise in his hears during that same appointment.

A November 2014 VA treatment note indicates that the Veteran experienced tinnitus.

In a January 2016 private medical record, the Veteran denied experiencing tinnitus symptoms.

A March 2023 statement in support of claim from the Veteran's wife indicates that she recalls the Veteran making complaints about the noises in his ears and that the Veteran compared it to the roaring of the water while standing near Niagara Falls.

During the March 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported constant tinnitus. However, the Veteran could not specify when the tinnitus began and stated that it occurred gradually over time. The Veteran noted that it sounded like a humming in his ears which changes from time to time. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the tinnitus was related to military noise exposure due to the lack of complaints in service and the denial of tinnitus in the April 2012 appointment. At that time, due to the invalid results for the Veteran's hearing loss examination, the audiologist could not determine if the tinnitus was related to his hearing loss or another etiology.

During the July 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported constant tinnitus. The examiner noted that the Veteran was unable to narrow down exactly when it began but stated that he noticed it after service. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was caused by military service as he had denied tinnitus symptoms on three occasions post-service. Further, the examiner opined that it was more likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was due to his bilateral hearing loss as it is a known symptoms of hearing loss.

Analysis

Direct Service Connection

The Veteran has met the first element of direct service connection, a current disability. The July 2024 rating decision identified a favorable finding for the diagnosis of a current disability, specifically recurrent tinnitus. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Likewise, the Veteran has met the second element of direct service connection, an in-service event or injury. The July 2024 rating decision identified a favorable finding for in-service noise exposure due to the Veteran's MOS. The Board is also bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The remaining question for the Board is whether the Veteran has met the third element of direct service connection, a nexus between the in-service event and the current disability. For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that the Veteran has not met this element.

The July 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by military service. The rationale provided notes that the Veteran had denied tinnitus symptoms on more than one occasion post-service and thus a nexus could not be made between the in-service noise exposure and the current tinnitus. The examiner noted that the likely etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus was his bilateral hearing loss, as this is a known symptom. The Board finds this opinion to be adequate for adjudication purposes. 

As the Veteran lacks a nexus between the in-service event and the current tinnitus, direct service connection must be denied.

Presumptive Service Connection

As with his hearing loss claim, the Veteran's claim for service connection of tinnitus also raises an additional theory of entitlement, presumptive service connection pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

Tinnitus presumably falls within the category of an "other organic disease of the nervous system" within the chronic diseases enumerated. Thus, the Veteran's claim is entitled to consideration under this theory as well.

In considering presumptive service connection for the Veteran's tinnitus, the Board finds that service connection on this basis is not warranted. As discussed above, the Veteran's tinnitus did not manifest while in service or within the one-year presumptive period following service. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. The Board also considered whether the Veteran qualified for presumptive service connection for his tinnitus based on a showing of continuity of symptomatology. However, the Board is strained to find a continuing of symptoms since service.

To begin, the Veteran denied tinnitus symptoms on three separate occasions. During his audiological evaluation in service, the Veteran denied tinnitus symptoms. See March 1957 Hearing Conservation Data Sheet. During his April 2012 VA appointment the Veteran denied tinnitus. Additionally, during a private medical visit in January 2016 the Veteran denied tinnitus symptoms. 

In his October 2013 correspondence, the Veteran clarifies that while he did deny "ringing" like a bell noise during the April 2012 appointment, he went on to state that he experienced buzzing or roaring noises at that time. The physician indicated that he denied tinnitus in general but the Veteran contends that he only denied the specific noise of a bell like ringing noise. While the Board accepts this explanation, it does not account for the denial of symptoms at a later appointment in January 2016.

As with his bilateral hearing loss symptoms, the Board finds that the Veteran's tinnitus symptoms likewise appear to come and go throughout the years and is strained to find a continuity of these symptoms since service. Thus, a grant based on presumptive service connection is not warranted.

Secondary Service Connection

The Veteran's claim for tinnitus also raises the possibility of a grant based upon secondary service connection. As the July 2024 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's tinnitus is likely a symptom of his bilateral hearing loss. In his March 2025 brief, the Veteran's attorney argues that his tinnitus is indeed secondary to his bilateral hearing loss.

(Continued on the next page)

?

While the Veteran has met the first element of secondary service connection, a current disability, he fails to meet the second element. In addition to a current disability, the Veteran must also have a service-connected disability. In this case, the Veteran does not have a service-connected disability which causes the claimed disability. While the Board acknowledges the positive nexus opinion provided by the July 2024 VA examiner as the tinnitus being caused by the bilateral hearing loss, the Board has determined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not service-connected. Thus, a grant based upon secondary service connection for tinnitus is not warranted.

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crain, N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.