Citation Nr: A25031461
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-465938
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's current glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis left shoulder had its onset in service, manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year, or is otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease.  

2. The evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's current glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis right shoulder had its onset in service, manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year, or is otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left shoulder disability, to include glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder disability, to include glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1969 to April 1972.  He was thereafter a member of the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, and the New York Air National Guard.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, left shoulder; glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder; and bilateral hearing loss.  

By way of history, in a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, left shoulder; glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder; and bilateral hearing loss.  In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of the November 2022 rating decision.  In a March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received, readjudicated the claims on the merits, and confirmed the denial of service connection for glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, left shoulder; glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder; and bilateral hearing loss.  

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, seeking review of the March 2023 rating decision.  As stated above, in a December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, left shoulder; glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder; and bilateral hearing loss.  

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on which he identified the March 2023 rating decision.  In a subsequent August 2024 letter, the Board advised the Veteran that his appeal could not be docketed because his VA Form 10182 was untimely as to the March 2023 rating decision.

In response to this letter, in August 2024, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 10182 on which he again identified the March 2023 rating decision.  In a subsequent August 2024 letter, the Board advised the Veteran that his appeal had been docketed.

Although the Veteran's second August 2024 VA Form 10182 is untimely as to the March 2023 rating decision, it is timely as to the December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision, which adjudicated the same issues.  Construing the Veteran's second August 2024 VA Form 10182 liberally, the Board finds that the December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision is the one on appeal and will proceed accordingly.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability.  

The Veteran contends that his left and right shoulder disabilities are the result of performing his duties as a drummer in the Marine Corps.  See July 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that as a member of the Marine Drum and Bugle Corps, he carried a 25-pound snare drum around his shoulders with a web sling and played 5 days a week, and sometimes weekends, for at least 3 to 4 hours a day. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain specifically enumerated chronic diseases, including arthritis, may be presumed to have been incurred in service if manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

To establish service connection under this provision, there must be: evidence of a chronic disease shown as such in service (or within an applicable presumptive period under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307), and subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease; or if the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, by evidence of continuity of symptomatology after service.  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) relating to continuity of symptomatology, however, can be applied only in cases involving those conditions explicitly enumerated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

The Veteran's DD Form 214 confirms that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was drummer, drum and bugle corps.  His service treatment records (STR's), however, are silent for any complaints, treatment, or abnormalities related to his left or right shoulders.  Rather, the service treatment records show that the Veteran's upper extremities were examined at service separation in April 1972 and determined to be normal.  

Additionally, service treatment records corresponding to the Veteran's membership in the Reserve and National Guard include multiple examination reports and reports of medical history, dated between February 1979 and September 1987.  These documents show that the Veteran's upper extremities were examined on multiple occasions during this period and consistently determined to be normal.  Additionally, on reports of medical history completed in connection with these examinations, the Veteran repeatedly denied having, or ever having had, a painful or trick shoulder.  

The record contains no evidence of post-service medical treatment related to the Veteran's left or right shoulders.  

In July 2022, the Veteran applied for VA compensation, seeking service connection for degenerative arthritis in his shoulders caused by his in-service activities as a drummer in the Marine Drum and Bugle Corps.  

In October 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  He reported that his bilateral shoulder pain began in 1969 "due to being [a] drummer in service as well as physical training."  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran as having glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis of the left and right shoulders.  In an accompanying opinion, the examiner determined that the Veteran's left and right shoulder disabilities were less likely than not incurred in or caused by his service.  In commenting on the evidence, the examiner acknowledged the Veteran's contentions but concluded that because neither the STR's nor the post-service medical records reflected reports of, or treatment for, any shoulder problems, a nexus was not as likely as not.  

For the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against an award of service connection for left and right shoulder disabilities.

With respect to the first element of service connection, a current disability, the evidence shows current diagnoses of glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, left shoulder and glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder.  See October 2022 VA examination.  As such, the Board finds that the first element of a service connection claim has been met.  

With respect to the second element, an in-service injury or disease, the Veteran's DD Form 214 confirms his MOS of drummer, drum and bugle corps, and the Veteran has credibly reported that in performing his duties, he carried a 25-pound snare drum around his shoulders with a web sling and played 5 days a week, and sometimes weekends, for at least 3 to 4 hours a day.   To this extent, an in-service injury has been established.  

The record, however, is persuasively against finding of an in-service disease.  As set forth above, the Veteran's upper extremities were examined at separation, and on numerous occasions during his membership in the Reserve and National Guard, and determined to be normal, indicating that arthritis was not present during service.  Additionally, although he now claims he developed shoulder pain in 1969, for the reasons set forth below, the Board does not find those statements to be credible because they are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record.   

Thus, the remaining question for the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's in-service injury and his current left and right shoulder disabilities.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against such a link.  As discussed above, the Veteran's STR's are entirely silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to his left or right shoulders, and his upper extremities were examined at service separation in April 1972 and determined to be normal.  Additionally, STR's corresponding to the Veteran's membership in the Reserve and National Guard show that his upper extremities were examined on multiple occasions during this period and consistently determined to be normal.  The Veteran also repeatedly denied having, or ever having had, a painful or trick shoulder.  

There is also no post-service clinical evidence of complaints or treatment for left or right shoulder injuries.  The Board has considered the Veteran's reports that his symptoms began in service and have continued to the present but finds that they are not credible.  As set forth above, the Veteran's recent statements of continuity are inconsistent with his statements in contemporaneous clinical settings, in which he repeatedly and consistently denied having or ever having had a painful or trick shoulder.  The Board finds the contemporaneous records more probative than the Veteran's recent statements made in the context of a claim for monetary benefits.  

The Board has considered the fact that the Veteran's current shoulder disabilities involve arthritis, which is an enumerated condition under 38 U.S.C. § 3.309(a).  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In this regard, the evidence described above demonstrates that left and/or right shoulder arthritis was not shown as chronic in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within a presumptive period, and were not noted in service with attributable continuity of symptomatology.  The STR's reflect that the Veteran was not diagnosed as having arthritis in service.  Rather, his April 1972 separation examination shows his upper extremities were examined and determined to be normal.  Moreover, there is no evidence of a diagnosis of arthritis within one year of his separation from service.  The first evidence of such diagnosis is contained in the October 2022 VA examination report, more than 50 years after separation.  

There is also no competent medical evidence supporting the claim for service connection.  The only medical opinion of record addressing the etiology of the Veteran's left and right shoulder disabilities, that of the October 2022 VA examiner, weighs against the claim.  The Board finds the opinion to be probative.  It was offered by a clinician with the requisite training and experience necessary to opine on the question of nexus.  The opinion considered the lay and clinical evidence of record and provided a rationale.  The opinion is consistent with the evidence of record, which, as set forth above, affirmatively shows that chronic shoulder pain was not present in service or for many years thereafter.  As such, the Board finds the opinion adequate and affords it significant probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (U.S. 2008) (explaining that most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning.)  There is no competent evidence to the contrary.  

Although the Veteran contends that his current left and right shoulder disabilities are the result of the in-service injury, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue because the record does not show that he has the medical training, experience, or credentials to make such a determination.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the VA medical opinion.  

The Board is charged with weighing the positive and negative evidence and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor when the evidence is in relative equipoise.  Considering the record, including the STR's, the October 2022 VA examination, and the lay statements of the Veteran, the Board finds that the negative evidence is more persuasive and of greater evidentiary weight.  As the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable and service connection for left and right shoulder disabilities is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  

The Veteran contends that his current bilateral hearing loss is due to in-service noise exposure.  See July 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he was exposed to excessive noise as a drummer in the Marine Drum and Bugle Corps, which required him to play 5 days a week, and sometimes weekends, for at least 3 to 4 hours a day.

In the December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran experienced in-service exposure to excessive noise and that he has a current bilateral hearing loss disability.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  As such, the remaining issue to be decided is whether the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disability had its inception in service or whether the current hearing loss disability is due to his conceded in-service exposure to excessive noise.  

The Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that in April 2022, he was seen in the audiology clinic for an initial audiogram.  The audiogram results are not reflected in the clinical notes, but the audiologist indicated that the testing revealed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2022, at which time the examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is less likely than not caused by or a result of an event in military service.  He reasoned that "[t]he Veteran's military occupational specialty was music (55XX) which had a moderate probability for hazardous noise exposure.  Although I was unable to locate a hearing exam from his time on active duty, I was able to locate a hearing exam from his time in reserves which is within normal limits."  

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted an opinion from his private primary care physician regarding the etiology of his hearing loss.  The physician opined that "the long chronic hours of carrying musical instruments during his military service is more likely than not a contributing factor to his [...] hearing loss for which he requires hearing aids."  She also noted the Veteran's report regarding an incident in service "where cabin pressure was flawed and caused ear drum[] pain they were all taken to sick bay in Guantanamo Bay."  The physician stated that "this too could have contributed to hearing loss."

The Veteran also submitted a 2013 Journal of Educational Audiology article entitled "Hearing Conservation Programs for Drum and Bugle Corps: Implications for Educational Audiologists" which discusses the results of a study that evaluated the effectiveness of a comprehensive hearing conservation program for increasing noise awareness and willingness to wear hearing protection among drum and bugle corps members.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the December 2022 private medical opinion offered by the Veteran's primary care physician fails to provide a basis upon which to grant the claim.  In this regard, the physician opined that "the long chronic hours of carrying musical instruments during his military service is more likely than not a contributing factor to his [...] hearing loss."  This statement is confusing as it seems to indicate that it is the carrying of heavy instruments that contributed to the Veteran's hearing loss.  The physician offered no explanation or supporting rationale for this conclusion.  Moreover, even had such explanation been offered, the opinion is insufficient to establish service connection as the applicable legal criteria requires a causal relationship, not just that an in-service injury was a "contributing factor."  The Board also finds the physician's opinion that the claimed incident of flawed cabin pressure that caused ear drum pain "could have contributed to [the Veteran's] hearing loss" insufficient to establish service connection.  Again, the physician has offered no explanation or supporting rationale for this opinion.      

After reviewing the remaining evidence, the Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct two pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  First, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain relevant VA treatment records.  The Veteran's VA treatment records, which were associated with the claims file prior to the December 2023 Higher-Level Review rating decision on appeal, indicate that audiometric testing was performed in April 2022.  The Board notes, however, that the Veteran's actual audiometric findings are not contained in the record on appeal.  Rather, the notes in the VA clinical records indicate that the audiogram results are viewable in the Audiogram Display Module, which is not available to the Board.  The AOJ's failure to obtain the actual audiometric findings constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  

The Board also finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain an adequate medical opinion.  In support of his negative opinion, the October 2022 VA examiner reasoned that, while the Veteran's MOS had a moderate probability for hazardous noise exposure, the available in-service audiogram was within normal limits.  The Board finds this opinion inadequate because it impermissibly relies on the absence of an in-service diagnosis of hearing loss as the sole rationale for the negative finding.  A claimant is not precluded from establishing service connection for a disability based on an absence of an in-service diagnosis of the claimed disability; rather service connection may be established for any disability, even if diagnosed many years after service separation, if such is found to be the result of an in-service injury or disease.  Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993).  

The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. at 312.  

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Undertake the necessary efforts to associate the numeric results of the April 2022 VA audiometric testing with the record on appeal.  (The Board is unable to view the Audiogram Display Module so the actual numeric test results must be manually associated with the record).

2. Obtain an addendum opinion in connection with the claim of service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  Access to the claims file must be made available to the clinician for review.  If the clinician determines that an examination is necessary to provide the opinion requested, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the evidence of record, and examining the Veteran if deemed necessary, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss had its onset during active service or is otherwise causally related to an in-service injury or disease, to include the conceded in-service injury of excessive noise exposure and/or the claimed in-service incident of flawed cabin pressure that resulted in ear drum pain?

(Continued on the next page)

?

In providing this opinion, the clinician must consider the relevant evidence of record, to include the 2013 Journal of Educational Audiology article entitled "Hearing Conservation Programs for Drum and Bugle Corps: Implications for Educational Audiologists."  

The examiner should also consider the Veteran's reports of his symptoms in service and thereafter, including the nature, onset, progression and severity of his reported symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of his current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the current bilateral hearing loss disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible? The Board has not made a credibility determination pending the examiner's findings.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Madison, Siobhan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.