Citation Nr: A25031637
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240831-469429
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected radiculopathy, femoral nerve, left lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected radiculopathy, femoral nerve, right lower extremity is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from June 1972 to June 1976.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Under the AMA, remands are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

While the Board sincerely regrets further delay, for the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that remand is required to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to issuance of the rating decision on appeal. Specifically, remand is required in order to obtain an adequate VA examination to assess the current severity of the Veteran's left lower extremity and right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected radiculopathy, femoral nerve, left lower extremity is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected radiculopathy, femoral nerve, right lower extremity is remanded.

The Veteran contends that the severity of his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy warrants higher ratings than are currently assigned.

By way of background, service connection for both left and right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy was granted in a December 2018 rating decision and assigned initial ratings of 10 percent disabling.  

In August 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for increased ratings for his service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy as well as his service-connected back disability.  In connection with the increased rating claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA Back Conditions examination in October 2023.  Based on an in-person examination and review of the Veteran's VA e-folder, the VA examiner reported normal strength; hypoactive deep tendon reflexes in the bilateral knees; and decreased sensation to light touch in the bilateral lower thigh/knee and lower leg/ankle.  The examiner reported signs and symptoms of radiculopathy including mild constant pain, and moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the bilateral lower extremities.  The examiner reported involvement of the bilateral femoral nerves and stated that all findings are due to radiculopathy.  See October 2023 VA examination report.

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a specific VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination.  While the VA back examination provides some findings regarding femoral radiculopathy, it does not fully evaluate the severity of the radiculopathy. 

Whenever VA undertakes to either provide an examination or to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  Failure to provide a separate VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination to assess the current nature and severity of service-connected femoral radiculopathy constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error; as such, remand is necessary to cure this error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA Peripheral Nerves examination to determine the nature, extent, and severity of his service-connected left lower extremity and right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy.  

2. All indicated tests much be conducted, and all symptoms associated with the Veteran's service-connected left lower extremity and right lower extremity femoral radiculopathy must be described in detail.  

3. The examiner must specifically indicate whether the impairment is in the nature of a neuritis, a neuralgia, and/or paralysis.  If paralysis of any nerve is identified, then the examiner must indicate whether the paralysis is complete or incomplete and, if it is incomplete, whether the incomplete paralysis is best characterized as mild, moderate, or severe.

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Fulmer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.