Citation Nr: A25031247
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-448910
DATE: April 4, 2025

ISSUES

1. Whether the request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,890.79, was timely received.

2. Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,890.79.

ORDER

The request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits was timely filed; to this extent only, the appeal is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,890.79 is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

In June 2022, VA received notice that the Veteran had been incarcerated for a felony conviction March 2022, and based upon this, VA reduced the Veteran's compensation benefits retroactively, creating an overpayment of $20,890.79. Notice of that overpayment, in addition to the Veteran's ability to request a waiver of recovery of the debt, was sent to the Veteran's prior address, despite VA knowing that the Veteran was housed at the correctional facility.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The Veteran's request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $20,890.79 was timely filed. 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b)(2).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from June 1979 to April 1980. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 administrative decision, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC).

Following the August 2023 COWC decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the August 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Whether the request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,890.79, was timely received.

The Veteran has argued that his request for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits should be considered timely. The overpayment in question stem from the Veteran's receipt of VA compensation benefits during a time when he was incarcerated following his conviction of a felony.

Under pertinent VA laws and regulations, any individual who is entitled to compensation or to dependency and indemnity compensation and who is incarcerated in a Federal, State, local, or other penal institution or correctional facility for a period in excess of sixty days for conviction of a felony (where, as here, committed after October 7, 1980) shall not be paid such compensation or dependency and indemnity compensation, for the period beginning on the sixty-first day of such incarceration and ending on the day such incarceration ends, in an amount that exceeds (A) in the case of a veteran with a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, the rate of compensation payable under section 1114(a) of this title; or (B) in the case of a veteran with a service-connected disability not rated at 20 percent or more or in the case of a surviving spouse, parent, or child, one-half of the rate of compensation payable under section 1114(a) of this title. 38 U.S.C. § 5313 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.665 (a).

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (a), this Veteran's rate of payment was at the 10 percent rate. An overpayment is created when VA determines that a beneficiary or payee has received monetary benefits to which he or she is not entitled. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.962.

By way of background, in June 2022, VA received a Bureau of Prisons match, indicating that the Veteran had been confined from March 2, 2022.

VA then undertook development to confirm the Veteran's incarceration by reaching out to the prison facility where the Veteran was located. See June 2022 Prison Development Notice. The prison facility did not respond with the requested information.

In August 2022, the Veteran was sent a Notification letter. Of note, the letter was sent to his prior address of record, not to the prison facility. The letter informed the Veteran that, based on the information received about the Veteran's incarceration, VA was proposing to reduce the Veteran's VA compensation retroactively to May 2, 2022, the 61st day of his continued incarceration following a felony conviction.

The Veteran did not respond to the proposal notice, and so in October 2022, VA notified the Veteran that it would retroactively reduce the Veteran's VA compensation to the 10 percent rating from May 2, 2022. The Veteran was informed that this would create an overpayment. Of note, this letter was also sent to the Veteran's home address - not the address of the prison facility.

On November 11, 2022, the Veteran was sent a letter from the Debt Management Center (DMC), informing him that an overpayment had been created in the amount of $20,890.79. The Veteran was informed of his rights to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt. Again, this DMC letter was sent to the Veteran's home address, not to the prison facility.

Later in November 2022, the Veteran submitted correspondence to VA. The Veteran wrote that he had been trying to reach out to VA to inform them of his arrest and incarceration, but his letters were sent to the wrong location. He stated that he did not receive the compensation benefits, because they were sent to a Mastercard which he did not have access to since his arrest. The Veteran intimated that someone else may have been using the funds deposited into that account fraudulently. He also included an updated address and requested that VA use that address going forward for correspondence.

In December 2022, the Veteran again submitted correspondence again requesting that his address be updated to reflect his accurate location at the prison. The Veteran also wrote that he had a lot of medical problems happening, and had recently lost some family members, which caused his mental health to spiral, ultimately resulting in his current incarceration.

In April 2023, the Veteran, through a new (but not current) Representative, submitted a statement noting the Veteran's address within the prison facility. They asked that all correspondence be sent to the Veteran there, because he did not have access to his old mailing address.

In May 2023, the Veteran, through his prior Representative again wrote that the Veteran does not receive the debt letters because it was sent to the Veteran's prior address, instead of his address within the prison facility. They argued that the Veteran faced financial hardship and requested that his waiver request be considered.

The Veteran submitted correspondence in May 2023 labeled "Financial Status Report." Of note, the note submitted is not on an official VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report, but the Veteran clearly included details of his current financial situation, including his expenses while in prison. He wrote that he did not receive the DMC letter until around March 1, 2023, because he did not have access to the old address, and it was his then-Representative who alerted him to the debt situation. He wrote that he faced severe financial hardship and restrictions within the facility, and for this reason, he was requesting a waiver of recovery of the debt.

The Veteran's "FSR" was forwarded to the COWC, and in a Decision from August 2023, the COWC determined that the Veteran's waiver request could not be considered because it was not timely. They wrote that the DMC letter was sent out on November 11, 2022, and the Veteran's waiver request was received on May 21, 2023, which is beyond 180-days for filing an application for a waiver. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b).

In October 2023, the Veteran, through his prior Representative, argued that the Veteran did not receive the initial DMC letter because he was incarcerated. They argued that the Veteran updated VA to his address change but did not get assistance from the prison facility, and therefore he never received the prior letter notifying him of the time restriction for filing a waiver claim. He argued that VA knew he was incarcerated, but still his mail was not forwarded to the correct location. Thus, they requested that the claim be considered timely, and that the waiver claim be decided on the merits.

Similar arguments were submitted by the Veteran through correspondence in December 2023, and again in January 2024.

Later in December 2023, the Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement. He selected the Direct Review docket. The Veteran wrote that he was appealing the decision to deny his waiver request, although the Veteran cited to multiple dates within the NOD. After some back and forth between the Veteran and the Board, whereby the Veteran ultimately clarified the Decision he was appealing, his claim was docketed.

The Veteran's claim is now before the Board.

Turning to the threshold question, the law states a request for waiver of indebtedness shall only be considered if it is made within 180 days following the date of a notice of indebtedness issued on or after April 1, 1983, by VA to the debtor. The 180-day period may be extended if the individual requesting waiver demonstrates to the Chairperson of the Committee that, as a result of an error by either VA or the postal authorities, or due to other circumstances beyond the debtor's control, there was a delay in such individual's receipt of the notification of indebtedness beyond the time customarily required for mailing (including forwarding). If the requester does substantiate that there was such a delay in the receipt of the notice of indebtedness, the Chairperson shall direct that the 180-day period be computed from the date of the requester's actual receipt of the notice of indebtedness. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b).

In consideration of the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's waiver request was timely received.

To begin, the overpayment stems from VA first being notified that the Veteran was incarcerated. This means that, at the very least, he was not at his prior address of record, as he was incarcerated. VA undertook development attempting to confirm information from the prison facility, however to VA's credit, that information was not returned by the facility. VA then sent the Veteran the proposal to reduce his compensation benefits, the decision to reduce those benefits, and the eventual DMC letter to the Veteran's prior address of record. While those letters were not returned as undelivered, VA was still on notice that the Veteran was not residing at that location anymore.

Later in November 2022, the Veteran wrote to VA saying that he had been trying to update them about his incarceration, but the prison facility was not being cooperative, and he was unable to update VA earlier. Regardless, he provided VA a new address and requested that mail be sent there.

The Veteran also took action to get a new Representative, and it was from working with this Representative that the Veteran evidently learned of the overpayment. The Veteran again requested that all information be sent to his updated address, but as far as the Board can tell, that DMC letter was not sent to the Veteran at the prison.

According to the Veteran, he was initially informed of the debt, as well as his right to request a waiver of recovery of the debt, around March 1, 2023. It was at this point that the Veteran submitted his own hand-written "FSR," whereby he requested a waiver. It appears that at this point the Veteran still had limited access to official forms. This FSR was received in May 2023.

Given the circumstances, as well as VA sending the notices to a prior address despite knowing the Veteran was located at a correctional facility, the Board finds that extending the 180-day time period for a waiver request is appropriate. Here, the Board has no reason to suggest that the Veteran did not promptly file his request for a waiver of the overpayment when he was actually notified of such debt.

The Board therefore finds that the Veteran's waiver request was timely submitted, and to this extent only, the appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.963 (b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board finds that additional evidentiary development is required before the claim on appeal is adjudicated.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,890.79 is remanded.

Turning to the Veteran's claim on the merits, the Veteran has requested a waiver of recovery of the overpayment.

Having said that, the Board is reminded that the Veteran's claim was denied as the waiver request was found to be untimely. Thus, the waiver issue has not been decided on the merits.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately remanding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Here, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred, as the Veteran's waiver request was not actually decided on the merits. Only the matter of timeliness was addressed by the COWC, so the Veteran's arguments regarding financial hardship, and him not being unjustly enriched because he did not actually receive the compensation funds, have not been considered. On remand, the COWC is directed to consider the Veteran's arguments in favor of a waiver when deciding the claim on the merits.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer the issue related to a waiver of recovery of VA compensation debt in the amount of $20,890.79 to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC). If deemed necessary, the Veteran should be sent another VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), and reasonable time should be allowed for the Veteran complete and return that form. The COWC should then decide the issue of entitlement to a waiver of recovery of the debt on the merits.

The COWC is reminded that the Veteran's waiver claim has been deemed timely by the Board.

The COWC is to also consider the Veteran's various lay statements, whereby he made waiver-related arguments regarding his financial hardship, and that he was allegedly not unjustly enriched because he never actually received the compensation funds.

The COWC is reminded that in cases involving entitlement to a waiver, if fraud, misrepresentation or bad faith is not found the issue becomes whether the evidence establishes that recovery of the overpayment indebtedness would be against equity and good conscience, in which case recovery of that overpayment may be waived, and that whether recovery of the debt would impose an undue financial hardship is an important element for consideration. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.963, 1.965.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.