Citation Nr: A25031293
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230502-362466
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits, other than employment services, under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here on appeal, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined rating of 100 percent.

2. During the period under consideration, the evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran had overcome any impairment to employability to which his service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed; he was suitably employed in a job consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.

3. The evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits were not met during the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.1, 21.32, 21.33, 21.35, 21.40, 21.50, 21.51.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from July 2003 to July 2006.  His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Phoenix, Arizona.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in May 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the March 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits.

The Veteran seeks to establish entitlement to VR&E services for the purpose of finding employment.  See March 2023 VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap. 38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g).

The determination as to whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50(b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

In the present case, the Veteran's basic eligibility for VR&E benefits is not in dispute.  During the period here on appeal, he was service connected for multiple disabilities with a combined evaluation of 100 percent from July 9, 2019.  He therefore met the basic threshold requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation.  However, as noted, in order to meet the full requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation, he must also have been determined by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.40.

According to the March 2023 RNI, the Veteran stated that he expected that the VR&E program would help him find employment and that he was "open to all options."  He reported that his highest level of education was completing four years of high school.  The Veteran had previously reported that he had a commercial driver's license and barber certification.  At the time of his application, the Veteran reported that he was presently employed full-time as a rental coordinator since May 2022, earning approximately $2,060 per month.  He described his job duties as creating contracts for companies that need forklifts.  Prior to his current employment, he reported employment as a freight broker from March 2017 to October 2018, which he reported leaving due to new management.  He stated that his service-connected disabilities had affected his job performance, but noted that he preferred to discuss his disabilities in person.

During a March 2023 VA vocational evaluation, a VRC considered the Veteran's education and work history, as well as his symptoms and impairment due to service-connected disabilities, which had a combined rating of 100 percent, and determined that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap.  As such, he was not entitled to receive VR&E services.

The VRC thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's history and noted the limitations that the Veteran would likely experience based on his service-connected disabilities. The VRC noted that the Veteran reported that his job performance was negatively affected when he was a barber.  His lower back would sometimes hurt, but that had not been an issue since then because his recent positions, including his current position, were sedentary.  The Veteran reported that he occasionally took over-the-counter aspirin but otherwise his back was stable.  The Veteran also reported that his right shoulder had been hurt in a motorcycle accident, but that he still went to the gym and had no limitations.  As for his service-connected depression, the Veteran reported that it was stable and that he no longer took medications.  Overall, the Veteran reported to the VRC that all of his disabilities were stable except for his lower back, which occasionally flared up.  

Ultimately, the VRC found that the Veteran had overcome the effects of any vocational impairment.  The VRC found that the Veteran was suitably employed as a rental coordinator creating contracts for companies.  It was noted that the Veteran enjoyed the job, and his service-connected disabilities were not being negatively impacted by the sedentary job duties.  In the final analysis, the VRC found that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for an employment handicap because he had overcome the vocational impairments to employability.

As for a serious employment handicap, because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the VRC assessed that the Veteran did not have a serious employment handicap.  Instead of education and employment benefits, the VRC referred the Veteran to non-VA resources that he could pursue.

Following review of the evidence properly available for consideration, the Board finds that entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits was not warranted during the period here on appeal.  The record shows that based on the Veteran's work experience and training, he had overcome any impairment of employment to which his service-connected disabilities substantially contributed, and he was employable with his then-current skills, training, and education.  Further, there is no indication that the Veteran was underemployed as at the time of the March 2023 decision on appeal, he had been working in a full-time sedentary job that he enjoyed.  While the evidence reflects that his service-connected disabilities, rated as 100 percent disabling, caused difficulties with aspects of employment, including occasional flare ups of back pain, the VRC nevertheless determined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would not cause an impairment in his ability to obtain, maintain, or retain suitable employment.  The VRC reached that conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational goals.  See March 2023 VA Form 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); March 2023 VR-58 (Decision Letter).

Consideration has been given to the Veteran's assertion that he should be entitled to VR&E services due to "major depressive disorder from chest surgery disfigurement which has other employees from previous jobs bully this veteran until this veteran quits employment."  See May 2023 VA Form 10182.  However, the Veteran's statement in that regard is inconsistent with other evidence of record.  For instance, he reported that he left his previous employment due to new management, not as a result of issues with bullying from co-workers.  See March 2023 RNI.  In fact, he never raised the issue of bullying until filing his VA Form 10182 in May 2023.  Contrary to his statement, he also previously reported to the VRC that his depressive disorder was stable, and he had stopped taking medications.  See March 2023 VA Form 28-1902b

While the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran disagrees with the VRC's findings, the Board finds that his lay assertions are entitled to less weight than the findings rendered by the VRC, who has specialized training in this area.  The VRC in this case had sufficient facts and data before her to support a determination that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap and provided a sound rationale for that determination.  See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997) (an opinion rendered by one with specialized training may be considered more probative than a non-specialist's finding). As noted previously, VRCs are specifically delegated the authority, by regulation, to determine whether a veteran has an employment handicap.  On review, the Board finds that the March 2023 assessment by the VRC is entitled to significant probative weight.  The Veteran, on the other hand, has not presented persuasive evidence to show that he had an employment handicap during the period on appeal and was entitled to VR&E services.  

Considering all of the available evidence, the Board finds that the legal requirements for entitlement to Chapter 31 VR&E benefits have not been met because the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue and was therefore not in need of rehabilitation.  Because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the Veteran also did not have a serious employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.52(a).

The Board commends the Veteran for wanting to pursue further training and employment opportunities.  Although he has every right to seek career training at the level of his choosing, allowing a veteran to pursue whatever level of career training he chooses when he is capable of obtaining suitable employment frustrates the purpose of VR&E benefits.  In that regard, the Board emphasizes that the purpose of Chapter 31 VR&E services is not to provide a claimant with whatever level of career training he chooses should his interests or career objectives change. Rather, the purpose of such services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.70.

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine but finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  That is to say, the evidence on the issue is not in approximate balance.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal is denied.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.