Citation Nr: A25031859
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230531-358029
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Challenges to the propriety of the creation of the overpayments arising from the Veteran's tours of active duty are denied.

REMANDED

Challenges to the validity of the amounts of the overpayments, to include the validity of the periods underlying the calculations of these amounts, are remanded.

The claim for a waiver of the recoupment of either the combined amount of the Veteran's overpayments or portion(s) thereof are remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The overpayments arising from the Veteran's tours of active duty did not ensue from sole administrative errors on the part of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), agency of original jurisdiction.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The overpayments arising from the Veteran's tours of active duty and execution of UTAs were properly created. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.500.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, a VA compensation beneficiary, had active duty from June to November 2001, January to December 2005, September 2009 to August 2016, and from June 2017 to March 2019. These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on his May 2023 filing of VA Form 10182, Notice of Appeal (NOD), asserting that the Veteran is currently challenging the decision of an unspecified VA agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) with regard to an unspecified debt, and noting that he was not at fault for failing to notify VA of his "change in status" as he did notify VA in various formats only to be assured that he need not worry about it. While the Veteran's use of the phrase "change in status" was unclear, the Board's review of the claims file has revealed that the Veteran was charged with multiple overpayments based on his post-initial tours of active duty, i.e., an activity compensated by the Department of Defense (DoD) via Defense Finance Accounting service (DSAF), the DoD's financial arm, all while the Veteran continued being in receipt of his VA compensation benefits. 

A challenge to a debt arising from VA overpayment may encompass up to three claims: a challenge to the creation of the overpayment, a challenge to the amount of the overpayment, and the claim for a waiver of the overpayment debt. Johnson v. Wilkie, No. 19-5789, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1205, at *5 (Vet. App. June 25, 2020). Critically, the challenges to the propriety of the creation of an overpayment attack the conceptual propriety of the creation of an overpayment without focusing on the amount of dollars and cents. In contrast, challenges to the validity of the amount focus on these dollars and cents, to include on the period(s) of the overpayments because the longer the period(s), the higher the overpayment(s). Further, if either one of the first two challenges is raised by the time the claim for a waiver is addressed, these challenges must be resolved prior to addressing the waiver claim. Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991).

Reading the Veteran's NOD and his accompanying Statement in Support of Claim, the Board concludes that - here - the Veteran raised all three claims. That said, only one of these claims is amenable to adjudication at this juncture, while the remaining two require further development. 

The Veteran's threshold claim appears to be his challenges to the propriety of the creation of his overpayment debts since his NOD and Statement in Support of Claim repeatedly asserted that the Veteran notified the AOJ by various means and on multiple occasions of his returns to active duty. Thus, the Board construes the Veteran's first line of challenges as an assertion that the Veteran's overpayments were a result of a sole administrative error on the part of the AOJ. 

The phrase "sole administrative error" is a legal term of art and, therefore, is qualitatively different from what a layperson's impression might be if based on a layperson's meaning of these words: because a mere clerical error - or a chain of such errors - cannot qualify as a "sole administrative error" for the purposes of the Board's analysis. Rather, a sole administrative error is established only if a two-pronged injury is met. On the one hand, a debtor is required to show that the debtor's actions or failure to act did not even contribute to the creation of the overpayment. 

The other requirement is a showing that the debtor neither subjectively knew nor should have objectively known, i.e., that a reasonable person standing in debtor's shoes would not have known, that the overpaid funds were disbursed in error. If either prong is not met, the sole administrative error cannot be found because the key word in the phrase "sole administrative error" is the word "sole," meaning that any failure to meet all of the aforesaid requirements makes the AOJ not a "sole" entity responsible for the creation of the debt. 38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(9), (10); 38 C.F.R. § 3.500(b)(2); see also Jordan v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 171 (1997).

Here, the Veteran's assertions that he repeatedly and by various means notified the AOJ of his returns to active duty are meant to support his position with regard to the first prong of the sole-administrative-error test, i.e., essentially, the Veteran maintains that he neither caused nor even contributed to the creation of any of his overpayment debts. Notably, the record accrued does not support the Veteran's assertions. However, out of an abundance of caution, the Board presumes, without making a factual finding to this effect, i.e., solely for the purposes of the legal analysis at hand, that the Veteran in fact repeatedly and by various means, notified the AOJ of his returns to the active duty. However, such a presumption cannot render the Veteran's overpayments improperly created since not only the record lacks any evidence suggesting that the Veteran neither knew nor even could have known that he was being overpaid, but the Veteran's own statements and the record demonstrate the exact opposite, i.e., that he knew and, in addition, should have known that the Veteran was being overpaid.

Indeed, the record demonstrates that, starting from its first (November 1, 2016) notification letter awarding the Veteran VA compensation, the AOJ was constantly reminding the Veteran of the following: "Conditions That Affect Your Right to Payments. Your payments may be affected by any of the following circumstances which you must promptly call to our attention[:] Reentrance into active service. . . . Receipt of active duty or drill pay . . . ." Therefore, a reasonable person standing in the Veteran's shoes would have known that (s)he was being overpaid had (s)he returned to active duty but still remained in receipt of VA compensation. Moreover, the Veteran's own statements that he kept repeatedly and by various means informing the AOJ in the change of his status verify that the Veteran was well aware of his lack of entitlement to VA compensation while he was on active duty. 

Further, while the Board is mindful of the Veteran's assertions that he repeatedly called the AOJ and was advised "not to worry" about the change in his status, however, the record fails to provide evidence of any such notification. The Veteran's acknowledged that he was aware that receipt of VA compensation, while in concurrent receipt of the DoD/DFAS pay, would lead to an overpayment, yet failed to then set these overpaid funds aside to remit them to VA once the AOJ recognized that his VA benefits had not been suspended. Given the lack of evidence supporting the Veteran's claims that he notified the AOJ of his return to active duty status, leading to an overpayment, the Board finds that the Veteran's challenges to the propriety of the creation of his overpayment debts are denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The same, however, cannot be said about the Veteran's challenges to the validity of the amounts of his overpayments. Indeed, COWC's decision underlying the Veteran's appeal at bar, stated:

The Veteran's first debt period is 06/05/2017, 04/01/2021, 04/01/2019, and 12/01/2019 through 03/31/2019 due to their return to active duty. The Veteran's second debt period is from 10/01/2019 through 03/28/2020 for their drill dates in FY 19. The Veteran's third debt period is from 04/01/2020 through 03/31/2021 for their drill dates in FY 20. The Veteran's fourth debt period is from 04/01/2021 through 05/31/2022 due to their return to active duty. The Veteran's fifth debt period is from 04/01/2019 through 09/30/2019 and 12/01/2019 through 09/30/2020.

The first sentence in COWC's finding is, unfortunately, lacks clarity. Further, the record strongly suggests that the Veteran did not execute any drill periods (also known as unit training assemblies (UTAs)). Instead, the record contains multiple VA Forms 21-8951, Notice of Waiver of VA Compensation or Pension to Receive Military Pay and Allowances, strongly suggesting that the Veteran served 183 days on active duty during fiscal year (FY) 2017, 360 days during FY 2018, 360 days during FY 2019, 360 days during FY 2020, and 360 days during FY 2021. 

This information is partly consistent with the Veteran's DD-214 form docketed on September 19, 2019, showing the Veteran's period of active duty from June 5, 2017, to March 31, 2019. However, the Board was unable to locate any DD-214 form suggesting that the Veteran was on active duty after March 31, 2019. In fact, the letter docketed on May 31, 2022, under the heading "DRPIS Response" reads:

[The statement that r]eads: Period (Active duty commitment): Enter 22 September 2015 - [ended] 21 September 2021 [is now being] changed . . . to read: Period (Active duty commitment): Enter 22 September 2015 - [ended] 15 August 2016.

Thus, the record, as accrued thus far, offers the Board no basis to presume that the Veteran had any period of active duty after March 31, 2019. Moreover, while the Board acknowledges that a veteran can commonly execute two UTAs during a single calendar day and - in the event the veteran is in receipt of VA compensation during that calendar day - (s)he would end up being overpaid for two calendar days, one actual and one qualifying as an accounting fiction since each UTA is equal to a single whole day of VA compensation. The VA Forms 21-8951 for the FYs 2020 and 2021 that are currently of record suggest a highly unusual pattern of the Veteran's execution of UTAs. Indeed, since both of these VA Forms 21-8951 state that the Veteran executed 360 UTAs, these assertions could only be true if the Veteran executed at least 180 days of UTA with two UTAs per single calendar day, for almost half a year, or single UTA per day for almost a year, seven days a week. Notably, while some service departments conduct many UTAs per an FY, and it is certainly not unfathomable for a service department to conduct UTAs on weekdays in addition to weekends, it is highly unlikely for a service department to conduct 360 UTAs per an FY. 

Therefore, the record at bar strongly suggests that the AOJ erred in its calculations of the Veteran's overpayments due to the AOJ's erroneous selection of the periods underlying these overpayments. A fortiori, the finding made by COWC upon COWC's unfortunate distortion of the AOJ's already likely-incorrect calculations are necessarily erroneous. Moreover, the record contains the Veteran's repeated requests for an audit, and a statement that he tried to discuss the debt with an AOJ officer over the phone, but was unsuccessful in determining anything other than it appeared the amount of debt was incorrect, and a full audit could not be achieved over the phone. Because the record does not contain any actual audit, a remand is required. And, given that the holding of Schaper bars the Board from conducting a waiver analysis until the amount of the Veteran's debt is determined upon a proper audit, his waiver claim is also remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request the DoD/DFAS to provide an in-a-glance report of the exact periods of the Veteran's active duty from June 2001 to September 31, 2021. Simultaneously with the foregoing, request DoD/DFAS to provide a report of the exact dates, if any, when the Veteran executed UTAs. In the event the DoD/DFAS is unable to provide the aforesaid reports, request the DoD/DFAS to provide the Veteran's UH022-2405 History Reports for FYs 2016 to 2021, inclusive.

2. Upon completion of the foregoing, conduct a paid and due audit of the Veteran's VA account to determine the exact amounts overpaid to the Veteran during FYs 2016 to 2021, inclusive.

3. Upon completion of the foregoing, issue the Veteran an Appeal Notification Letter detailing, in a narrative fashion and utilizing language amenable to a layperson's understanding, how the amounts of his overpayments were calculated and accompany the Appeal Notification Letter with a copy of the audit report obtained pursuant to Step 2.

4. Simultaneously with the foregoing, provide the Veteran with an opportunity to file his updated VA Form 21-5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), and afford him a period of 60 days to respond. Upon the expiration of the period, forward the Veteran's claims file to COWC for a readjudication of his waiver claim.

5. Upon completion of the foregoing, notify the Veteran of the outcome and clarify to the Veteran that his challenges would not be returned to the Board automatically, and the Veteran's timely and proper actions would be required in the event he desires further review by the Board. 

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna Kapellan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.