Citation Nr: A25031302
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-426908
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in blindness, the anatomical loss of both hands, or are the result of deep partial thickness burns, full thickness burns, subdermal burns, or an inhalation injury.

2. The Veteran's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is not the result of an inhalation injury.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a special home adaptation grant have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.809a.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1981 through June 1984 and from August 1986 through December 1991 in the United States Army.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement: VA Form 10182 and selected the Direct Review docket. Based on that docket selection, the Board is limited in its review of the evidence and may only consider the evidence of record at the time the March 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the March 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.801.? 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim: VA Form 20-0995 and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Special Home Adaptation Grant

Legal Criteria

A Veteran may qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if the Veteran has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees; such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature. Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a Veteran that has a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is denied.

Analysis

The Veteran seeks entitlement to a special home adaptation grant due to COPD and reports requiring a new well to be dug on his property due to his current well failing water tests. 

The Veteran is service connected for COPD which is currently rated at 100 percent effective August 10, 2022.

The Veteran has not alleged, and is not service-connected, for a vision disability which results in blindness, a disability which results in the anatomical loss of both hands, a disability which is the result of deep partial thickness burns, or a disability which is the result of full thickness subdermal burns. As such, those criteria will not be discussed.

The Veteran contends that the claimed COPD should qualify as an inhalation injury under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b). 

VA regulations allow for a grant of special home adaptation when a Veteran has "residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)." 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b)(1)(iv). This regulation very clearly states that to meet this criterion for specially adapted housing, a Veteran must have an inhalation injury, and the subsequent disorders listed are examples of possible residuals from that initial inhalation injury. In adding "inhalation injury" as a basis for entitlement to a grant of special home adaptation, VA intended to include injuries "from the same incidents that cause severe burns. Inhalation injury is due to breathing steam or toxic inhalants such as fumes, gases, and mists present in a fire environment." 74 Fed. Reg. 67145, 67148 (Dec. 18, 2009).

VA, private, and service treatment records do not indicate that the Veteran experienced any in-service inhalation injury caused by breathing steam, smoke, gas, or other toxic fume occurring in a fire environment at any time, nor has the Veteran asserted such. The Veteran has asserted that his COPD is due to exposure to burn pits and other toxins while serving in the Gulf War. While the Board is cognizant that this is an intricate matter, burn pits are not generally considered the type of "fire environment" which is required under the regulation.

VA differentiates between a disease and an injury. An "injury" for VA purposes is a harm which is the result of an external trauma, whereas a "disease" is an internal infection or "degenerative process." The nature of the Veteran's disability is that of a disease, not an injury. While the Board concedes that the Veteran's exposure to burn pits is the likely cause of his COPD, those exposures did not result in an injury. There is no evidence indicating that the Veteran ever suffered an inhalation injury caused by breathing steam, toxic fumes, gases, or mist present in a fire environment, and the Veteran has never asserted having experienced an injury of this nature. In the absence of evidence of an "inhalation injury," eligibility for special home adaptation is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b)(1)(iv).

In sum, the competent and probative medical evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a, and the claim is denied.

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crain, N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.