Citation Nr: A25031529
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-470599
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence of the record favors a finding that the Veteran's service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot caused his obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot, have been met.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.310.?? 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1981 to November 1984.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

In August 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, in its review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to his service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot.  See August 2024 Summary of Argument.  The Veteran contends that his service-connected musculoskeletal conditions kept him from exercising and made it difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep.  He endorsed pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, and poor concentration.  He explained that he weighed 165 pounds at military entrance, 205 pounds upon military separation, and 223 pounds presently.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. 

The Board notes that service connection may be established on a direct or a secondary basis.? However, as the Veteran seeks service connection on a secondary basis, and the Board is granting the claim on that basis, the Board will limit its discussion accordingly and not address?service connection on a direct basis.? 

Applicable Law

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a).? A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or chronically aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury is considered service-connected, and when thus established, this secondary condition is considered a part of the original condition.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a) and (b).? Establishing service connection on this secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.? Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439 (1995) (en?banc).?? 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Walsh v. Wilkie that obesity?as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection can be established on either a causal or aggravation basis.? See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300, 306-307 (2020).? Furthermore, the Court concluded that General Counsel Precedent Opinion 1-2017, which determined that?obesity?can constitute an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis, not only applies when a service-connected disability causes?obesity, but also when a service-connected disability aggravates?obesity.? See id.?? 

Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).?? 

Analysis

As to a current disability, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran has a current obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis.? As to a separate disability already subject to service connection, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for plantar fasciitis of the left foot.? See October 2023 Rating Decision.? The Board is bound by these favorable findings.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).? Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to or aggravated by his service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot.? See Allen, 7?Vet. App.?at 439.? 

As to a nexus, or link, there are several opinions of record.  Against the claim, there is a July 2023 VA medical opinion that the Veteran's claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected condition.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was diagnosed many decades after leaving service, that the two conditions were not medically related, that the claimed disorder was a separate entity from the service-connected condition and unrelated to it, and that a nexus could not be established.  The examiner concluded by stating that it was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the plantar fasciitis, left foot.  See July 2023 VA Medical Opinion.  Here, the Board affords the opinion little probative weight.  The examiner did not explain how the diagnosis decades after service impacted the opinion, did not discuss aggravation, and did not contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

For the claim, there is a June 2023 medical opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain and obesity is due to and/or related to his service-connected left foot plantar fasciitis, that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea with CPAP is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from the service-connected left foot plantar fasciitis, and that it is at least as likely as not that without the Veteran's weight gain and obesity his obstructive sleep apnea condition with CPAP would not have occurred.  As a rationale, the examiner noted the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis, service-connected left foot plantar fasciitis diagnosis, and progressive weight gain.  Citing to medical literature, the examiner discussed sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity, musculoskeletal conditions associated with weight gain/obesity, pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea related to obesity, effects of chronic musculoskeletal pain on sleep, pathophysiology of sleep disturbance related to obesity, and weight gain and obesity as a major risk factor associated with obstructive sleep apnea.  In conclusion, the examiner determined that the Veteran's service-connected condition caused his weight gain and obesity, that his weight and obesity caused or contributed to his current condition, that the Veteran gained approximately 58 pounds from active duty to present time, and that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran would not have developed obstructive sleep apnea if not for his weight gain and obesity.  See June 2023 Private Medical Opinion. 

Satisfying the final element for service connection, the Board finds there is a nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot.? While it does not appear that the examiner reviewed the Veteran's entire record, the rationale rendered by the June 2023 examiner is logical, well-reasoned, and thorough.? Additionally, the opinion is probative and persuasive as to the question of whether the Veteran's service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot caused his obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity.? The opinion was supported by relevant treatise evidence and is consistent with the Court's holding in Walsh and the General Counsel's precedential opinion regarding obesity serving as an intermediate step for the award of service connection.? The Board affords the medical opinion?substantial probative weight.? See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 301 (2008) (explaining that a medical examination report must contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two).?? 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, as all three elements for service connection on a secondary basis have been met, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected plantar fasciitis of the left foot, is granted.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch,?21 F.4th at 776.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.