Citation Nr: A25031765
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 221223-308350
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostatitis, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1986 to June 2006.

The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision denying service connection for a GU condition, to include prostatitis, and denying an increased rating for hemorrhoids, in January 2022. This constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the January 2022 decision.  In October 2022, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2022 decision.  

In the December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for GU condition and entitlement to a compensable rating for hemorrhoids, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to duty-to-assist argument).

Service connection for prostatitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has current prostatitis that is the result of his active service. Specifically, he reports that he was diagnosed with prostatitis during service, and his prostate symptoms worsened in 2021 following a nephrectomy. In a November 2021 statement, the Veteran reports that he was diagnosed with prostatitis during service in 2005, and that his symptoms have continued since his separation from service:

A December 2021 VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion based on no current diagnosis, while noting a prior diagnosis of prostatitis made in 2005.  However, the record contains various reports of urinary symptoms suggesting functional impairments due to the claimed prostatitis, including "painful urination, painful ejaculation, increased urinary frequency, incomplete bladder emptying, testicular pain."  A remand is necessary for a new VA examination to determine whether the reported symptoms of the claimed prostatitis condition reach the level of a functional impairment for earning capacity, as contemplated in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). If so, the examiner should address whether the symptoms were due to his service and/or secondary to his service-connected kidney conditions.

The AOJ's failure to obtain an addendum examination and opinion to correct the above deficiency constitutes pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is warranted.

Evaluation of external hemorrhoids, which is currently 0 percent disabling, is remanded.

In a September 2006 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's hemorrhoid condition, and assigned a zero percent (noncompensable) disability rating, which was continued in an August 2010 rating decision. The Veteran filed an increased rating for his hemorrhoid condition in October 2021. The review period for this issue begins October 15, 2021, the date of receipt of the increased rating claim. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (rating schedule), found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Disability ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 1155.

A hemorrhoid disability is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7336. During the pendency of the appeal, VA published amendments to 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, the Schedule of Ratings for the Digestive System, effective May 19, 2024. Where the rating criteria are amended during the course of the appeal, the Board must consider both the former and the current rating criteria; however, should an increased rating be warranted under the revised criteria, that award may not be made effective before the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.114; Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327, 1329 (Fed. Cir. 2003). As the Veteran's claim was pending at the time of such regulation change, he is entitled to the application of the criteria most favorable to his claim.

Prior to May 19, 2024, under DC 7336, a noncompensable rating is warranted for mild or moderate external or internal hemorrhoids. A 10 percent rating is warranted for large or thrombotic hemorrhoids, irreducible, with excessive redundant tissue, evidencing frequent recurrences. A 20 percent rating is warranted when there are hemorrhoids with persistent bleeding and with secondary anemia, or with fissures.

Under the revised criteria for DC 7336, a 10 percent rating is warranted for prolapsed internal hemorrhoids with two or less episodes per year of thrombosis; or external hemorrhoids with three or more episodes per year of thrombosis. A 20 percent rating is warranted for internal or external hemorrhoids with persistent bleeding and anemia; or continuously prolapsed internal hemorrhoids with three or more episodes per year of thrombosis.

Because DC 7336 does not include the use of medication in the rating criteria, it is necessary to consider whether the Veteran was taking medications which improved the severity of his symptoms. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).

The October 2022 rating decision continued the noncompensable rating for the Veteran's hemorrhoid condition, finding that his "current hemorrhoids manifestations are characterized as mild to moderate in severity, with small or moderate external hemorrhoids. Other than occasional discomfort, there are no other manifestations associated with [his] hemorrhoids." 

The Veteran contends that his hemorrhoid condition warrants a compensable rating. Specifically, he reported the following in a November 2021 statement: 

I am requesting a rating increase as I do not think that the current rating accurately reflects my disability. I continue to get hemorrhoids daily and are about the size of a dime. I have pain, bleeding, itching, irritation, and swelling daily. My hemorrhoids have led to bleeding and tearing. When I use the restroom, there is blood on the tissue constantly. I have altered my diet to ease my symptoms. Due to my hemorrhoids, I am unable to do prolonged walking, prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, long car rides, and recreational activities comfortably or consistently. I use pain relievers to handle my condition. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2021 regarding the severity of his hemorrhoid condition. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of "Internal or external hemorrhoids." The Veteran is noted to have reported the following during the examination regarding the history of his hemorrhoid condition: 

Had hemorrhoids in service -- treated with otc hemorrhoid creams. No surgery. No procedures. Had colonoscopy, he thinks they saw them on that. Thru va. If he sits too long they bother him, can have some pain when he wipes; they come and go, sometimes 'big' not always. Bothers him on long drives. 

The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking medication for his hemorrhoids: "OTC hemorrhoid cream when it acts up -- about 3x a month." The observable symptoms at the time of the examination were noted to be internal or external hemorrhoids, mild or moderate: "small hemorrhoid noted, not inflamed at 7:00 position on rectum." The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's hemorrhoid condition had a functional impact as causes the Veteran to require "comfortable seating." 

Although the VA examiner indicated that the records were reviewed, the noted symptoms do not reflect the Veteran's symptoms reported in his October 2021 statement or during the November 2021 examination, such as his reports of the hemorrhoids causing "bleeding and tearing" and "blood on the tissue constantly" when he uses the restroom. There is insufficient information for the Board to determine whether the Veteran's hemorrhoids-which he described to the VA examiner as "sometimes 'big' not always"-are adequately reflected in the physical examination findings during the November 2021 examination. Moreover, the Veteran reports that he uses a topical over-the-counter hemorrhoid cream when his hemorrhoid condition flares up, a few times per month. There is insufficient evidence for the Board to determine whether the symptoms noted in the VA examination reflect the ameliorative effects of medication.

The AOJ's failure to obtain an addendum examination correcting the above deficiencies constitutes pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum regarding the severity of the Veteran's hemorrhoid condition from an appropriately qualified examiner. The evidentiary record covering the period on appeal, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. The DBQ may be completed through review  of available records using the Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) process if the examiner determines that the existing evidence provides sufficient information on which to prepare the DBQ and that an examination will likely provide no additional relevant evidence.

The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements describing his symptoms during flare-ups and ensure that the Veteran's competent and credible reports are reflected in the symptoms noted. If the examiner finds the Veteran not to be credible (i.e. if the Veteran's statements conflict with other evidence of record), the examiner must state the basis for this finding. 

The examiner must note what effects the Veteran's reported medication has on his hemorrhoid condition, including hemorrhoid ointment and pain reliever, and indicate what the severity of the Veteran's symptoms would be without the use of medications.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the claimed prostatitis.

(A) Review the December 2021 VA medical examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's GU condition to determine whether a current diagnosis of prostatitis or another GU condition based on the Veteran's symptoms can be made based on the evidence of record, or if the results of a follow-up examination would be likely to result in a current diagnosis, and provide such examination if needed. 

(B) If no current diagnosis is found, the clinician should address whether the Veteran's reported GU symptoms constitute any functional impairment of earning capacity, sufficient to qualify the symptoms as a disability under current caselaw. In particular, the clinician should review the Veteran's statement regarding his GU symptoms, dated November 17, 2021.

(C) The clinician should opine whether the diagnosis and/or functional impairment related to the Veteran's reported GU symptoms is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) due to the Veteran's service, to include the Veteran's service-connected kidney conditions.

(D) The clinician should opine whether the diagnosis and/or functional impairment related to the Veteran's reported GU symptoms at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) was (i) caused OR (ii) aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected kidney conditions.

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions.

The clinician is asked to provide the underlying reasons for all opinions expressed, and is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the evidence of record is so evenly divided that, in the examiner's expert opinion, it is as medically sound to find in favor of the proposition as against it.

 

 

S. Kim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.