Citation Nr: A25031999
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-429938
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include right and left sided lumbar radiculopathy, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from September 2019 to December 2022.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). The law creates a new framework for veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review, and this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

The Notice of Disagreement appealed a January 2024 supplemental claim rating decision stemming from an April 2023 rating decision. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of right hip condition and back pain with burning sensation, to include right and left sided lumbar radiculopathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a), the Board's authority to remand a claim is limited to instances requiring (1) correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A , if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal, or (2) the correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the Board finds that the below referenced matters must be remanded for the correction of duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the promulgation of the respective rating decision on appeal. 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, the claim on appeal must be remanded to the AOJ to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include right and left sided lumbar radiculopathy, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends that as a result of jumpmaster training during service, which included parachute jumping and landing, the Veteran developed back pain with burning sensation, and a right hip condition. The Veteran asserts that his back condition claim should be expanded to include his diagnosis of radiculopathy. The Veteran further contends that he is entitled to service connection on a presumptive basis for arthritis pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.309. 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that in the March 2024 appellate brief submitted by the Veteran's representative, it was argued that in addition to the claims of back pain and right hip condition, the Veteran should be service connected for a left hip condition. The April 2024 Notice of Disagreement identified the January 2024 rating decision as the decision on appeal and specified back pain and right hip condition as the issues being appealed. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran listed a left hip condition in his August 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application and was subsequently put on notice by VA that his left hip condition claim must be filed on a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits in order to be processed further. See January 26, 2024 Notice Letter. Accordingly, the Board is precluded from addressing the issue of left hip condition in the present appeal as it was not an adjudicated entitlement as described in 38 C.F.R. 3.151(c) subject to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, nor was it identified in the April 2024 Notice of Disagreement. See 38 C.F.R. § § 20.201, 20.202. 

Turning to the issues on appeal, the Veteran contends that his claimed disabilities are a result of parachuting during his jumpmaster military training courses. His DD-214 reflects having received a parachutist badge and taking a jumpmaster military education course. In the Veteran's April 2023 VA examination, he stated that after a particular jump, his back pain began. 

Addressing the issue of expanding the Veteran's back disability first, prior to the promulgation of the rating decision on appeal and in its appellate brief, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran's back disability claim should be expanded to include the Veteran's radiculopathy, diagnosed by a private physician in July 2023. See August 2023 Brief, see also March 2024 Appellate Brief. In determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). In evaluating the Veteran's back disability, the Board must consider whether a separate evaluation may be warranted for any associated objective neurological abnormalities of the disability, under an appropriate Diagnostic Code. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5235-5243, Note (1). 

The Board observes that the Veteran's October 2022 Initial Claim Application characterized his back condition as "back pain with burning sensation." The subsequent April 2023 VA examination described the Veteran's current symptoms as burning sensation to the lumbar spine that is intermittent, a "pinpoint spot," but indicated that there were no signs or symptoms related to radiculopathy, nor were there indications of guarding or muscle spasms. See April 2023 VA Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). The initial April 2023 rating decision denied service connection for the Veteran's back disability claim for lack of a current disability.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim application, a written brief, and private medical records. In addition to back pain and a right hip condition, the August 2023 Supplemental Claim Application listed left and right lumbar radiculopathy as specific issues and associated these claims with the April 2023 rating decision.  The July 2023 private medical record included with the August 2023 Supplemental Claim Application assessed the Veteran as having L4-5 disc degeneration with retrolisthesis and "probably" foraminal stenosis, as well as lumbar radiculopathy. See July 2023 private medical treatment record. The record indicated that the radiculopathy was "more right than left-sided lumbar radiculopathy which is manifesting as muscle spasms." See July 2023 private treatment record. In the August 2023 written brief, the Veteran's representative contended that the Veteran's back disability claim should be expanded to included radiculopathy. In January 2024, the RO sent notice to the Veteran informing him that his claim for radiculopathy must be filed on a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits in order to be processed. See January 30, 2024 Notice Letter. However, no action was taken on this matter, and in the Veteran's March 2024 appellate brief, the Veteran's representative presented the same argument for expanding his back disability claim to include radiculopathy. Therefore, in consideration of the above and in deference to the Veteran, the Board broadly construes the Veteran's back disability claim on appeal to include lumbar radiculopathy.

The Board has fully reviewed the evidence of record and identified several predecisional errors that warrant a remand of the Veteran's back disability and right hip disability claims.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2023 regarding both his claimed right hip and back conditions. The VA examiner declined to provide a current diagnosis for either claimed condition. During the VA examinations, the Veteran stated that he never sought treatment for either claimed condition with the exception of receiving conservative treatment for his back after a particular parachute jump during service. The initial April 2023 rating decision denied service connection for both claims, citing in part no current diagnosis for either condition.

First, the Board observes that the Veteran filed his claims for service connection in October 2022 and separated from service in December 2022. The record reflects that the Veteran received treatment from a VA facility prior to the issuance of the January 2024 rating decision. See February 2023 and September 2023 Enterprise database search results. However, there are not any records from the facility associated with the Veteran's claims file. The AOJ's failure to obtain these outstanding VA treatment records constitutes a pre-decisional error that must be corrected on remand. 

As discussed, the Veteran provided private medical treatment records which indicated diagnosed conditions related to his back and right hip along with his Supplemental Claim Application. See July 2023 private medical treatment records, see also June 2023 private medical treatment records. In pertinent part, a June 2023 medical treatment after-visit summary reflects that the following issues were addressed during the encounter: snapping hip syndrome and pain of the right hip. See June 2023 private medical treatment records. Instructions with recommended exercises for snapping hip syndrome were included with the after-visit summary. Id. In July 2023, a private medical provider assessed that the Veteran had L4-5 disc degeneration with retrolisthesis and "probably" foraminal stenosis, as well as lumbar radiculopathy. See July 2023 private medical treatment records. The Veteran was not afforded another VA examination, and the AOJ issued the January 2024 rating decision on appeal which confirmed and continued the previous denials.

Next, the AOJ failed to consider whether the Veteran had a current disability of back pain resulting in functional impairment under Saunders v. Wilkie, No. 2017-1466 (Fed. Cir. Apr. 3, 2018). In Saunders v. Wilkie, No. 2017-1466 (Fed. Cir. Apr. 3, 2018), the Federal Circuit held that the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110" refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability." In other words, where pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability. The Federal Circuit did emphasize that they were not holding a veteran could demonstrate service connection "simply by asserting subjective pain. To establish the presence of a disability, the veteran will need to show that his pain reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity." In other words, subjective pain in and of itself will not establish a current disability. Consideration should be given to the impact, or lack thereof, from pain, focusing on evidence of functional limitation caused by pain. Here, the Veteran reported in his April 2023 VA examination that he experienced back pain with a burning sensation and reported that, in his occupation as a project manager his productivity decreased as a result of requiring more breaks due to his back pain making it uncomfortable to sit for long periods. He reported having lost up to a week's worth of time at work in the last year.  The Veteran is competent to provide lay statements about his back pain, as it is a symptom within the realm of his personal knowledge and experience, as well as how it has impacted his work. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Further, the VA examination noted that the Veteran exhibited pain after being examined immediately after repeated use over time.  As there was competent evidence of back pain and associated functional impairment of record prior to the issuance of the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ's failure to consider the Veteran's back pain as a current disability under Saunders constitutes an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, and correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination regarding his claimed right hip condition in April 2023. However, the VA examination is not sufficient. Here, the Veteran stated his hip pain was "all related to jumps" and was never seen or evaluated for his right hip pain. He described "intermittent deep pain" and feeling a "pop" when stretching out his right hip. The Veteran denied having flare ups and no functional loss was noted in the examination. The VA examiner provided the Veteran with a diagnosis of "normal" in the diagnostic section of the April 2023 DBQ, providing the remarks: "normal exam, normal x-ray, subjective complaints are greater than objective complaints. Making right hip "pop: when extended does not rise to the level of a chronic diagnosis at this time." The Veteran's self-described deep intermittent pain was not addressed outside of being a current symptom. However, the Board finds that the diagnosis of a "normal" right hip in conjunction with the determination that the Veteran's "popping" sensation of his hip did not rise to a level of chronic disability, and the failure to address the competent lay statements of intermittent deep pain to be inconsistent, rendering it inadequate for adjudicative purposes. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating that "The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion."). Thus, the AOJ's reliance on an inadequate examination prior to the promulgation of the rating decision on appeal constitutes a predecisional error that must be corrected on appeal.

Furthermore, the evidence shows that VA did not obtain medical nexus opinions on the issues of whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for his back disability or right hip disability. VA must provide a medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the Veteran qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-82 (2006). After the unfavorable April 2023 rating decision was rendered, the Veteran provided private medical treatment records that reflected current diagnoses, and these records were accepted as new and relevant evidence. 

Contrary to the assertions in the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, there is evidence of in-service events in the military, repeated parachute jumps and landings, provided in the form of lay evidence and supported by military personnel records showing jumpmaster education courses and the Veteran's receipt of a parachutist badge. The Board observes that in the August 2023 written brief included with the Supplemental Claim Application, the Veteran's representative discussed and cited to medical literature regarding the physical impacts of parachute jumping and landing in the military along with the August 2023 Supplemental Claim Application. While the Veteran is competent to provide lay statements regarding his military service and symptoms of pain, he is not competent provide a medical opinion as to whether his pain was a result of his miliary service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

No VA medical nexus opinions were obtained by the AOJ during the period on appeal, with the initial April 2023 VA examination request only seeking medical opinions as to chronic disabilities and their severity. See March 2023 examination request. Here, the duty to obtain medical nexus opinions for the Veteran's back and hip conditions under McLendon was triggered prior to the issuance of the January 2024 rating decision as there was competent evidence of a current disability of a back condition under Saunders and as evidenced in the July 2023 private medical record, a current disability of a hip condition as evidenced in the June 2023 private medical record, competent lay evidence with supporting documentation regarding repetitive parachute jumping and landing while in service, and no medical nexus opinion was obtained by the AOJ during the period on appeal. Thus, the AOJ's failure to obtain medical nexus opinions represents predecisional duty-to-assist errors that must be corrected on remand.

Additionally, in August 2023, the Veteran's representative raised the contention that he is entitled to presumptive service connection for his claimed conditions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 because the claim for back pain was received by VA prior to the Veteran's separation from service in December 2022, and generally, a diagnosis of arthritis within one year of separation from service warrants service connection under this regulation. The Board notes that arthritis is listed as a chronic disease that is subject to presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a); however, medical opinions are required to determine whether any of the Veteran's diagnoses, L4-5 disc degeneration with retrolisthesis, foraminal stenosis or snapping hip syndrome, medically constitute arthritis. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 174 (1991) (the Board may not make independent medical assessments). In light of the diagnoses reflected in the June and July 2023 private medical treatment records, the fact that the Veteran filed for service connection for back and hip disabilities prior to his separation from service, and the unaddressed contention of the Veteran that these disabilities fall under the chronic disease of arthritis pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.309, the AOJ's failure to seek a medical opinion on these matters which were reasonably raised by the record constitutes an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, as correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim prior to the issuance of the January 2024 rating decision.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ is requested to obtain and associate with the Veteran's claims file his post-service treatment records from the Austin, MVH, as identified in the February and September 2023 Enterprise database search results.

2. After the outstanding requested medical records have been associated with the Veteran's claims file, the AOJ is to obtain medical opinions by an appropriate VA examiner regarding the Veteran's back disability and right hip disability. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and note review of the record in the examination report. Any indicated tests or studies should be performed, and all material relevant evidence should be discussed. All pertinent medical complaints, symptoms, and clinical findings must be reported in detail. Following complete review of the record, the examiner must address the following:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of foraminal stenosis. If there is a determination of a current disability of foraminal stenosis, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the foraminal stenosis had its onset during any period of active military duty, or is otherwise etiologically related to service, to include consideration of the Veteran's parachute jumping and landing during his jumpmaster military training courses.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's current back disability, to include his diagnosed L4-5 disc degeneration with retrolisthesis, lumbar radiculopathy, and back pain, at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset during any period of active military duty, or is otherwise etiologically related to service, to include consideration of the Veteran's parachute jumping and landing during his jumpmaster military training courses.

(c.) Whether the Veteran's diagnosed snapping hip syndrome and right pain at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had their onset during any period of active military duty, or are otherwise etiologically related to service, to include consideration of the Veteran's parachute jumping and landing during his jumpmaster military training courses.

(d.) Whether any of the Veteran's diagnosed back and hip disabilities medically constitute arthritis.

The VA examiner is respectfully reminded that the diagnoses of L4-5 disc degeneration with retrolisthesis, lumbar radiculopathy, snapping hip syndrome, and current disability of back pain are established fact in this record and are not in dispute.

Any opinion should include a detailed rationale. The examiner should consider the entire claims file and discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the nature of symptoms. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, and that he reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion.

Additionally, the examiner is to specifically address the medical literature identified in the August 2023 written brief.

If the examiner is unable to offer the requested opinion, it is essential that the examiner offer a rationale for the conclusion that an opinion cannot be provided without resort to speculation, together with a statement as to whether there is additional evidence that might enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 328 (2010).

3. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appeal based on the entirety of the evidence of record. If the Veteran's appeal is not granted to the fullest extent possible, he should be furnished with a copy of the readjudication and afforded the applicable opportunity to respond.

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.