Citation Nr: A25031984
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240528-443732
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for a compensable rating for service-connected right upper extremity scars is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2003 to October 2012. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of a compensable rating for service-connected right upper extremity scars, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The claim for a compensable rating for service-connected right upper extremity scars is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking a compensable rating for his service connected scars. In a September 2023 statement, he reported that his scar was "very painful" and that the pain was "nonstop." 

In February 2024, the Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the severity of his disability. During the examination, the examiner noted four scars, but found none of them to be painful, unstable, or tender to palpation. Even more, the Veteran failed to report any current symptomology. 

However, the Veteran also submitted a statement in September 2023 in which he explained how his scar (noted that the Veteran used scar singular rather than scars) was painful and pretty nonstop, such that it always ached whether sitting, laying down or working.  The examiner did not address the Veteran's September 2023 statement regarding nonstop pain, and the AOJ did not request an addendum opinion to clarify the discrepancy. 

Here, the VA examination appears to have identified four scars, but the Veteran's statement only refers to one scar.  As such, clarification is needed.

VA treatment records do not provide for any findings of greater significance than those found in the above VA examination. Specifically, the records do not provide information regarding the quantity or condition of the Veteran's right upper extremity scars. 

Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, the Board notes that it is unclear how many, if any, of the Veteran's scars are painful. In his September 2023 statement, the Veteran referred to a singular painful scar without any indication that there were additional (unpainful) scars. Conversely, the February 2024 VA examiner noted four scars, none of which were observed to be or reported as painful. On remand, the AOJ is directed to obtain another examination that addresses the Veteran's lay statements regarding pain. Also, the Veteran is invited to provide a statement as to which of his scars he was referring to in his September 2023 statement.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an examination of the Veteran's service-connected right upper extremity scar(s). The examiner should answer the following questions:

a)	How many scars does the Veteran have on his right upper extremity?

b)	If more than one, should they be considered one scar for rating purposes?  Why or why not?

c)	Is the scar/scars painful (as suggested by the Veteran's September 2023 lay statement). Why or why not?  

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Graison-McBride, Kimberly F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.