Citation Nr: A25031804
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240803-466832
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include major depressive disorder (MDD), as secondary to service-connected inguinal hernia, scars traversing the lower abdomen, loss of mandible with temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorder, residual of meniscal repair of left knee, and loss of maxilla on a causation basis, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of MDD that was caused by his service-connected disabilities. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for MDD as secondary to his service-connected disabilities are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1977 to July 1983, and from April 2003 to April 2004.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran did not waive the remainder of his window to request a docket switch pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Because the current decision represents a full grant of the benefit sought, the lack of a waiver represents only harmless error by the Board.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include MDD, as secondary to service-connected disabilities. 

The Veteran contends that his acquired psychiatric disability, to include MDD, is related to his service-connected disabilities.  More specifically, he explained that his service-connected disabilities cause him to have difficulty with relationships and functioning.  He stated that the pain from previous surgeries and difficulty with his knee has caused him to be depressed and anxious.  See March 2024 VA 21-526EZ.

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of an established service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Similarly, any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will be service connected.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). In the latter instance, the nonservice-connected disease or injury is said to have been aggravated by the service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310. In cases of aggravation of a veteran's nonservice-connected disability by a service-connected disability, such veteran shall be compensated for the degree of disability over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.322.  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 778 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the evidence, an April 2024 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of any mental health condition under the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) V.  However, a March 2024 private examiner determined that the Veteran met the requirements for a diagnosis of depressive disorder, with mixed features (major depressive like features and anxious distress) under the DSM V diagnostic criteria.

Although the April 2024 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a mental health diagnosis under DSM V following her evaluation of the Veteran, the examiner made no findings as to the adequacy of the positive diagnosis of MDD.   

Accordingly, the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disability, to include MDD.  The Board accords the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and finds that he has a current diagnosis of MDD, and accordingly, the first Shedden element, current disability, is met.

In the July 2024 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the claimed primary disabilities are service connected and noted that the Veteran is service connected for inguinal hernia, left knee meniscal tear, lower abdomen traversing scar, loss of mandible with TMJ disorder, and loss of maxilla.  The Board will not disturb this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Therefore, the Veteran has met the second required element of secondary service connection.

Turning to the third element, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to include MDD, was caused by his service-connected disabilities.    

The Veteran attended a private examination in March 2024 with Dr. C.L., a licensed clinical psychologist.  The examiner noted a thorough review of the Veteran's medical records and a diagnosis of depressive disorder, with mixed features (major depressive like features and anxious distress).  The examiner concluded that the claimed condition is at least as likely as not due to, the result of, or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected conditions.  She explained that it is common for people diagnosed with health conditions, such as the Veteran's service-connected conditions, to experience depression due to the longitudinal nature of the disease, including symptoms of chronic pain, and loss of mobility and functioning.  Due to his mental distress, the Veteran reported a decrease in social and occupational functioning which causes overall moderate functional impairments.  Impairments were evidenced by reduced and/or strained social interactions, decreased productivity and motivation, chronic sleep disruption, and memory loss.  There is a family history of mental health problems but no record of the Veteran experiencing such symptoms before enlisting in the Air Force and Army or prior to sustaining his service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination in April 2024.  The Veteran reported experiencing anxiety 2 to 3 days per week.  Anxiety most commonly occurs in response to groin pain with intimacy with his spouse.  He rates his anxiety as typically being a 4 to 5 out of 10.  He worries if he will be a good partner with this groin issue.  He feels like his heartbeat accelerates and breathing gets more intense.  He reported having a depressed mood daily.  He rates his typical depressed mood as being a 5 out of 10 over the last months.  The Veteran also reported experiencing tearfulness at times and lower energy and motivation.  As noted above, the examiner concluded that the Veteran does not meet the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for any mental health condition.  She explained that aside from the private examination conducted in March 2024, the available records do not reflect or support a diagnosis of any mental health condition secondary to his service-connected medical conditions.  The Veteran reported having engaged in mental health therapy at times in the past but not related to the current claimed symptoms or conditions.  These records were not available for review in VBMS at the time of this exam.  Outside of the subjective symptoms reported, the available records do not demonstrate support of a diagnosis of a mental health condition at this time.

There are thus conflicting medical opinions as to whether the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disability that is secondary to his service-connected disabilities.  Ultimately, the Board affords probative weight to the March 2024 opinion finding that the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disability which was caused by his service-connected disabilities.  The March 2024 examiner provided a well-reasoned medical explanation for her conclusion.  The opinion was supported by cited research studies linking the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to his acquired psychiatric disability.  Although the April 2024 VA examiner reached a different conclusion, the March 2024 examiner considered the Veteran's lay statements and facts of the Veteran's specific case to include his service-connected disabilities.  Moreover, the April 2024 VA examiner did not consider the March 2024 private opinion which noted several psychiatric symptoms to include, depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (more than once a week), chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of mood and motivation, impairment of short- and long-term memory, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Additionally, the April 2024 VA examiner failed to explain why the Veteran's diagnosis of MDD is no longer valid.

Accordingly, the Board has weighed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disability that is secondary to his service-connected disabilities.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule is therefore for application.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The Board will resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and find that the evidence supports the grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include MDD, as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, on a causation basis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107.     

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Miller, D. M. Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.