Citation Nr: A25031615
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-417178
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1979 to July 1983.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2023 decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2023 decision.  In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for bilateral pes planus and service connection for a bilateral ankle disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

a)	Bilateral pes planus

The Veteran contends that his pre-existing asymptomatic bilateral pes planus was aggravated beyond its natural progression during military service.  He contends that he did not experienced foot pain before the military but began having pain in his feet during boot camp, which worsened over his time in service, and has continued since separation.  The Veteran reports that his foot pain increased in severity during service due to the demands of physical training and wearing military footwear.  He reports using ace wraps and orthotics during service to treat his foot pain.  See February 2016 NOD, February 2022 statement in support of claim, March 2022 VA examination, and February 2023 VA examination.

The medical opinions that were obtained in June 2015, March 2022 and February 2023 are inadequate because the proper legal standard was not utilized, and the Veteran's lay statements regarding worsening foot pain during and after service were not addressed.  A new medical opinion must be obtained with a rationale that adequately addresses whether the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was clearly and unmistakably aggravated beyond its natural progression during service.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

(b) Bilateral ankle disability

The Veteran contends that he began experiencing bilateral ankle pain during service in 1981, and self-treated with ace wraps for support.  He alleges that his bilateral ankle pain is the result of in-service physical training and wearing the required military footwear.  See March 2022 ankle DBQ and February 2023 foot and ankle DBQs.

The June 2015, March 2022 and February 2023 medical opinions are inadequate because the examiners failed to address the Veteran's contention that his bilateral ankle pain began in service as a result of his physical training and wearing military footwear. The June 2015 and March 2022 medical opinions are also insufficient because the rationales are based solely on the absence of evidence in service and a lack of continuity of care after service.  

To date, a VA opinion has not been obtained regarding whether the Veteran's bilateral ankle disability is related to the in-service events described by the Veteran. Failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

(c) Appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW.

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate examiner.  Following a review of the record, and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming his statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

(a)	Is it clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, and undebatable) that the preexisting pes planus was NOT aggravated during service? Why or why not?

(b)	Is it clear and unmistakable that any increase in disability during service was due to the natural progress? Why or why not?

* A March 1979 entrance medical examination reflects a diagnosis of asymptomatic bilateral pes planus.  

*The Veteran contends that his pre-existing asymptomatic bilateral pes planus was aggravated beyond its natural progression during military service.  He argues that he did not experience foot pain before the military but began having pain in his feet during boot camp, which worsened during service and continued after separation.  He contends that his foot pain increased in severity while in the military due to the demands of physical training and the military footwear.  The Veteran reports using ace wraps and orthotics during service to treat his foot pain.  See February 2016 NOD, February 2022 statement in support of claim, March 2022 VA examination, and February 2023 VA examination.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy.  See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.  In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

3. Obtain an examination and medical opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed left and right ankle sprain.  Following a review of the record, and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming his statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral ankle sprain had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to, the Veteran's active-duty service? Why or why not?

*The Veteran contends that his bilateral ankle pain began while on active duty in 1981 and has continued since that time.  He alleges that his bilateral ankle pain is the result of in-service physical training and wearing the required military footwear.  See March 2022 ankle DBQ and February 2023 foot and ankle DBQs.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy.  See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

The examiner is informed by the Board that chronicity is not required to find a nexus to service or for service connection to be granted.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty. Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

(Continued on the next page)

?

4. Provide the Veteran notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

5. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mecone, Alison M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.