Citation Nr: A25031041
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-461557
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1965 to January 1969.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ)

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on November 22, 2024, and the hearing transcript is of record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability.

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a heart disability.

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed heart conditions were caused by toxic exposures in service.  Specifically, the Veteran has claimed exposure to herbicide agents and PFAs.

While the Board observes that the Veteran's initial claim to establish service connection for a heart disability was denied by the AOJ in an earlier rating decision, the AOJ favorably found in the rating decision on appeal that new and relevant evidence sufficient to warrant reconsideration of the matter had been received.   Therefore, the Board will proceed with readjudication of the merits of the previously denied claim.

The AOJ favorably found in the rating decision on appeal that the evidence showed diagnoses of coronary artery disease, coronary artery bypass graft, and myocardial infarction, that coronary artery disease has been presumptively linked to herbicide exposure, that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, and that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) was conceded, but without conceding Agent Orange exposure.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by those favorable findings.

VA's duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991).  When VA obtains an examination, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private April 2024 medical opinion from a physician.  That examiner stated a professional medical opinion that the Veteran's disability was more likely than not related to service, and that the Veteran's coronary artery disease with coronary artery bypass grafting and myocardial infarction was presumptively linked to herbicide agent exposure.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service records indicate his participation in toxic exposure risk activity with herbicide agents.

The Board finds the April 2024 private opinion to be incomplete because the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinion.  A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value.  Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998).  The examiner stated that the Veteran's current heart conditions were related to service, but did not explain what led to that opinion, other than a conclusory statement that those conditions were presumptively linked to herbicide agent exposure.  The April 2024 private examiner did not explain how the evidence related to the medical opinion provided.  In essence, the examiner stated that the Veteran's heart conditions are related to service using a theory of direct service connection because the Veteran had herbicide agent exposure, which permits service connection on a presumptive basis.  The examiner did not provide sufficient rationale for the opinion.  The Veteran has not been shown to have served in Vietnam or another place where service connection can be presumed based on herbicide agent exposure.  Therefore, the bare conclusion that the Veteran's service records showed herbicide agent exposure is a finding of fact by the medical professional that has not been established by the evidence of record.  As the April 2024 private opinion did not provide an adequate rationale, the Board finds it to be incomplete.

At a December 2023 VA heart examination, the examiner initially opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not that a heart disability was caused by the indicated TERA, reasoning that the Veteran's service in Vietnam presumptively linked the Veteran's current coronary artery disease to service.  After VA requested a clarification based on the fact that the Veteran had not been shown to have served in Vietnam, but instead served in the Philippines, and that exposure to herbicide agents had not been conceded by VA, the examiner issued an addendum opinion on February 4, 2024.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's coronary artery disease was at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA based on the Veteran's service in the Philippines and exposure to herbicide agents through contact with aircraft carrying herbicide agents.  VA requested an additional clarification, which the examiner provided in an additional addendum opinion on February 13, 2024.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's coronary artery disease was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA.  The examiner reasoned that there were no records of the Veteran performing firefighting duties on a damaged, burnt, herbicide agent-carrying aircraft in the Philippines.  Therefore, there was no presumed exposure to herbicide agents based on servicing aircraft that performed operations in Vietnam.

The Board finds the February 13, 2024, addendum opinion to be incomplete.  An opinion that does not specifically address a claimant's contention is incomplete.  The Veteran claimed service connection for heart disease based on two claimed exposures, herbicide agents and PFAs.  The VA opinion did not address the Veteran's claimed exposure to PFAs.  PFA exposure does not provide a presumptive basis for service connection.  Therefore, the Veteran's service history must be examined for PFA exposure, and an opinion should be provided based on whether the Veteran had an event or events in service exposing him to PFAs.  Then, an opinion should be provided as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any PFA exposure in service caused any current heart disability.

Additionally, it does not appear that the Veteran's contentions regarding the disability were considered, as they were not addressed in the rationale.  Those contentions include the Veteran's statement received by VA on October 23, 2023.  Because the examiner did not discuss or consider whether there was any subjective evidence or lay evidence to support a theory that any current heart disability is related to service, the Board finds the VA examination report to be incomplete.

Accordingly, as the December 2023 examination and accompanying February 13, 2024, addendum opinion have been found inadequate, and there are no other adequate etiology opinions of record, remand is necessary for an adequate etiology opinion regarding the claimed heart disability and its relation to service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any heart disability.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, and should note that review in the report.  A clearly stated rationale for the opinion offered must be provided and must not be based on the lack of a record in service of the claimed disability.  The examiner should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Diagnose all heart disabilities found on examination or shown during the pendency of the claim.

(b)	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that a heart disability is etiologically related to active service or any event, disease, or injury during service, including whether any diagnosed heart disability was caused by conceded toxic exposures based on the Veteran's MOS.  The examiner should discuss the reported symptoms since service and cannot rely on a lack of medical findings in the service medical records to support an opinion.  

(c)	The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contention that exposure to PFAs caused a current heart disability.  The examiner should specifically address VA's November 2023 TERA Memo that conceded non-deployment related toxic exposure risk activity based on the Veteran's MOS of Fire Protection Specialist.  

(d)	The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contentions contained in the Veteran's statement received by VA on October 23, 2023, and in the November 2024 Hearing Transcript.  

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.