Citation Nr: A25031274
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-470303
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 10 percent for left knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from July 1980 to June 1983 and from October 1983 to October 2000.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 10 percent for left knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

At the May 2023 VA knee and lower leg examination, the Veteran reported us of over-the-counter analgesics to treat his knee disability.  However, this examination report did not consider the ameliorative effects of medication when evaluating the current nature and severity of the left knee disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) (when a Diagnostic Code is silent as to the effects of medication, VA may not deny entitlement to a higher disability rating based on the relief provided by medication).  The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently held in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (March 12, 2025) that the holding of Jones v. Shinseki, applies when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities if the relevant Diagnostic Code does not reference medication use.  The Court found that to comply with Jones, when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant Diagnostic Code does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of each disability.  Here, the Veteran's left knee disability is rated under Diagnostic Code 5003-5261.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  This Diagnostic Code does not reference medication use.  Thus, in rating this disability, the rater must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of the left knee disability.  The May 2023 VA examiner did not discount the beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of the left knee disability in the examination report.  Upon remand, another VA examination and medical opinion must be obtained before the Board can decide this claim on the merits.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected degenerative arthritis of the left knee.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms 

?

necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups and with repeated use over time.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  

The examiner should also provide estimates of what the Veteran's range of motion measurements, symptoms, and related impairment would have been, for the service-connected degenerative arthritis of the left knee, without the ameliorative effects of medication used to treat the disability, including after repetitive use over time and during flare-ups.  In other 

?

words, a baseline severity must be provided for the left knee disability for the entire appeal period.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R.R. Watkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.