Citation Nr: A25031978
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 181219-1757
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of the right knee claimed as right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1980 to November 1982. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2018 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In May 2019, the Veteran elected a RAMP opt in and requested a hearing before the Board. In July 2019, the RO issued a deferred rating, noting that the Veteran had requested to have a hearing before the Board, not a higher-level review. In July 2023, the Veteran failed to appear at the hearing, and it was later determined that the Veteran was in a substance abuse facility. In September 2023, the Veteran requested to have the requested hearing. In May 2024, it was reported that the Veteran was incarcerated and would not be available for the hearing, the correspondence further noted that the Veteran wanted to proceed without a hearing. In December 2024, the Veteran contacted the VA and requested that his matter be decided by a judge without a hearing.

THEREFORE, THE BOARD MAY ONLY CONSIDER THE EVIDENCE OF RECORD AT THE TIME OF THE MAY 2019 RAMP OPT-IN, AS WELL AS ANY EVIDENCE SUBMITTED BY THE VETERAN OR REPRESENTATIVE WITHIN 90 DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT OF THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE HEARING REQUEST. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(B). IF EVIDENCE WAS SUBMITTED EITHER (1) DURING THE PERIOD AFTER VA RECEIVED THE RAMP OPT-IN AND PRIOR TO RECEIPT OF THE WITHDRAWAL, OR (2) MORE THAN 90 DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT OF THE WITHDRAWAL, THE BOARD DID NOT CONSIDER IT IN ITS DECISION. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(B), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection of a right knee condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This matter is now properly before the Board.

1. Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of the right knee claimed as right knee condition.

The Veteran contends that he should be service connected for degenerative arthritis of the right knee claimed as right knee condition. 

In September 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran indicated his right knee pain is on and off since he was in his twenties. The examiner noted that the Veteran has flare ups every two weeks and that they last about a day or two. The examiner noted that the Veteran said that his knee is less flexible, but he is able to get around. The examiner did find that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of degenerative arthritis. 

The September 2018 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed right knee condition was caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's gait is normal, and that the exam was "totally normal". The examiner noted that the Veteran was seen for knee swelling in service, there is no evidence of chronic arthritis or any chronic knee condition in service. The examiner noted that the Veteran worked in construction for many years and that is probably the etiology of the current bilateral knee arthritis. The Board finds that the examiner's opinion is inadequate. The examiner made a presumption that the Veteran's arthritis is related to construction work that the Veteran did after service, without indicating any specific injury or rationale as to why that conclusion was made. Furthermore, the examiner did not discuss the cause of the Veteran's knee swelling, and whether that swelling could have been etiologically related to the Veteran's current diagnosed condition. The Board finds that the examiner disregarded the Veteran's September 2015 lay statements that were part of the record. The Board finds that the September 2018 VA examination was inadequate as it failed to adequately consider and discuss the Veteran's lay statements. The Veteran is competent to report his injuries and pain related to said injuries.

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file. In November 2015, the Veteran submitted a lay statement regarding injuries to his joints. The Board finds that the Veteran also submitted a lay statement in September 2018 that questioned the adequacy of the examiner's examination. Therefore, in September 2015 and November 2018, the Veteran submitted lay statements discussing his right knee injury that occurred in service. 

The Board finds that the RO relied on an inadequate VA examination when denying the Veteran's claim. The Board further finds that the RO made a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain an adequate VA examination to support its decision. One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the RO for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

Therefore, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct the RO's pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed right knee condition. If a VA examination cannot be afforded to the Veteran in a reasonable matter due to incarceration or hospitalization, the Board asks that the RO obtain an addendum medical opinion that includes a complete review of the Veteran's entire claims file, lay statements, medical records to adequately assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right knee condition.

The examiner must consider all prior medical examinations government and non-government, service treatment records, and the Veteran's lay statements of record, particularly the September 2015 lay statement of his in-service injury.

The examiner must respond to the following: 

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right knee injury / pain was caused by or otherwise related to an in-service event, injury, or disease? 

Consider the Veteran's lay statement of record regarding falling during training in service.

Discuss the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current diagnosis of degenerative arthritis. Is it possible that the Veteran's current diagnosis may be etiologically related to the in-service injury. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.??? 

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the Veteran's claim. 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Counsel, H. Hailu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.