Citation Nr: A25031536
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240614-447884
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and bipolar disorder due to military sexual trauma is granted.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.  

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is related to his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1991 to May 1993. This matter is before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board is expanding the issue on appeal to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition due to MST to encompass the claimant's reported symptoms and other information of record.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD and depression due to MST, is granted.

The Veteran is of the position that he has an acquired psychiatric disability due to MST.  In his November 2019 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, he stated that he was sexually harassed, groped and accosted in the shower during active service.  

In the Veteran's Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for PTSD Secondary to Personal Assault, he said that there was a male corpsman who became fixated on him.  The corpsman would watch him shower, say inappropriate things to him, constantly try to grope and grab the Veteran, and watch him sleep. When the Veteran confronted him, the corpsman would tell him, "Who are they going to believe: you - the person locked in the psych ward, or me?"  The Veteran reported the issue to the staff, and it was ignored.  The Veteran has experienced extreme weight loss or gain, lethargy, isolation, depression, hypervigilance and substance abuse.  

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

The law provides that if a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than a veteran's service records may corroborate the veteran's account of the stressor incident. Gallegos v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 329 (2008); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(5).  Examples of such evidence include, but are not limited to, records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians; tests for sexually transmitted diseases; and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy.  Evidence of behavioral changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these alternate sources. Examples of behavioral changes that may constitute credible evidence of a stressor include, but are not limited to: request for transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavioral changes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

In the context of a PTSD claim based on personal assault, a medical opinion may be used to corroborate a personal-assault stressor. See Menegassi v. Shinseki, 683 F.3d 1379, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (observing that the Court erred when it determined that a medical opinion based on a post-service examination of a Veteran cannot be used to establish the occurrence of a stressor); see also Patton v. West, 12 Vet. App. 272 (1999) (rejecting the requirement that something more than medical nexus evidence is required for credible supporting evidence in personal assault cases). Thus, courts have made plain that in a claim for service connection for PTSD based on in-service personal assault, favorable medical evidence diagnosing PTSD based on the Veteran's account of in-service assault must be weighed against all other evidence of record when determining whether the claimed in-service personal assault has been corroborated. See Menegassi, 638 F.3d at 1382.

A veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of examination, acceptance, enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.  To rebut the presumption of soundness the burden is on VA to satisfy a two-prong test by showing by clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's disability both existed prior to service and was not aggravated during service.  See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Bagby v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 225, 227 (1991).  The Veteran did not have a psychiatric disorder that was noted on entry into service.  The presumption of soundness attaches. 

Following a review of the record and applicable legal criteria, for the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that the presumption of soundness cannot be rebutted and the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is due to service.  

The Veteran has a current acquired psychiatric disorder.  In December 2020, the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified personality disorder, unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder.  In January 2021, he was diagnosed with PTSD at a private medical facility.  Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met.   

Although the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not note any preexisting disability in his entrance examination, all of the clinicians of record found, based on the medical record, STRs, and the Veteran's statements, that he had a preexisting acquired psychiatric disorder.  The December 2020 VA examiner noted that the Veteran has an extensive history of behavioral dysfunction and sociopathy, including prior to the military.  The Veteran reported that he was psychiatrically hospitalized once prior to the military related to legal problems.  A September 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bipolar disorder pre-existed his military career.  As such, it is undebatable that the Veteran had a preexisting acquired psychiatric disorder.

Next, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's preexisting acquired psychiatric disorder was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service.  Even when there is clear and unmistakable evidence of preexistence, the Veteran need not produce any evidence of aggravation in order to prevail under the aggravation prong of the presumption of soundness.  Rather, the burden is on VA to establish by clear and unmistakable evidence that it did not or that any increase was due to the natural progress of the disease. Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 235 (2012).  This burden must be met by "affirmative evidence" demonstrating that there was no aggravation.  Id.  Conversely, the burden is not met by finding "that the record contains insufficient evidence of aggravation."  Id.  In this case, the record does not contain affirmative evidence that the psychiatric disorder was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service.  Therefore, the Veteran's claim is treated as one of service connection.  

In May 1992, the Veteran was noted as needing a psychiatric appointment.  The Veteran was diagnosed with bipolar disorder, alcohol dependence and personality disorder in January 1993 during active service.  He was hospitalized for psychiatric treatment from November 3 - 18, 1992.  He had just returned from his unauthorized absence and reported that he had made several recent suicide attempts.  He was noted as having a history of alcohol dependence.  Psychological testing was obtained and supported a diagnosis of personality disorder and depression.  The second element has, therefore been met.  

A November 1992 service medical record indicates that the Veteran was originally admitted to an emergency room with depressive symptoms after three suicide attempts.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran reported his depressive symptoms worsened one year prior to the visit.  

In July 2020, the Veteran reported experiencing sexual assault during active service.  In December 2020, he appeared for a VA examination for mental disorders. The examiner indicated that a diagnosis of PTSD was not found.  He was, however, diagnosed with unspecified personality disorder, unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  The Veteran reported experiencing nightmares about the MST that he experienced once every few months or less often.  He feels down most of the time and has experienced depression since the military.  Medical records reveal a report of mental health problems prior to the military.  He also felt anxious most of the time related to recent life stressors.  He has panic attacks less than once per week, can lose his temper quickly, has exaggerated startle response is hypervigilant and tries to avoid others when angry.  He reported attempting suicide a few times, with the most recent occurring approximately three years prior to the examination. He reported that while psychiatrically hospitalized from November 1992 through April 1993, a hospital corpsman would assault him on several occasions.  

The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, finding that the Veteran's psychiatric hospitalization alone indicates that he was previously experiencing mental health problems.  His medical records reveal a report of psychiatric hospitalization, legal problems and a poor relationship with his mother prior to the military. The examiner opined that the Veteran seemed to minimize the extent of his behavioral and mental health problems which occurred prior to the military.

An addendum opinion was authored later that month indicating that the Veteran's bipolar disorder clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  However the examiner did not provide a rationale and therefore the opinion is inadequate and it is afforded no probative weight. 

During a December 2020 VA examination for Mental Disorders, the Veteran reported that he has been disciplined in service on several occasions, resulting in his being reduced in rank twice, ultimately leading to his discharge.  

The Veteran was seen at a private medical facility in December 2020.  He reported that he had traumatic experiences that he did not like discussing.  He then informed the clinician that during active service, a member of the military staff made unwanted sexual advances and assaulted him.  The Veteran expressed frustration that someone could take advantage of people in "fragile state[s]."  He stated that his mood goes up and down from day to day. 

The Veteran submitted a statement in January 2022.  He stated that he first experienced mental health symptoms during active service when several servicemen attacked him while he was on the phone because one of the servicemen wanted to use the phone as well.  The Veteran has become hypervigilant as a result of the attack.  After the incident, the Veteran went absent without leave because he felt that he needed to get away from everyone.  He felt suicidal when he left.  He subsequently surrendered himself and was hospitalized.  During hospitalization, he experienced MST. He now has suicidal thoughts, depression and withdraws from friends.  

That same month, the Veteran's mother submitted statement on his behalf.  She stated that after active duty he became reclusive.  He also stopped laughing or smiling, and began to drink heavily.  

The evidence includes a private medical examination that was submitted in April 2022.  The clinician opined that the Veteran has PTSD due to MST.  She also opined that his bipolar disorder became manifest during active service.  The clinician opined that the limitations of social and occupational functioning imposed by the Veteran's PTSD and bipolar disorder have resulted in major deficiencies in most areas and his symptoms prevent him from performing non-exertional activities such as communicating, remembering and following instructions, using judgment, adapting to changes, and dealing with people, including supervisors, coworkers, and the public.  The clinician further opined that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD and bipolar disorder are inextricably intertwined, and as a result, it is impossible to differentiate what portion of his occupational and social impairment is caused by his PTSD as opposed to his bipolar disorder.

In September 2022, a VA examiner provided an opinion upon review of the Veteran's records, including the April 2022 private medical examination.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's bipolar disorder pre-existed his military career and was not substantially aggravated beyond its normal progression by an in-service stressor-related event.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's medical records throughout the military reveal a report of psychiatric hospitalization and legal problems as well as a poor relationship with his mother prior to the military. 

The Board assigns the most probative weight to the April 2022 private medical opinion because it was thorough, based on a review of the record, well-reasoned, and is sufficient to allow the Board to find that the Veteran had a MST.  Service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on TDIU is remanded.

In his November 2020 VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's application for increased compensation based on unemployability), he asserted that his psychiatric disorder, hearing loss, and tinnitus are the disabilities that prevent him from securing or following substantially gainful employment.  His hearing loss and tinnitus are not service connected.  Prior to this decision, his only service-connected disability was sarcoidosis, rated at 30 percent from August 10, 2023.  The Board has granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability due to MST, and a rating and effective date have not yet been assigned for this disability.  The AOJ's implementation of the grant of service connection by assigning an initial rating and effective date will impact the current claim for entitlement to a TDIU.  Accordingly, the issue of TDIU is remanded so that the AOJ may satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty that would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127 (2024).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Implement the Board's grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability and then adjudicate his TDIU claim.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sanders, Danielle A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.