Citation Nr: A25031062
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-434915
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, for major depressive disorder from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, is granted.  

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder from April 29, 2020, is denied.  

Entitlement to a total disability due to individual unemployability based on a single disability for special monthly compensation purposes is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, the Veteran's major depressive disorder was manifested by no more than occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, family relations, and mood. 

2. From April 29, 2020, the Veteran's major depressive disorder did not result in total occupational and social impairment.

3. The Veteran has been award entitlement to TDIU based on the cumulative effects of his service-connected disabilities.

4. The Veteran does not have any single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent and a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability has not been shown; the evidence does not support SMC at the housebound rate for any period on appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, have been met for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

2. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 70 percent have not been met for the appeal period from April 29, 2020. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a total disability due to individual unemployability based on a single disability for special monthly compensation purposes have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16, 4.18; Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008); Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Youngblood v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 412 (2019).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from June 1974 to February 1977.

In a rating decision issued in October 2019, the AOJ awarded service connection for major depressive disorder and assigned a 50 percent disability evaluation, effective November 12, 2013.  

In April 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-995 Supplemental Claim Application seeking a higher evaluation for service-connected major depressive disorder, to include TDIU.  

A March 2022 rating decision increased the rating for major depressive disorder, effective April 29, 2020, the date the supplemental claim was received.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket appealing the evaluations assigned for his major depressive disorder prior to and from April 29, 2020, to include TDIU.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The Board notes that the Veteran has continuously pursued review of an October 2019 rating decision in which service connection was granted for major depressive disorder with the assignment of a 50 percent rating, from November 12, 2013.  In a timely supplemental claim received on April 29, 2020, the Veteran appealed the initial 50 percent evaluation assigned for his major depressive disorder in the October 2019 rating decision.  An August 2020 rating decision subsequently assigned an effective date of November 14, 2013, on the basis of a clear and unmistakable error.  In the March 2022 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating for major depressive disorder to 70 percent, effective April 29, 2020, resulting in a staged rating.  Subsequently, in the April 2023, VA Form 20-996 Request for Higher-Level Review (HLR) as well as in his VA Form 10182, in response to the May 2023 HLR decision, the Veteran sought increased evaluations for the appeal period prior to and from April 29, 2020, to include compensation for individual unemployability.  Therefore, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as an increased rating claim for major depressive disorder for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, and the appeal period from April 29, 2021.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating, but no higher, for major depressive disorder from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, is granted.  

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder from April 29, 2020, is denied.  

From November 14, 2013, and prior to April 29, 2020, the Veteran was assigned a 50 percent disability rating for major depressive disorder and was assigned a 70 percent disability rating from April 29, 2020, under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434 (major depressive disorder). 

For reasons set forth below, the evidence is at least evenly balanced, if not higher, that the Veteran's major depressive disorder warrants a 70 percent rating, but no higher, under Diagnostic Code 9434 for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Under the provisions for rating psychiatric disorders, a 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.)

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

Ratings are assigned according to the degree of occupational and social impairment resulting from manifestations of the disability at issue. However, the use of the term such as in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Instead, the VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment. 

The Board notes that the Court has distinguished a new claim for an increased rating of a service-connected disability from a case where the veteran expresses dissatisfaction with an initial rating of a disability that has just been service-connected. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). In the latter case, VA must assess the level of disability from the date of initial application for service connection and determine whether the level of disability warrants the assignment of different disability ratings at different times over the life of the claim, a practice known as "staged rating. See Id.

The Veteran is seeking increased staged rating for his service connected major depressive disorder.

On review of the record, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, and a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted from April 29, 2020.   

At the outset, the Board notes that no other records have been identified in the record beyond the limited medical records already associated with the Veteran's claims file regarding his service-connected psychiatric disability.  Therefore, the Board will also consider a January 2012 psychiatric evaluation, which is beneficial to the Veteran, to help fully assess the severity of his service-connected major depressive disorder.     

In a January 2012 psychiatric evaluation associated with his claim for SSA disability benefits, the Veteran reported that he had difficulty with falling asleep and frequently woke up during the night.  He reported that he felt depressed, frustrated, useless, restless, worried and overly anxious every day with symptoms such as dysphoric mood, lack of motivation, occasional crying spells, difficulty concentrating, loss of interest in previously enjoyable activities, and social withdrawal.  He occasionally heard whistling and people talking when no one was present.  He had difficulty with short term and long term memory as well as organizing and planning things.  On mental status examination, his affect and mood were depressed.  His attention and concentration as well as recent and remote memory skills were mildly impaired.  His cognitive functioning was average, and his insight and judgment were good.  He was able to dress, bathe, and groom himself, however, due to his difficulty with concentrating and physical limitations he could only do a limited amount of cooking, preparing of food, light cleaning, light and limited amounts of laundry and shopping, and a limited amount of driving locally.  He needed assistance with managing money because of difficulties with concentration and arithmetic.  The psychologist stated that the Veteran's difficulties appeared to include maintaining his attention and concentration for extended periods of time, performing complex tasks either independently or with supervision, appropriately dealing with moderate to high degrees of stress, and maintaining a regular schedule.  His difficulties appeared to be due to limited energy and difficulty concentrating due to a combination of depression, anxiety, and apparent cognitive impairments.  

In addition, on mental disorders disability benefits questionnaire submitted in October 2015 and completed by Dr. H.H, a private Licensed Psychologist, the Veteran reported that he suffered from chronic sleep impairment including insomnia.   He self-medicated with alcohol in the past and on occasion now.  His symptoms consisted of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impairment of short and long term memory; disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; suicidal ideations; persistent delusions or hallucinations; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting. He reported that he could no longer enjoy simple activities.  On mental status examination, he complained of increased trouble with short-term memory.  He struggled to remember basic information.  There was a report of overt hallucinations.  His mood was anxious and nervous, and his affect was restricted.  He endorsed symptoms of anxiety, suspiciousness, and paranoia.   

Furthermore, Dr. H.H. determined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  Dr. H.H. found that the Veteran could not sustain the stress from a competitive work environment or be expected to engage in gainful activity due to his anxiety disorder.  Dr. H.H. referred to research indicating that some psychiatric diagnoses, including anxiety, led to occupational dysfunction and poor work related quality of life (Savoca & Rosencheck 2000).  Therefore, sustaining and maintaining meaningful gainful employment was a resulting social and occupational symptom of a debilitating anxiety disorder.  In an accompanying medical opinion regarding the Veteran's ability to do work related activities (mental), Dr. H.H. determined that the Veteran would miss 3 or more days of work per month, would need to leave work early 3 or more days, and would have trouble with concentration more than 3 days a month for at least 7 hours of an 8-hour workday due to his mental condition and symptoms.  Also, more than once a month, he would respond in an angry manner but would not actually become violent.

During a July 2019 VA mental disorders examination, the examiner referred to the DBQ completed by Dr. H.H. and stated that it appeared as if the responses to this questionnaire supported the Veteran's mental health symptoms.  The examiner found that the Veteran's symptoms consisted of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; suspiciousness; mild memory loss; disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech.    Behavioral observations showed that his affect was somewhat depressed, and his overall mood was neutral. He experienced difficulty with focus, concentration, irritability, social isolation, and nightmares.

In an April 2020 statement from the Veteran's spouse, K.P. reported that the Veteran had difficulty with his memory and had to write everything down or else he would forget what he had to do, including while at work.  He forgot about conversations between he and his wife.  He struggled with communication and would get lost in the middle of a conversation as if he was unable to focus.  He exhibited decreased motivation, irritability, sleep impairment, nightmares, mood swings, temper problems, frustration, difficulty with dealing with people, isolating behavior, sadness, and depression. K.P. stated that the Veteran had a hard time working because of his mental health.  He would become easily agitated at work and then complain about his day when he came home.  He remained stressed due to his job and there were times that he had a hard time getting up and going in the morning.  He was also stressed being around people that he worked with and would have to walk away from situations to calm himself down before he could get back to work.  

In April 2020, the Veteran's son, A.P. submitted a statement describing his father's trouble with his memory, including forgetfulness with conversations and his appointments as well as with turning off the stove after cooking and the lights after he left a room.  He had decreased motivation and had trouble with sleeping.  He did not enjoy hobbies like he used to and struggled with mood swings and temper problems.  He would get angry easily and was depressed.  He was not able to handle stress and would get very easily overwhelmed.  When his depression became bad, he had a hard time wanting to get up to get moving to go to work.  He did not like to go out, including in big public settings and preferred to stay around the house.  

During an August 2020 VA mental disorder examination, the Veteran's symptoms consisted of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened effect; disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech.  On examination, his affect was blunted, and his mood was irritable.  The examiner also reported that the Veteran experienced irritability, hopelessness, social isolation, difficulty with concentration, fatigue, and nightmares. He sometimes felt it would be better off if he were not here. He did not appear to pose any threat of danger or injury to self or others.  

The VA examiner added that the Veteran reported that he has been more depressed and anxious.  As a result of his depression, he had difficulty sleeping, which left him fatigued during the day.  Symptoms such as fatigue and difficulty sustaining concentration and remembering things would impact occupational activities. His irritability led to "a short fuse" and snapping at others, which may impact relationships with coworkers and supervisors. His lack of interest and motivation would make it difficult to get out of bed and maintain a regular work schedule.  

The VA examiner noted that since the Veteran's last review, he reported that he has been more depressed and anxious. He felt depressed mostly daily, with fluctuating severity. He was more unmotivated and irritable and snapped at his wife. He had difficulty concentrating and had to write things down. He sometimes felt it would be better off if he were not here, but had no active suicidal ideation, intent or plan.

Collectively, these symptoms are of the type, extent, severity, and/or frequency that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas of the Veteran's life, including work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

The Court has held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130). See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017). The Court specified that VA must not require more than thought or thoughts to establish the symptom of suicidal ideation and may not require that the Veteran have been hospitalized or treated on an inpatient basis to establish suicidal ideation. Id. Although the Veteran denied having suicidal ideations on multiple occasions during this period, he indicated that he had, at least, passive suicidal ideations.  Dr. H.H. indicated that the Veteran had suicidal ideations in the DBQ submitted in October 2015.  During the August 2020 VA examination, although the examiner determined that the Veteran did not appear to pose any threat of danger or injury to self, the Veteran did report that he sometimes felt it would be better off if he were not here. However, the Veteran's social and occupational impairment as demonstrated by the symptoms discussed in the above paragraph show that when viewed holistically, looking at social and occupational impairment and the Veteran's history of ongoing symptoms, the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates a severity level warranting the 70 percent rating in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, and from April 29, 2020. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

As the Veteran has been assigned a 70 percent disability rating for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, and from April 29, 2020, the Board now turns to the question as to whether or not a rating in excess of 70 percent is warranted. Here, a 100 percent rating is not warranted any time, because there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms rose to both total occupational AND social impairment.

The Board has considered the Veteran's, his wife's, and his son's reports as well as the medical evidence of record documenting the severity of the Veteran's occupational impairment, including experiencing difficulty with concentrating; difficulty in completing his assigned work duties; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful situations, including work or a work-like setting; an inability to sustain the stress from a competitive work environment or be expected to engage in gainful activity; agitation at work; difficulty getting up and going to work; as well as stress from being around co-workers and needing to walk away to calm down before getting back to work.  Also, the record shows that the Veteran has not worked since 2011 due to a work-related injury with symptoms associated with depression, anxiety, and apparent cognitive impairments.

Additionally, the Board has considered that auditory hallucinations were indicated on the January 2012 psychiatric evaluation and in October 2015, Dr. H.H. described the hallucinations and delusions as persistent.  However, on subsequent July 2019 and August 2029 VA examinations, there was no evidence of hallucinations, delusions, or paranoia.  Also, all examinations and evaluations showed that he was adequately groomed, was able to maintain eye contact, his thought process was coherent, and goal directed, his insight and judgment were normal, and he was oriented to time, person, and place.   

Significantly, he had social acquaintances, remained married, and maintained relationships with his sons.  He reported having a good relationship with his family and turned to his family and friends for emotional support.  He kept in touch with his brother on the phone. He reported that he and his wife visited a friend. Although he found himself being socially isolated and withdrawn, he reported that he also enjoyed going out and being social.  See January 2012 psychiatric evaluation, October 2015 mental condition DBQ, and August 2020 VA examination.  

Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the Veteran is not shown to have experienced symptoms of the type, extent, and frequency or severity to result in both total occupational AND social impairment as contemplated by the rating criteria for a 100 percent rating.

After resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's major depressive disorder symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria under Diagnostic Code 9434 for a rating of 70 percent rating for the appeal period from November 14, 2013, through April 28, 2020, and from April 29, 2020. The Board finds that predominantly, the Veteran's major depressive disorder is not productive of total social and occupational impairment and does not meet the criteria of a 100 percent rating at any point. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130. As the persuasive evidence is against a higher 100 percent rating, the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

3. Entitlement to a TDIU based on a single disability for special monthly compensation purposes is denied.

 The Veteran is currently in receipt of a total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU). August and September 2020 rating decisions granted initial entitlement to TDIU based on the cumulative effects of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, throughout the period on appeal from November 14, 2013. During the appeal the Veteran sought an increased rating for his major depressive disorder, to include a total disability evaluation based on individual employability (TDIU).  Therefore, the Board must determine whether a TDIU is warranted such that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation based on a singular service-connected disability, such as his major depressive disorder, as it could serve as the basis for SMC at the housebound rate pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s). See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008).

A total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and where it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to his or her age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16, 4.18, 4.19; see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).

VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether his disabilities establish entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) at the housebound rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s), including whether the award of a TDIU would provide entitlement to SMC. See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35 (1993); Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991); Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008).

SMC may be warranted pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s) if a Veteran has a service-connected disability rated as 100 percent disabling and (1) has an additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently rated at 60 percent or more, or (2) by reason of such service-connected disability or disabilities is permanently housebound. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i).

Notably, if TDIU is based on a single service-connected disability, it can serve as a single disability rated as total and the remaining disabilities can satisfy the remaining requirement of disabilities ratable at 60 percent. Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 293 ("section 1114(s) does not limit "a service-connected disability rated as total" to only a schedular rating of 100 percent, and the Secretary's current regulation permits a TDIU rating based on a single disability to satisfy the statutory requirement of a total rating").

The Veteran is currently service connection for major depressive disorder rated as 50 percent; tension headaches rated as 30 percent prior to April 29, 2020, and 50 percent from that date; and tinnitus rated as 10 percent.

In a January 2012 psychiatric evaluation associated with his claim for SSA disability benefits, the Veteran reported that he left his job in 2011 and was not currently able to work due to a combination of psychiatric difficulties and medical conditions associated with a head injury he sustained in May 2011.  He had worked as a building inspection and obtained a high school diploma and attended two years of college. The psychologist stated that the Veteran's difficulties appeared to include maintaining his attention and concentration for extended periods of time, performing complex tasks either independently or with supervision, appropriately dealing with moderate to high degrees of stress, and maintaining a regular schedule.  His difficulties appeared to be due to limited energy and difficulty concentrating due to a combination of depression, anxiety, and apparent cognitive impairments.  

On SSA Form-3368, the Veteran listed several conditions that limited his ability to work such as post concussive disorder, herniated disc in the tailbone, bone spurs (spine, neck, back, leg, and shoulder), arthritis in back, revised whiplash, chronic body pain, insomnia, eye pain (vision problems), and depression. 

A February 2012 mental residual functional capacity assessment included the diagnoses of adjustment disorder and rule out cognitive disorder NOS and determined that the Veteran was able to perform simple tasks in a low stress work setting.  

The Veteran submitted a mental disorders disability benefits questionnaire in October 2015, on which, Dr. H.H., a private Licensed Psychologist, determined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  Dr. H.H. found that the Veteran could not sustain the stress from a competitive work environment or be expected to engage in gainful activity due to his anxiety disorder.  Therefore, sustaining and maintaining meaningful gainful employment was a resulting social and occupational symptom of a debilitating anxiety disorder.  In an accompanying medical opinion regarding the Veteran's ability to do work related activities (mental), Dr. H.H. determined that the Veteran would miss 3 or more days of work per month, would need to leave work early 3 or more days, and would have trouble with concentration more than 3 days a month for at least 7 hours of an 8-hour workday due to his mental condition and symptoms.  Also, more than once a month, he would respond in an angry manner but would not actually become violent.

On October 2015 headaches DBQ and residual functional capacity evaluation, Dr. H.S., a private physician, found that the Veteran had very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine headache pain.  Tinnitus was the principal cause of his headaches.  Dr. H.S. determined that the Veteran would not be able to hold employment as he was incapacitated during a headache.  He experienced nausea, vomiting, blurred vision, and was unable to concentrated.  He would miss more than 3 days a week, would need to leave the workplace early 3 or more days per month, would not be able to stay focused for at least 7 hours of an 8-hour workday for more than 3 days a month, and require more unscheduled breaks. 

During a July 2019 VA mental disorders examination, the examiner reported that the Veteran exhibited disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting.

On August 2019 VA headache examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain one every month that was no productive of severe economic inadaptability. The condition impacted his ability to work due to headaches and limitations due to headaches such as difficulty concentrating, not being able to bend over, and decreased ability to look at a computer screen for more than one hour. 

In his April 2020 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application, the Veteran listed the issues as "[e]valuation of major depressive disorder to include individual unemployability," as well as "[e]ffective date and evaluation of tension headaches, to include individual unemployability".   

In April 2020 and August 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, on which he reported that all of his service-connected disabilities prevented him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation.  He last worked in May 2011 and left that job because of his disabilities.  He received or expected to receive workers compensation benefits as well as disability/retirement benefits.  He completed two years of college. 

In an April 2020 statement from the Veteran's spouse, K.P. reported that the Veteran had a hard time working because of his mental health.  He would become easily agitated at work and then complain about his day when he came home.  He remained stressed due to his job and there were times that he had a hard time getting up and going in the morning.  He was also stressed being around people that he worked with and would have to walk away from situations to calm himself down before he could get back to work.  K.P. added that whenever the Veteran had a headache, he had to lie down in a dark room and was unable to function.  Depending on weather, he experienced this type of headache at least twice a week.  Ringing in his ears also caused frustration. 

In April 2020, the Veteran's son, A.P reported that when his father's depression became bad, he had a hard time wanting to get up to get moving to go to work.  

On May 2020 VA headaches examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran had very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain more frequently than once a month productive of severe economic adaptability. The Veteran's headache condition impacted his ability to work in that he needed to lay down in a dark room and could not perform his activities during his weekly headache attacks.  

On May 2020 VA 21-4192 Request for Employment Information, the Veteran's employer noted that the Veteran worked as an inspector and was placed on disability from May 2011 to August 2012.  His last date of employment was August 1, 2012.   The employer remarked that the Veteran was hit in the back of the head with a concrete shut at the job site and he experienced a concussion, headaches, and body numbness.  He never returned to work and became disabled on May 24, 2011. 

On June 2020 VA tinnitus examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran's tinnitus would not negatively impact his ability to function in an occupational environment such as an office setting where he could communicate by email and with limited face to face interaction.  

During an August 2020 VA mental disorder examination, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms included disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. The VA examiner added that symptoms such as fatigue and difficulty sustaining concentration and remembering things would impact occupational activities. His irritability led to "a short fuse" and snapping at others, which may impact relationships with coworkers and supervisors. His lack of interest and motivation would make it difficult to get out of bed and maintain a regular work schedule.  

Based on the above facts, the Board finds the evidence persuasively establishes that the cumulative effects of his major depressive disorder, headaches, and tinnitus caused the occupational impairment leading to unemployability.  The Veteran himself has alleged that multiple service-connected disabilities prevented him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation.  See April 2020 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application as well as April 2020 and August 2021 VA Forms 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

The Board also finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's major depressive disorder alone caused significant occupational impairment rendering him unable to obtain and maintain gainful employment. A February 2012 mental residual functional capacity assessment determined that the Veteran was able to perform simple tasks in a low stress work setting.  Statements submitted by the Veteran's spouse and son described how the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms impacted him while he was working. 

The Veteran's VA treatment reports, SSA records, and request for employment information do not identify any functional impairment specifically caused by the Veteran's major depressive disorder.

To the extent that Dr. H.H. found that the Veteran could not sustain the stress from a competitive work environment or be expected to engage in gainful activity due to his anxiety disorder and listed the number of days and months that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms would impact his work related activities, Dr. H. determined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood, which was consistent with the 70 percent rating.  

The Board further notes that none of the VA examiners have opined that the Veteran was unemployable due solely to his major depressive disorder. December 2019 and August 2020 VA examiners had the opportunity to opine that the Veteran was totally occupationally impaired due to his major depressive disorder and did not do so. It was specifically indicated that he had several impairments which would interfere with employment such as disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; difficulty with focus and concentration; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; and memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events.  Furthermore, symptoms such as fatigue and difficulty sustaining concentration and remembering things would impact occupational activities. His irritability led to "a short fuse" and snapping at others, which may impact relationships with coworkers and supervisors. His lack of interest and motivation would make it difficult to get out of bed and maintain a regular work schedule.  The Board finds; however, these symptoms are adequately compensated for by the current 70 percent rating for this disability.

The "applicable regulations place responsibility for the ultimate TDIU determination on the VA, not a medical examiner." Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). As such, the TDIU claim based solely on the post-concussion syndrome with unspecified depressive disorder is denied. 

As the Veteran does not have any single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent and a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability has been denied, the evidence does not support SMC at the housebound rate for any period on appeal.

Further, the Veteran is not permanently confined to his dwelling and the immediate premises, nor was he institutionalized and confined to the ward or clinical areas. The medical evidence reflects that he left the home or immediate premises for medical appointments and socialization. He reported that he and his wife visited a friend. Although he found himself being socially isolated and withdrawn, he reported that he also enjoyed going out and being social.  See January 2012 psychiatric evaluation, October 2015 mental condition DBQ, and August 2020 VA examination.  Therefore, the evidence does not support housebound benefits on the basis of being permanently housebound. For these reasons the appeal is denied.

In summary, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against entitlement to a TDIU based upon a single disability, or his service-connected major depressive disorder for the purposes of satisfying the statutory requirement of a 100 percent rating is not warranted, the benefit-of-the-doubt is not applicable, and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

 

 

H. SEESEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crohe, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.