Citation Nr: A25031048
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-426515
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for allergic rhinitis is denied. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral flatfoot is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran had an onset of GERD during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

2. The probative evidence of record does not support a finding that the Veteran's nasal passage is 50 percent blocked on both sides or completely blocked on one side. 

3. The probative evidence of record does not support a finding that Veteran's bilateral pes planus causes very painful symptoms. Rather, the Veteran reported that he only occasionally has arch pain and sore feet. Additionally, the record does not support a finding that the Veteran has objective evidence of marked deformity, pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for the establishment of service connection for GERD have been met.?38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.  

2.  The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for allergic rhinitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.31, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522. 

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a bilateral foot condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code rked. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2007 to May 2011 and from July 2013 to July 2013. This matter comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal from two separate January 2024 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).? 

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), seeking?direct?review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Under?Direct?Review, all evidence available at the time of the decisions on appeal is considered.? 

1. Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Legal Criteria

Service?connection may be granted for disability arising from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active?service.?38 U.S.C. § 1131;?38 C.F.R. § 3.303?(a).?Service?connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to?service, establishes that the disease was incurred in?service.?38 C.F.R. § 3.303?(d). As a general matter,?service?connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in?service, and (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during?service. 

Service?connection?can also be established on the basis of?continuation?of symptomatology.?Continuity?of symptomatology may be shown by demonstrating "(1) that a condition was 'noted' during?service?or any applicable presumption period; (2) evidence of post-service?continuity?of the same symptomatology; and (3) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of a nexus between the present disability and the post-service?symptomatology." Barr v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?303, 307?(2007). 

Factual Background

The Veteran was diagnosed with acid reflux at an April 2018 private medical examination. 

The Veteran was afforded an April 2023 VA during which he was diagnosed with GERD. The conducting examiner indicated that the Veteran's condition had its onset during service in 2007-08 when he noticed that he had a lot more acid reflux. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's condition has stayed the same since exiting from service. The examiner noted that the Veteran currently has symptoms of reflux, substernal pain, and sleep disturbances as a result of his GERD. 

A VA examiner reviewed the claim folder and opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's GERD is causally related to his in-service toxic exposures. As a rationale, the examiner explained that the Veteran did not report having symptoms of GERD until May 2018, which was five years after exiting from service. See November 2023 opinion.  

Analysis 

The record indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of GERD. Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met. 

Although the service treatment records are absent for reports of GERD, the Board assigns probative value to the April 2023 VA examiner's findings that the Veteran's GERD had its onset during service. The Board notes that the Veteran reported at the examination that he had issues with acid reflux during service. The Board finds the Veteran competent and credible to report observable symptoms such as acid reflux. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board further notes that the April 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's GERD condition did not improve after exiting from service but rather stayed the same. 

The Board does not assign probative value to the November 2023 VA examiner's negative opinion because they limited the scope of their opinion as to whether the Veteran's GERD was causally related to toxic exposures. Additionally, the VA examiner did not account for the Veteran's reports of in-service acid reflux at the April 2023 VA examination. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran had an onset of GERD during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

As such, service connection is granted. 

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for allergic rhinitis is denied. 

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's disability of allergic rhinitis is rated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Nose and Throat. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522. Under this Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. A 30 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis with polyps.

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA examination during which the conducting examiner opined that there was not greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis. The examiner noted no complete obstruction on either the left or right side due to rhinitis. Finally, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had no nasal polyps. 

Analysis 

The Board finds that the Veteran does not have a compensable rating for his service-connected rhinitis. To meet the criteria for a 10 percent?rating, the probative evidence would have to indicate the?Veteran's rhinitis?is not manifested by polyps but there is greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. 

The Board notes that the probative evidence of record, including the August 2023 VA examination, does not support a finding that the Veteran's nasal passage is 50 percent blocked on both sides or completely blocked on one side. 

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral flatfoot is denied.

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's bilateral foot condition, diagnosed as bilateral pes planus, (flatfoot), has been rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5276, which pertains to flatfoot, at 10 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under DC 5276, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate symptoms, where the weight-bearing line is over or medial to the great toe, inward bowing of the tendo achilles, pain on manipulation and use of the feet, bilateral or unilateral. A 30 percent rating is warranted for bilateral pes planus with severe symptoms, where there is objective evidence of marked deformity, pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities. A maximum 50 percent rating is warranted when the symptoms are pronounced, there is marked pronation, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendo achilles on manipulation, not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a , DC 5276.

Although the rating criteria do not define "moderate," "severe," "marked," "extreme," or "pronounced," according to MERRIAM WEBSTER, "moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension" or "limited in scope or effect." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate. "Severe" means "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe. "Marked" means "having a distinctive or emphasized character." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/marked. "Pronounced" means "strongly marked." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/pronounced. "Extreme" means "existing in a very high degree;" "exceeding the ordinary, usual, or expected;" "most advanced or thoroughgoing;" or "maximum." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/extreme (last accessed July 23, 2024). The Board also notes that the symptoms provide descriptions of symptoms at each disability level to assist the Board in distinguishing between moderate, severe, and pronounced flatfoot.

Finally, while some of the symptoms listed in the rating criteria are conjunctive - e.g., "pain on manipulation and use accentuated" - the rating criteria themselves are not. In other words, a veteran does not need to demonstrate all of the symptoms under a particular rating to be assigned that evaluation. See Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2009) (discussing how some Diagnostic Codes, such as Diagnostic Code 7903 for hypothyroidism, are not conjunctive); Dyess v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 448 (1991). Where a disability manifests in some criteria from a lower evaluation and some criteria for a higher evaluation, the Board should address 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 and explain which evaluation the disability more nearly approximates.

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA examination for his bilateral flatfoot condition. The conducting examiner noted that there was no pain on manipulation of the feet, there was no indication of swelling on use, no characteristic calluses or objective evidence of marked deformity of one or both feet. The examiner noted that the Veteran had symptoms of occasional arch pain. The examiner further noted no marked pronation of one foot or both feet. The Veteran uses heel rises for his Achilles tendon. The Veteran reported that he occasionally cannot run due to having sore feet. 

The Veteran was also afforded a September 2023 VA examination for his bilateral flatfoot condition during which the conducting examiner noted that he was given arch supports during service to treat his asymptomatic pes planus. 

Analysis 

The Board finds that the probative evidence of record does not support a finding that Veteran's bilateral pes planus causes very painful symptoms. Rather, the Veteran reported that he only occasionally has arch pain and sore feet. Additionally, the record does not support a finding that the Veteran has objective evidence of marked deformity, pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities. 

As such, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's bilateral flatfoot condition is not warranted. 

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bahus, Alexander

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.