Citation Nr: A25031203
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-453479
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right hip disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee degenerative joint disease (right knee DJD), is granted.

Service connection for a left hip disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, is granted.

Service connection for a left knee disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence suggests that his right hip, left hip, and left knee disabilities were caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee DJD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right hip disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left hip disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability, as secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from April 1983 to April 1989, and from October 2002 to August 2003. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2023 higher-level review decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 (right hip and left hip disabilities) and March 2022 (left knee disability) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims of entitlement to service connection for the right hip, left hip, and left knee disabilities, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Generally, service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is shown to be proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the lay and medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. Masors v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 181 (1992); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991). Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-782 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Service Connection-Right Hip, Left Hip, and Left Knee Disabilities

The Veteran contends that his bilateral hip and left knee disabilities were either caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee DJD. He does not allege, and neither does the record indicate, that his bilateral hip and left knee disabilities were directly or presumptively related to his active service. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (2008). As such, this decision will only address secondary service connection for his bilateral hip and left knee disabilities.

In this regard, the Veteran has been service-connected for right knee DJD since May 2004. At a September 2021 VA examination, he was diagnosed with bilateral hip osteoarthritis. He reported to the examiner that the onset of bilateral hip pain began in approximately 2017 and has continued, resulting in limited range of motion and associated stiffness and difficulty with maintenance of station. He stated that his right knee pain, which started in service, has now resulted in bilateral hip pain. In addition, VA treatment records, dated in November 2015, note a diagnosis of left knee arthritis.

Regarding whether the currently diagnosed bilateral hip and left knee disabilities are secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD, there is evidence both for, and against, the claims. 

Evidence in support of the Veteran's claims includes private medical opinions dated in July 2021. The clinician, who indicated that she reviewed the Veteran's claims file, to include military service medical records and personnel records, civilian medical records, physical examinations and diagnostic impressions, radiological study reports, laboratory studies, lay statements from the Veteran, VA examinations, combined with her clinical experience and expertise, and medical literature review, opined that the Veteran's bilateral hip arthritis and left knee arthritis are secondary to, related to, or aggravated by the service-connected right knee DJD with associated compensatory posture and movement with biochemical and kinematic changes. It was noted that due to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected lower extremity, right knee, pathology and associated pain, he developed an altered center of gravity and antalgic gait pattern with limping, that the medical literature associates with secondary biomechanical changes that cause abnormal kinematics to occur within both of the lower extremity joints, and that, per relevant literature, hastened the development and progression of the Veteran's right hip, left hip, and left knee arthritis. 

The clinician explained that multiple studies within the medical literature indicate that alterations in joint kinematics affect other major joints, including the feet, ankles, knees, hips, and the lumbar spine over time, and can accelerate wear on these joints by means of compensation and altered biomechanics. She also referred to specific medical literature which discusses the biomechanics of limping and gait pattern effects. She stated that any condition that causes pain in a lower extremity bone or soft tissue injury can produce an antalgic gait, and that lower joint injuries and conditions commonly cause an antalgic gait. It was specifically noted that any condition or injury causing muscle or joint damage of a lower extremity, often results in major horizontal or vertical displacements of the center of gravity of the body mass that could generate increased force transmission by the normal leg. It was also explained that the diseased or injured joint, which was the right knee DJD in this case, was the catalyst for the abnormal gait, thereby affecting the corresponding healthy joints through added pressure, repeatedly noted as abnormal "wear and tear." The clinician further noted that it has been established that abnormal gait unrelated to pain, but related to an abnormality in the afflicted joint, will cause change in the center of gravity and excessive heel strike, thus creating an abnormal progression of degeneration in the healthy joint. 

The clinician related several studies and medical literature to the Veteran's case and emphasized that current medical literature has linked foot, ankle, and knee pain to the biomechanical changes and alterations in joint kinematics related to compensatory strategies, antalgic gait patterns, abnormal dynamic forces in the lower extremity joints, and the transfer of weight away from the normal center of gravity due to pain or painful motion. She explained that these chronic changes in the lower extremity load distribution increase dynamic forces on the hip and other knee joint, predisposing them to pain, inflammation, and chronic hip and knee joint disabilities, and that this increased wear and tear on the hips and other knee results in hastened degenerative arthritis histopathological processes. She further noted that it is widely accepted and well documented in medical literature studies that orthopedic impairments located in one region of the body affects, and are associated with, the musculoskeletal function and symptoms of a completely separate region. The clinician reiterated that, per the evidence presented in support of the medical opinions, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right hip, left hip, and left knee disabilities are secondary to, related to, or aggravated by the service-connected right knee DJD with associated compensatory posture and movement with biomechanical and kinematic changes.

Evidence against the claims includes the opinions of a November 2020 VA examiner, who stated that any hip condition, right or left, is less likely as not proximately due to or the result of DJD of the right knee. The examiner stated that he did not find evidence that the Veteran's right knee DJD condition either caused or aggravated any right or left hip condition. The examiner further stated that he did not find evidence that the right knee DJD either caused or aggravated any left knee condition.

In September 2021, a different VA examiner opined that there is not sufficient evidence of alteration in the weight bearing or mechanical bone stress patterns resulting from the Veteran's present knee diagnosis to result in secondary dysfunction of either hip, nor is there a satisfactory pathophysiologic relationship between depressive disorder and hip dysfunction to establish a causal relationship. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's bilateral hip disability is not secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD. 

In January 2022, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran has DJD of his left knee because of wear and tear for his stated age. The examiner noted that it is a normal aging process and, in this case, not due to any imbalance of pressure forces from the right knee condition. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's gait on examination was normal, which argues against any gait-associated condition because of the right knee condition.

Additionally, in September 2021, the Veteran submitted a statement, in which he explained that after developing his right knee condition, he started walking unevenly due to the pain and discomfort. He stated that, over time, he started having increased pain and discomfort in his hips due to the altered gait. Further, the Veteran noted his current symptoms, to include pain and limited range of motion.  

In November 2021, the Veteran also submitted a statement regarding the onset of symptoms for his left knee, maintaining that his left knee disability is also secondary to his service-connected right knee DJD, as it caused him to walk with an altered gait. He noted that the symptoms related to his knee include pain with motion, swelling, buckling, a feeling of the knee giving out, cracking, popping, crunching, and snapping. He stated that "even plain walking can be painful as well as simply standing still." 

Based on the above, the Board finds that, in giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, his right hip, left hip, and left knee disabilities were caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee DJD. In making this determination, the Board finds the medical opinions of the private clinician to be persuasive because they adequately account for the nature and etiologies of the Veteran's bilateral hip and left knee disabilities, to include whether they were either caused or aggravated by the service-connected right knee DJD. The private medical opinions include adequate rationales supported by the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service treatment records, medical literature, and the clinician's expertise. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Thus, the Board assigns these opinions probative weight.

While the Board cannot ignore or disregard the VA examiners' medical conclusions [Willis v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 66 (1991)], the Board is free to assess medical evidence and is not compelled to accept a medical opinion. Wilson v Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992). In this case, the Board finds that the VA examiners' negative opinions failed to consider the Veteran's lay reports and offer less adequate rationales than those provided by the private clinician. As such, the Board affords them low probative weight.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the Board finds the medical opinions of the private clinician and the Veteran's competent and credible reports of the onset of his bilateral hip and left knee symptoms and the connection to his service-connected right knee DJD, to be more probative than the negative nexus opinions of the VA examiners. Accordingly, and resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor (see 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781), the Board concludes that the weight of the evidence supports finding that the Veteran's bilateral hip and left knee disabilities are secondary to the service-connected right knee DJD. Thus, service connection is warranted for the Veteran's right hip, left hip, and left knee disabilities.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.