Citation Nr: A25031584
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240925-478108
DATE:  April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

With reasonable doubt resolved in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for sleep apnea, secondary to service-connected major depressive disorder, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1991 to December 1995.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that decision, the RO reconsidered the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea but confirmed and continued the previous denial. 

In September 2024, VA received the Veteran's 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD).  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Direct Review docket does not allow submission of any additional evidence in support of an appeal.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Thus, the record closed as of the August 2024 rating decision.

Evidence added during an ineligible period will not be considered.  Should the Veteran want VA to consider evidence submitted outside the eligible period, the Veteran should submit a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim, identifying such evidence. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"- the so-called "nexus" requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for certain chronic diseases may also be established based upon a legal "presumption" by showing that the disease manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  In addition, service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after service when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected condition.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Although obesity is not a disability for VA compensation purposes, obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  See also Marcelino v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 155 (2018) (affirming the Board's decision that service connection is not warranted for obesity as it is not in and of itself a disability for VA purposes, but not addressing VAOPGCPREC 1-2017).

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea is related to his active service, to include as secondary to his service-connected major depressive disorder and related medication used for treatment.  He also asserts that he has a hard time sleeping due to constant tinnitus.  The Veteran has been advised that there is a strong connection between depression disorder and sleep apnea.  See January 25, 2022, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; see also December 15, 2022, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; October 23, 2024, Appellate Brief; May 3, 2023, Correspondence.

Favorable findings made by the AOJ are binding on the Board unless rebutted by evidence of clear and unmistakable error (CUE).  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  In the February 2022, March 2022, October 2023, March 2024, and August 2024 rating decisions, the RO provided favorable findings that the Veteran had a diagnosis of sleep apnea (per a June 2022 sleep study and an August 2023 VA examination) and that the claimed primary disabilities (tinnitus and major depressive disorder) are service-connected. The RO also found that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations, and thus, participation in a toxic exposure risk activity was conceded.

In a March 2023 private Disability Benefits Questionnaire for sleep apnea, the examiner noted a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner opined that, as a family medicine practitioner, the Veteran's current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea is at least as likely as not, secondary to or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder and the medication taken as part of its treatment.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, including private treatment records.  The examiner explained that the Veteran is prescribed an antidepressant (Trazadone) for treatment of his diagnosed major depressive disorder.  The examiner provided that, per a 2021 research study (Association Between Depression and Sleep Apnea), antidepressants can reduce the muscle tone of the upper airway dilator muscle.  When that occurs, it stimulates the body's wake-up response to hypoxia and increases the wake-up threshold for apnea events, thereby increasing the number and duration of apnea events.  The examiner explained that these physiological changes can occur no matter a person's weight, and that sleep apnea is a progressive condition that can worsen over time.  See March 15, 2023, VA Examination; see also May 3, 2023, Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  The examiner explained that, citing to medical research, it is well known that there is a strong correlation between major depressive disorder and obstructive sleep apnea.  There can be hundreds of microarousals every night with apnea, causing the neurotransmitters in the brain to be depleted, and, as a result cause a person to feel rundown and sleepy, lacking energy to do the things that might protect against developing depression and anxiety.  However, the examiner asserted that, unfortunately, while there is a strong correlation noted between these two conditions, causation has not yet been determined.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's BMI in June 2022 was 32.5, which is considered obese, and is a major risk factor for the development of sleep apnea.  Therefore, based on medical records, physical examination, and presented history, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's sleep apnea is secondary to his major depressive disorder.  See August 30, 2023, C&P Examination.

The April 2024 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  The examiner's rationale was that the Veteran has diagnoses of obstructive sleep apnea, tinnitus, and major depressive disorder.  The examiner explained that the pathophysiologies of tinnitus and major depressive disorder are unrelated to obstructive sleep apnea.  Thus, the claimed sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus or major depressive disorder.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the medications taken for his service connected major depressive disorder caused or aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea.  His rationale was that there is no evidence in the record that the medications taken for the treatment of major depressive disorder led to the development of obstructive sleep apnea.

The April 2024 VA examiner determined that a baseline level of severity of the Veteran's sleep apnea based upon medical evidence available prior to aggravation or the earliest medical evidence following aggravation by a service connected condition could not be determined because the medical evidence was not sufficient to support a determination.  The examiner found that, regardless of an established baseline, the Veteran's sleep apnea was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service connected disabilities.  Regarding both tinnitus and major depressive disorder, the examiner stated that there was no evidence in the available records to support that either disability aggravated the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea beyond its natural course.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.  The examiner's rationale was that the pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea involves collapse of the upper airway/aerodigestive tract during sleep.  It is a prevalent condition for which there are several common risk factors.  Additionally, review of the medical and scientific literature did not demonstrate a definitive causal relationship between the Veteran's TERAs and the development of this condition.  See April 18, 2024, C&P Examination.

The Board affords higher probative value to the March 2023 private medical opinion than the August 2023 and April 2024 VA medical opinions.  The VA examiners did not fully address the evidence of record, including the March 2023 private medical opinion.  Neither VA examiner addressed the cause of the Veteran's obesity, despite the August 2023 VA examiner's assertion that obesity is a major risk factor of sleep apnea.  The April 2024 VA examiner noted that sleep apnea is a predominant condition with several common risk factors, but he did not specify those factors nor whether any were applicable to the Veteran.  Of note, the August 2023 VA examiner asserted that there is a correlation between depressive disorder and sleep apnea, but that causation has not yet been determined.  He provided no further discussion, including as to whether depressive disorder could cause or aggravate sleep apnea.  The August 2023 VA examiner did not address aggravation, and the April 2024 VA examiner simply asserted that there was no aggravation but did not provide a sufficient rationale for that conclusion.  Meanwhile, the March 2023 private examiner reviewed the record, cited to medical research, and provided a clear rationale for his opinion that the medication used for treatment of his major depressive disorder has caused or aggravated the Veteran's sleep apnea.  Notably, the competent and credible evidence of record does not adequately refute the private examiner's assertion.  Thus, the private medical opinion is afforded high probative value. 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Labi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.