Citation Nr: A25031373
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417174
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

A rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain.

A rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain.

A compensable rating for right knee limitation of extension.

A compensable rating for right knee limitation of extension.

Service connection for a neck condition. 

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1981 to December 1985. 

The matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), Regional Office (RO). 

In a February 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

A rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain.

A rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee strain.

A compensable rating for right knee limitation of extension.

A compensable rating for right knee limitation of extension.

The Veteran is currently rated at 10 percent under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260 for right and left knee painful motion and rated noncompensable (0 percent) under DC 5261 for his right and left knee limitation of extension.  The Veteran contends that he meets the criteria for higher ratings under the relevant DCs.  See February 2024 NOD. 

In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his claims.  The Veteran reported that he is unable to sit or stand in place for long periods of time, has trouble carrying objects greater than fifty pounds, has difficulty rising from a seated position, and has limited ability to walk more than a block without rest.  The Veteran was able to perform active and passive ROM testing, but indicated pain on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing, resulting in the functional loss described above. 

The Board finds the May 2023 examination not entirely adequate to decide the claim.  Here, the Veteran indicated pain on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight bearing, that causes functional loss.  However, the examiner failed to estimate the Veteran's functional limitations from pain on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weight bearing, in terms of the degree of additional range of motion loss.  Correia v. McDonald, 28?Vet. App.?158 (2016).   

Furthermore, the examination is internally inconsistent.  Here, the examiner did not conduct repeated use over time ROM testing because the procured evidence from the Veteran did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability.  However, as stated above, the Veteran indicated pain on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing with functional loss.  Thus, it is unclear how the examiner arrived at the conclusion that repeated use over time testing was not necessary because of the Veteran's procured statements, when the other portions of the examination suggest pain, impairment, and fatigability resulting in functional loss.

As such, remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors and to afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination to assess the nature and severity of his right and left knee conditions.  38 C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

Service connection for a neck condition. 

The Veteran contends that he has a neck condition related to active duty.  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he has been self-medicating for his neck condition during service and has continued since separation from service.  See February 2024 NOD. 

Initially, in the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ established that the Veteran has a neck disability.  Specifically, during a May 2023 VA examination, the examiner noted diagnoses of degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine, spinal stenosis, and spondylolisthesis.  The AOJ also favorably found that the Veteran had a qualifying in-service event or injury based on an in-service cervical spine complaint.  The Board is bound by these?prior favorable findings, which were not clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in May 2023.  The diagnoses were degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine, spinal stenosis, and spondylolisthesis.  The Veteran reported while he was stationed in Panama he was exercising in the gym and hurt his neck.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's neck condition was less likely than not related to service because the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were silent for any neck complaints or neck conditions. 

Following a request for Higher Level Review (HLR), the RO found the May 2023 examination to be inadequate because it was not supported by the evidence of record.  Specifically, the RO determined that relevant STRs that showed a complaint for neck pain were not included in the Veteran's file.  As such, the RO ordered a new opinion that addresses the relevant records. 

A new November 2023 VA opinion was provided.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's neck condition is less likely than not due to service.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's isolated neck pain complaint was acute and resolved in service because there is no evidence to support ongoing or chronic issues.  The examiner lastly opined that these conditions are generally associated with overuse or repetitive injury that develop over time and are not consistent with a one-time complaint.  

The Board finds the November 2023 opinion not wholly adequate to decide the claim.  First, the examiner relied on an absence of documented evidence during and after service without explaining why, as a medical matter, the Veteran would have sought treatment or complained of the condition during or after service, or why an absence of documented treatment or symptoms (as opposed to undocumented symptoms) was otherwise medically significant.  See McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 30 (2016); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 272-75 (2015); Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 223-24 (2011).

Additionally, the examiner opined that the Veteran's conditions are typically associated with overuse or repetitive injury that develop over time and are not consistent with a one-time complaint.  However, the Veteran failed to apply this analysis to the Veteran's specific circumstances.  

As such, remand is required to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist errors and to afford the Veteran a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his neck disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c)(1), 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to assess the severity of his service-connected right and left knee conditions.  The examiner should review the entire claims file and this remand in conjunction with the examination.

The examiner should test the range of motion in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing, for each disability, if possible.  If the examiner does not conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should clearly explain why.

If pain is noted upon testing of active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing, the examiner should estimate the amount in degrees of ROM lost from that pain. 

The examiner should also note any additional loss of function with repetition due to factors such as pain, weakness, fatigability, and pain on movement. The extent of additional limitation should be expressed in degrees. Flare-ups have been reported throughout the rating period on appeal and the examiner must express an opinion on whether the flare-ups are associated with additional functional loss. He or she should estimate the degree of lost motion during such flare-ups. The examiner must attempt to elicit information from the record and the Veteran regarding the severity, frequency, duration, or functional loss manifestations during flare-ups before determining that an estimate of motion loss in terms of degrees cannot be given. Any inability to furnish such an estimate must be predicated on a lack of medical knowledge among the medical community at large and not the insufficient knowledge of the examiner.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an orthopedist to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed neck disability.  The examiner should review the entire claims file and this remand in conjunction with the examination.

The examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's diagnosed neck condition had its onset during service or is etiologically related to service. 

The examiner should not rely on silence in the medical records unless it can be explained: (a) why the silence in the available records can be taken as proof that the symptoms did not occur, including why the fact would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

A rationale should be provided for opinions expressed.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the reason for this should be fully explained in the opinion. 

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training. As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record.

 

 

S. Merrick

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fyffe, Michael C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.