Citation Nr: A25031200
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-461251
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a hernia condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinea pedis, claimed as bilateral athlete's foot is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a hernia disability.

2. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a low back disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a hernia condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a low back condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1982 to May 1987. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In an August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection  

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active military service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To prevail on the issue of service connection there must be competent evidence of a current disability; medical evidence, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and competent evidence of a nexus between an in-service injury or disease and the current disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Where there is approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, reasonable doubt is resolve in favor of the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a hernia condition.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition.

The Veteran contends that a hernia condition and a low back condition are related to active military service. 

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that interpretation of 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1131 as requiring the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary). In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). 

Review of the record does not indicate a current diagnosis of either a hernia disability or a low back disability. Importantly, the Veteran has not offered any lay testimony of persistent symptoms consistent with a current disability of right shoulder. Accordingly, VA's duty to assist in obtaining an examination is not triggered. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) (one element for triggering VA's duty to obtain an examination is the presence of a current disability or persistent symptoms indicative of a current disability). Evidence must show that the Veteran currently has the disability for which benefits are being claimed.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that he has a hernia disability and a low back disability due to service. However, the Veteran has not been shown to possess the requisite medical expertise or knowledge to render a medical diagnosis of a hernia or low back disability. Although a lay person, such as the Veteran, is competent to describe observable symptoms, such as painful motion, the diagnosis of a hernia or low back disability, involves a complex medical question and does not lend itself to lay opinion evidence. See Jandreau , 492 F.3d 1372, 1377  (Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011). The Board finds that the Veteran is not competent to diagnose himself with either a hernia or low back disability.

The Board has considered the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie in which service connection was deemed possible in the absence of a diagnosis when such factors as pain are shown to limit functional ability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018) ("pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability"). That Federal Circuit decision qualified that holding, however: "[w]e do not hold that a veteran could demonstrate service connection simply by asserting subjective pain. To establish the presence of a disability, the veteran will need to show that [his] pain reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity." Id. at 1365. Here, the Veteran has not alleged that he suffers from pain, nor that the pain reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity. 

Lacking a current diagnosis for a hernia or low back condition, the Veteran does not meet the cornerstone element of service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225. As such, an assessment of the remaining elements is not necessary. Service connection for a hernia condition is not warranted and service connection for a low back condition is not warranted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

While the Board regrets the additional delay, remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran claims that sleep apnea is related to active military service due to the disruptive sleep from shift assignments. 

The Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in March 2024. During that examination, the examiner provided an opinion indicating the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not related to the Veteran's indicated toxic exposure risk activities. The examiner did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in or caused by the Veteran's claimed in-service event, injury, or exposure, to include his asserted disruptive sleep due to shift assignments. 

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board finds the March 2024 opinion is incomplete, inadequate, and inconsistent with the evidence of record.  The examiner did not reconcile the opinion with the information contained in the Veteran's claim or the Veteran's lay statements. The inadequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Therefore, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion.

Moreover, the Board notes that there are two separate Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memoranda contained in the Veteran's file. In the TERA memo dated 1 November 2023, it was noted that the Veteran had deployment related exposure due to service in Germany and concluded that the Veteran had participated in a TERA. In the TERA Memo dated 1 April 2024, there was no mention of the Veteran's service in Germany, and concluded that the Veteran had not participated in a TERA. Neither of the memoranda contains information regarding the Veteran's deployment and exposure to potential toxic substances during deployment in Honduras. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinea pedis, claimed as bilateral athlete's foot is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that tinea pedis is related to the living conditions experienced while serving in Honduras. Specifically, the Veteran reported that the condition began in 1982 due to sweaty, itchy feet.  

The Veteran received a VA medical examination in March 2024. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinea pedis was less likely than not related to the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activities. The examiner did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's tinea pedis was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board finds the March 2024 opinion is incomplete, inadequate, and inconsistent with the evidence of record.  The examiner did not reconcile the opinion with the information contained in the Veteran's claim or the Veteran's lay statements. The inadequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Therefore, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion.

The Board notes that there are two separate Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memoranda contained in the Veteran's file. In the TERA memo dated 1 November 2023, it was noted that the Veteran had deployment related exposure due to service in Germany and concluded that the Veteran had participated in a TERA. In the TERA Memo dated 1 April 2024, there was no mention of the Veteran's service in Germany, and concluded that the Veteran had not participated in a TERA. Neither of the memoranda contains information regarding the Veteran's deployment and exposure to potential toxic substances during deployment in Honduras. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Prepare an updated TERA memorandum that considers toxic exposures in connection with the Veteran's stated deployments.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to obtain opinions, including any necessary TERA opinions, from an appropriate medical practitioner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea and tinea pedis.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, the updated TERA memorandum, and the lay evidence of record, and should indicate that review in the examination report.  The examiner should elicit from the Veteran a full history of all potential exposures and identify each toxin to which the Veteran claims exposure.  The examiner should:

(a.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea is etiologically related to active service, or any event, disease, or injury during service, to include his asserted disruptive sleep due to shift assignments. 

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's tinea pedis is etiologically related to active service or any event, disease, or injury during service, to include any in-service symptoms. 

(c.) State whether the Veteran's reported symptoms align with how any disabilities linked to Toxic Exposure Risk Activities are known to develop or whether the Veteran's reports are generally inconsistent with medical knowledge, or implausible.  Explain why or why not.

(d.) Reconcile the opinion with the findings and conclusions in all prior medical opinions, and all relevant VA and private treatment records.

Any opinion expressed should be accompanied by a complete rationale with references to the record.  The examiner cannot base any opinion solely on any lack of any treatment or complaints in service.  The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements in the record regarding symptoms during and since service.

In providing any opinions, the examiner is directed to consider the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA.

 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Linney, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.