Citation Nr: A25031477
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-472220
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to June 1, 2022 is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that the service-connected disabilities are not shown to have rendered him incapable of substantially gainful employment at any time during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU prior to June 1, 2022 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.18.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1984 to February 1987. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of history, the Board previously denied this claim in July 2022. Subsequently, in December 2022, the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim, which the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied in an August 2023 rating decision. In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the August 2023 decision. In March 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2023 decision.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a TDIU prior to June 1, 2022

The Veteran has alleged that his service-connected disabilities precluded him from obtaining or maintaining gainful employment. 

A TDIU rating may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

The Court has held that the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 has two components. First, there is an economic component which essentially contemplates an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Second, there is a non-economic component dealing with the individual Veteran's ability to "follow and secure" employment. For the second component, attention must be given to: (a) the veteran's history, education, skill and training, (b) the Veteran's physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory and visual, and (c) whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, with relevant factors such as memory, concentration, and ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers and demonstrate reliability and productivity. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). As "sedentary" is defined as requiring or marked by much sitting, e.g., a "sedentary desk job," the Board finds that sedentary employment is a job where the worker primarily sits down. See Webster's II New College Dictionary 999 (1999).

A protected work environment is a "lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." See Labruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 11, 27 (2024).

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a Veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether they are capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

Service connection was in effect during the appeal period for the following disabilities: 1) unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with a 50 percent evaluation; 2) bilateral flat feet with degenerative arthritis with a 50 percent evaluation; 3) left knee degenerative arthritis limitation of flexion with a 10 percent evaluation; 4) right knee degenerative arthritis limitation of flexion with a 10 percent evaluation; and 5) bilateral knee degenerative arthritis limitation of extension each with a noncompensable evaluation. The combined disability rating during this period was 70 percent. Accordingly, the schedular criteria for a TDIU have been met.

Evidence

The Veteran's DD-214 indicated that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was food service specialist. His April 2023 TDIU application noted that he had a high school education. He previously engaged with VA Veteran Readiness and Employment (VRE) through which he obtained a certification in HVAC. In July 2015, VRE considered him successfully rehabilitated because he had maintained employment for at least 60 days in housekeeping at the Dorn VA. November 2017 VA treatment records noted that he earned about $1,800 each month working there. At a February 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran explained that he took that job to get a foot in the door and had been hoping for a better job due to his background. He stated that he ultimately resigned from the position in October 2018 because he did not think that his career was going anywhere, which he found stressful. The Veteran felt that he was unable to get any promotions because he could not build relationships with his supervisors. At a March 2019 VA psychiatric examination, he indicated that he was good at the job, and had no interpersonal problems, but resigned when he did not get a position in maintenance for which he had applied. At the Board hearing he did share that he had personality clashes with a couple of other people in a different department.

September 2007 VA treatment records noted that the Veteran had been a truck driver since 1987. In November 2019, VRE accepted the Veteran back into the program. July 2020 VA treatment records indicated that he worked full time as a carpenter. At the February 2022 Board hearing, the Veteran asserted that he had been working with a friend approximately 20 to 25 hours a week, but not every week; however, that employment ended in November 2021 when his friend left the state. At a May 2022 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran shared with the examiner that he worked approximately 32 hours per week for a friend's air conditioning business, and that the job was going okay. That same month, VRE canceled the Veteran's services because he had stopped replying to emails regarding his employment status. In a July 2022 statement, the Veteran asserted that he felt that his last examination felt rushed, and that he did not say that he worked full time, but rather than he worked around 25 hours a week periodically throughout the year. He suggested that his social security records would demonstrate this. 

On the April 2023 TDIU application, the Veteran reported that he last worked full time on October 12, 2018, and that he became too disabled to work on June 1, 2022. He shared that the most he ever earned in one year was $35,000 in 1994 as a block paint worker at a construction company. The Veteran indicated that he last worked from January 2022 to June 2022 for a pest control company, full time, earning approximately, $2,400 per month. Prior to that, he wrote that he had previously worked for VA from October 2014 to October 2018 full time in housekeeping, earning approximately $2,300 per month. These two former employers returned VA forms 21-4192 Request for Employment Information and confirmed that he had previously worked at each place of employment in the positions and timespans that he reported, and that he had resigned voluntarily from each position, but neither confirmed his income.

Turning to the service-connected disabilities, a March 2019 VA examiner found that the knees had no functional impact. In December 2022 VA examiner opined that the knees had functional impact to include an inability to stand or walk for prolonged periods of time and prevented yard work. 

As for the feet, a July 2023 VA examiner found functional impact to include an inability to stand or walk longer than 10 minutes.

Regarding the psychiatric disability, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2019 where the examiner opined that the symptoms manifested as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The Veteran endorsed the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in support of his claim in May 2021, which included an interview. There, he endorsed the following symptoms: 2 to 3 panic attacks per week, significantly decreased motivation, difficulty problem solving, hypersensitive to social situations, poor judgment, and an inability to work more than a day or two a week.

At the February 2022, the Veteran indicated that he handled stress as well as the average person working full time. 

He underwent another VA examination in May 2022 where the examiner opined that the symptoms manifested as occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. The Veteran endorsed the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment.

A July 2023 VA examiner opined that the symptoms manifested as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. There, the Veteran endorsed the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.

The Veteran submitted 2 private medical opinions in support of this claim. A May 2021 private examiner opined that veterans with severe PTSD symptoms are more likely to work part time, or not at all. The examiner continued that these veterans have difficulty with self-regulation, which can be expressed in problematic behaviors such as fights, substance abuse, and self-harm. They noted that social relationships play a key role in employment problems, and that therefore, the PTSD symptoms would have caused the Veteran to not be able to work. 

In October 2022, a private occupational expert opined that the service-connected feet with pain on use, and lack of transferable skills to lighter alternative employment is a significant vocational impairment when considered together. They indicated that his educational development as well as transferable skills from past employment activities did not provide him with occupational opportunities which would not require the physical capacity to maintain extended periods of standing or walking. The examiner explained that his past employment is heavy in physical demand, and that these occupations require that the worker walk and stand for prolonged periods of time, and do not provide them with a skill base that directly transfers to alternative light or sedentary occupations. They opined that it was unlikely that the Veteran possessed the educational development, or transferable skills require to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment that would be considered light or sedentary. The examiner noted that he would require this type of employment due to his bilateral foot condition which results in pain upon use. 

The examiner explained that industry standards for being off task in a workday is that anything more than 10 percent of the time on a chronic basis would not be tolerated in competitive employment. They concluded that the Veteran would most likely be off task more than 10 percent of the time due to his difficulties standing and walking with painful motion.

Analysis

Based on the aforementioned, the Board finds that a TDIU prior to June 2022 is not warranted at this time. As with the July 2022 decision, the Board concedes that the service-connected disabilities, particularly the psychiatric disability, and the feet, certainly do seem to cause some functional impact in terms of his employability. In fact, pursuant to this decision, the Veteran is in receipt of a combined 70 percent disability rating throughout the period on appeal; however, despite such impairment, the evidence of record does not persuasively show that the Veteran is unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities at any time during the period on appeal.

The Board has considered the private medical opinions that the Veteran submitted in support of his claim. The crux of this determination, however, comes down to the lack of sufficient information regarding the Veteran's employment situation prior to June 2022. As addressed in the July 2022 decision, the evidence of record is still conflicting, and insufficient. The Veteran has only listed two of his past employers on the April 2023 TDIU application. He has yet to officially address with any specificity his employment details when he worked with his friend, or when he worked as a carpenter, to include his working hours, and income. 

Regarding his work with his friend, the greatest amount of information that he has provided is that he worked 20 to 25 hours a week, some weeks of the year. The Veteran indicated that his Social Security statements would demonstrate that he has only worked periodically part-time, but he fell short of actually submitting those statements. Importantly, the Veteran has repeatedly reported that he did not leave his position with VA because of his service-connected disabilities, in fact he said he was good at the job, but because he was frustrated with his lack of career growth. He also shared that he stopped working with his friend, not because his disabilities became too severe, but because his friend moved away.

It is long established that working in itself is not a preclusion from a TDIU. The jobs could be in a sheltered or protected environment, or his income could be below the minimum poverty threshold, this is in fact the argument that the Veteran is advancing; however, he has not actually reported his income, or described the jobs as being a sheltered, or protected environment. The Board finds the Veteran's statements competent as they are capable of lay observation. 38?U.S.C. §?1154(a); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005) (noting that a lay witness is competent to report to factual matters of which he or she has first-hand knowledge). However, they are not corroborated by the record. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995) (noting that the probative value of a witness statement may be affected by inconsistency with other evidence), aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

To the extent that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities hindered his ability to obtain or maintain gainful employment, the rating schedule already contemplates industrial impairment. Stated another way, evidence of occupational limitations is present in every case in which an evaluation has been assigned for a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (explaining that disability evaluation percentages "represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations" and "degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability"); see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). ("A high rating in itself is a recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment."). If the Board were to accept the argument that evidence of occupational limitations due to service-connected disabilities necessarily constitutes evidence of unemployability, then entitlement to a TDIU would be reasonably raised and warranted in every case where a Veteran challenged the assigned evaluation.

Instead, for a Veteran to prevail on a claim for a TDIU the record must reflect some factor which takes the case outside the norm. The sole fact that the Veteran is unemployed or has shown evidence of a difficulty in obtaining employment is not enough. The question is whether this Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 361.

The Board has also considered whether this type of work would be considered to be a sheltered workshop under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), which states that marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a fact found basis (includes but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.

The term "sheltered workshop" is not defined in title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations, but several state codes define "sheltered work shop" in the following ways: "a facility designed to provide gainful employment for individuals with severe disabilities who cannot be absorbed into the competitive labor market or to provide interim employment for such individuals when employment opportunities for them in the competitive labor market do not exist" (Louisiana); "a facility, or any portion thereof, operated by a nonprofit organization, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or association whose purpose is to provide meaningful work or training activities to individuals with developmental disabilities...." (Oklahoma); "an occupation-oriented facility operated by a not-for-profit corporation, which, except for its staff, employs only persons with disabilities" (Missouri); "an occupation-oriented facility operated by a nonprofit agency, public or private, which except for its staff, employs only handicapped persons" (New Jersey). La. R.S. § 39:1604.4; 63 Okl. St. § 1-865.2; § 178.900 R.S.Mo.; N.J. Stat. § 34:16-40.

Moreover, the SSA which, as the Court indicated in Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000), is the most closely analogous legal context, uses the similar terms "sheltered or special environment" and "sheltered employment." These are not precisely defined in Title 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations. Notably, 20 C.F.R. § 404.1574(a)(3), which the Code describes as an evaluation guide for employees for determining whether a worker is involved in substantially gainful activity, states: "If you are working in a sheltered workshop, you may or may not be earning the amounts you are being paid. The fact that the sheltered workshop or similar facility is operating at a loss or is receiving some charitable contributions or government aid does not establish that you are not earning all you are being paid...."

In other words, even if the Veteran was working full time, if it was not substantially gainful, or was in a sheltered environment, this would not necessarily preclude a grant of entitlement to a TDIU, but there is insufficient evidence of record to support a finding that the work was not substantially gainful, or in a sheltered environment. Perhaps doing work for a friend could count as a sheltered environment; however, Veteran neglected to include the necessary information.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of his service-connected disabilities. Additionally, he is credible in his reports during clinical evaluations of symptoms and their effect on his activities. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). But as a lay person, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic code or to assess whether the symptoms preclude employment. Furthermore, the question of employability is ultimately one for the finder of fact. Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

In sum, it is the lack of an accurate picture of the Veteran's employment history, and annual income that ultimately determined this appeal, not necessarily the severity of his service-connected disabilities.

Accordingly, the criteria for the claim of entitlement to a TDIU prior to June 1, 2022 have not been met, and the appeal is denied.

?

In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt. In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). Here, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. Id. 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rogos, John M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.