Citation Nr: A25031825
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-470116
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for dental abscesses and gingivitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from April 1988 to April 1992, to include service in Southwest Asia theater. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Board acknowledges that the VA Form 10182 NOD also listed the issue of entitlement to service connection for a neck disability. However, in an April 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for a neck disability. Therefore, this a grant of the full benefit sought, and the issue is longer on appellate review. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for dental abscesses and a back disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The denial of due process may include issuing a Board decision prior to the expiration of the one-year period for a claimant to request a docket change. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). In this case, the Board is not rendering a decision on the merits but remanding the case. Accordingly, the Veteran's due process rights are not affected by not waiting until May 14, 2024, the end of the period in which to request a docket change, to remand this case.

1. Entitlement to service connection for dental abscesses and gingivitis is remanded.

As this appeal is governed by the AMA, remand is only permitted to correct an error in the duty to assist that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Accordingly, the Board finds the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not obtaining a VA examination and opinion for dental disability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Remand is required to obtain a VA examination. In McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims indicated that there was a four-part test to determine whether an examination was necessary under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Id. at 81. Under this test, VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion where there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. Id.; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). 

Here, in a dental service treatment record (STR), the dental record indicated the Veteran has a dental issue in the "back bottom."   

A September 2023 VA treatment record stated the Veteran has a need to wisdom teeth removal.

In the January 2024 VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim, the Veteran stated that during his enlistment, it was established that his wisdom teeth needed to be extracted due to pain and other complications. However, he stated that due to deployments, his dental needs were not met. He stated he did not receive proper dental care while enlisted.

Therefore, the criteria for McLendon have been met. As a result, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection for a dental disability because no VA examination has been performed and no VA examiner has opined whether the Veteran's dental disability was caused by service. Therefore, VA examination is necessary. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Remand is necessary to obtain an addendum VA opinion. When VA undertakes to obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). A medical opinion is considered adequate "where it is based on consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and examinations and also describes the disability, if any, in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one." Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). 

On the July 2022 VA back examination, the Veteran stated that he has experienced aching pain in the low and upper back for over 20 years. He denied a specific back injury but associated his back problem with working as an artillery aid during active duty. He stated that as an aid, he had to carry heavy gun power on his back and consequently experienced back pain. 

Here, the June 2023 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability is the result of service. The examiner reasoned that the medical records show no complaints or treatment during service. The examiner stated that when the lumbar spine is strained or sprained, the muscles and tissues become swollen. The examiner stated that inflammation causes pain and may cause muscle spasms. The examiner stated that lumbar muscle strains and sprains are the most common causes of low back pain. The examiner stated that muscle strains and sprains are common in the low back because it supports the weight of upper body and is involved in moving, twisting, and bending. The examiner stated that lumbar muscle strain is caused when muscle fibers are abnormality stretched or torn. The examiner stated that lumbar sprain is caused when ligaments are torn from their attachment. The examiner stated that both of these can result from a sudden injury or from gradual overuse. Therefore, the examiner stated there is no sufficient medical evidence that indicates that the Veteran's diagnosis of joint pains, back, was incurred in or caused by working as an artillery aid to include carrying heavy gun powder during service. 

In the January 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's neck disability is more likely than not the result of active service. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was as a field artillery cannoneer, which involved the inspection, preparation, and carrying of ammunition. The examiner noted the Veteran has complained of chronic neck pain for 20 years. The Veteran denied prior neck injury but attributed his neck problem to working in artillery during active duty. The Veteran stated that his career involved carrying ammunition including projectiles over his shoulder and neck and at some point, he developed a traumatic neck pain. The Veteran's lay testimony discusses having to routinely transport the ammunition on his shoulders. The examiner stated that the STRS show multiple episodes recorded involving the joints that would be bearing the weight of the ammunition in the fashion described by the Veteran, namely the right ankle, knee, and arm/hand, the latter had complaints of numbness and weakness problems. The examiner stated that medical judgment sees the STRs as indirectly supportive of the Veteran's claim. The examiner stated that this examiner has seen other veterans with the same MOS and similar neck conditions develop, and has seen actual photos of the veterans carrying the ammunition cradled on their neck and shoulder, and medical judgment sees it as at least as likely as not that this type of significant weight bearing on the neck performed repetitively would be stress of unusual nature on the neck and would at least as likely as not compromise the axial integrity of the cervical spine, producing the subsequent currently diagnosed conditions related to the Veteran's currently claimed neck condition. 

On the January 2024 VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim, the Veteran stated that while serving as a cannoneer in an artillery unit, that required manual transporting and or lifting of very large and heavy projectiles caused many strains and pressure on the lower back. The Veteran stated that constant twisting of his back to load projectiles and gunpowder into the chamber of the howitzer also caused strains and problems to his lower back. 

The June 2023 VA examiner did not address the Veteran's statement regarding in-service overuse or 20 years of back pain since separation from service. Also, the examiner stated that muscle strains and sprains are common in the low back because it supports the weight of upper body and is involved in moving, twisting, and bending and can onset from gradual overuse. The examiner did not address the Veteran's in-service twisting, bending, and overuse in relation to the Veteran's MOS, as it was considered in the January 2023 VA neck medical opinion. Therefore, remand is required to obtain an addendum VA opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination from an appropriate medical profession to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's dental disability. The examiner must opine as to whether the dental disability to include, abscesses or gingivitis or need for treatment to wisdom teeth, is at least as likely as not related to service, to include in-service dental finding of the "back bottom."

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability. The examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the diagnosed back disability, is related to service, to include as a result of the Veteran's MOS as a field artillery cannoneer, which required moving, bending, twisting, and overuse. The examiner must provide a thorough discussion of the Veteran's contentions regarding in-service symptoms and continuity thereafter.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Thompson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.