Citation Nr: A25031889
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230919-377763
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for anemia is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pitting edema is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for obesity is dismissed.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than October 15, 2021, for the grant of service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a dental disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for razor bumps is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fatty liver is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hydronephrosis, to include pyel ureteral junction syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for mild to moderate partially visualized stool burden is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right arm disability claimed as right arm pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome is remanded. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee osteoarthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The appeals for entitlement to service connection for anemia, bilateral pitting edema, and obesity are dismissed under this docket number as they were addressed and denied in February 2025 Board decisions.

2. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy is granted as secondary to the grant of service connection for spondylolisthesis, which was granted effective October 15, 2021.

3. The Veteran's service treatment records show only periodontal disease and does not show any dental trauma, impairment of the mandible, loss of a portion of the ramus, or loss of a portion of the maxilla.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a currently diagnosed skin disability related to razor bumps during service.  

5. Granting all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's hypothyroidism is causally related to his service-connected MDD.

6. Hyperlipidemia is a laboratory finding not a ratable disability for VA compensation purposes.

7. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding of a diagnosed respiratory disability, to include COPD, during the evidentiary period on appeal.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for anemia have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for bilateral pitting edema have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for dismissal of entitlement to service connection for obesity have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date than October 15, 2021, for the grant of service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a dental disability have not been met.   38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 1712(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.381, 4.150.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for razor bumps have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for COPD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service from June 1993 to June 1997 and June 1999 to September 1999.  

The Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement (NOD) in September 2023 electing the direct review lane.   

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal for each individual issue cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, for any claims that have been remanded below, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran's claims related to his left ankle, right ankle, left knee, diabetes, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, bladder, gall bladder, cholecystectomy, erectile dysfunction, left shoulder, neck, transverse myelitis, chronic fatigue syndrome, bilateral pes planus, and diverticulitis were also addressed on the September 2023 NOD.  However, as these appeals were repeated in the October 2023 NOD, the Board has addressed them a single time in a separate Board decision so as to consolidate the issues and not provide repetitive findings.

1. Entitlement to service connection for anemia.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pitting edema.

3. Entitlement to service connection for obesity.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for anemia, bilateral pitting edema, and obesity will be addressed together as they stem from the same legal and factual basis.  

The Veteran submitted numerous NODs relating to the above claims.  In this instance, two separate NODs requested an appeal of the issues of entitlement to service connection for anemia, bilateral pitting edema, and obesity with regards to the same rating decision and the same evidentiary period.  The Board denied these claims in February 2025 Board decisions.  Accordingly, the appeal under this docket number is duplicative.  As such, the duplicate appeals under this docket number must be dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  There remains no case or controversy at issue for the Board to adjudicate.  

The Board does not have jurisdiction over the appeals for entitlement to service connection for anemia, bilateral pitting edema, and obesity and the issues are dismissed under this docket number.  

4. Entitlement to an earlier effective date than October 15, 2021, for the grant of service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy.

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date for a grant of compensation will be the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if a claim is received within one year of separation. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Otherwise, the effective date of the award of an evaluation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after a final disallowance, or a claim for an increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  Id.  The effective date of a secondary disability cannot be earlier than the effective date for the primary disability upon which secondary service connection was granted.  

The effective date for an award of service connection is not based on the earliest medical evidence demonstrating a causal connection, but on the date of the claim for service connection. See Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377 (1999); see also McGrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000). 

In this case, the Veteran's grant of service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity was granted as secondary to the grant of service connection for spondylolisthesis.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran filed an intent to claim on October 5, 2021.  The AOJ, however, granted service connection for spondylolisthesis effective October 15, 2021.  The Board does not have jurisdiction to address or change the effective date of spondylolisthesis.  As such, the effective date of radiculopathy for the left lower extremity cannot be granted effective prior to October 15, 2021.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the appropriate effective date in this case is the October 15, 2021, date of grant of service connection for spondylolisthesis.  As such, the claim must be denied as it is without legal merit.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

Service Connection 

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Evidence of continuity of symptomatology from the time of service until the present is required where the chronicity of a chronic condition manifested during service either has not been established or might reasonably be questioned.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see also Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1340 (Fed.Cir.2013) (holding that only conditions listed as chronic diseases in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) may be considered for service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b)).  Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).  

Additionally, disability which is proximately due to, or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  The Board also notes that secondary service connection on the basis of aggravation is permitted under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310, and compensation is payable for that degree of aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability caused by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In order to establish entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) competent evidence establishing a nexus between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

The Board has reviewed all the evidence in the record.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no requirement that the evidence submitted by the appellant or obtained on his behalf be discussed in detail.  Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate each claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to each claim.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) and Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under the laws administered by VA.  VA shall consider all information and medical and lay evidence of record.  Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

5. Entitlement to service connection for a dental disability.

Under VA regulations, compensation for a dental disability is only available for certain types of dental and oral conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, such as impairment of the mandible, loss of a portion of the ramus, and loss of a portion of the maxilla. Compensation is available for loss of teeth only if such is due to loss of the substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to trauma or a dental disease other than periodontal disease, such as osteomyelitis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.

The Board has reviewed the claims file to include all dental records contained in his service treatment records.  The Veteran experienced periodontal disease during service, but did not experience any dental trauma or any oral condition listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.  The Veteran has not asserted any dental trauma and has not indicated any other oral conditions.  

The Veteran was offered a VA examination in October 2022 regarding his dental claim, but he did not appear and did not submit any statements requesting the examination be rescheduled or providing any good cause for missing his examination.  

As such, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to service connection for a dental disability must be denied.  

6. Entitlement to service connection for razor bumps.

The Veteran contends that he has a diagnosis of razor bumps that are causally related to his active service.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of razor bumps and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran attended a VA examination of the skin in November 2021.  The VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of razor bumps. Further, despite consistent treatment, the Veteran's VA and private treatment records do not show a diagnosis or treatment for razor bumps.

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of razor bumps, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

Without evidence of a current disability, service connection may not be granted.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran may have had razor bumps during service; however, the Court has held that "Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of razor bumps and no lay or medical evidence of record shows that the Veteran's reported symptoms cause functional impairment. There also is no evidence of a disability at any point during the claims period or shortly prior to the claim being filed.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current disability related to razor bumps.  As such, the claim must be denied.  

7. Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism.

The Veteran contends that his hypothyroidism is causally related to his active service or to his service-connected disabilities. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  The examiner diagnosed hypothyroidism.  The examiner then provided a nexus opinion noting that they Veteran's hypothyroidism was at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disability.  The examiner noted that hypothyroidism has been linked to depression as there is irrefutable evidence that it triggers the affective disease and psychotic disorders.  Depressive patients have a higher frequency of hypothyroidism and patients with hypothyroidism have a higher occurrence of depressive syndrome.  The examiner opined that the claimed hypothyroidism is at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current hypothyroidism is proximately due to his service-connected MDD.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for hypothyroidism is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

8. Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia.

Hyperlipidemia, or elevated cholesterol, is considered to be laboratory result and not a disability for compensation purposes.  See 61 Fed. Reg. 20,440, 20,445 (May 7, 1996) (diagnoses of hyperlipidemia, elevated triglycerides, and elevated cholesterol are laboratory results and are not, in and of themselves, disabilities). The term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  For these reasons, service connection for hyperlipidemia must be denied.

9. Entitlement to service connection for COPD.

The Veteran contends he has a current diagnosis of COPD.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of COPD and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The record contains numerous treatment records.  The Veteran's pulmonary effort was consistently normal.  The Veteran had no respiratory distress.  VA treatment records showed no evidence of acute cardiopulmonary disease upon chest X-ray.  His pulse oxygen remained good with readings of 98 percent in November 2021.    

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of COPD, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

Without evidence of a current disability, service connection may not be granted.  The Court has held that "Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of any respiratory disability and no lay or medical evidence of record shows that the Veteran's reported symptoms cause functional impairment. There also is no evidence of a disability at any point during the claims period or shortly prior to the claim being filed.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current disability of COPD.  As such, the claim must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Board notes that the issues of entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability, left hip disability, and obstructive sleep apnea were remanded in February 2025 rating decisions.  Although the Veteran properly appealed later rating decisions for these issues in the current September 2023 NOD on appeal, the Board finds that as further development has already been noted as required prior to a decision on the merits and no evidence of record in the extended appeal period allows for a grant of service connection, the Board must reiterate the reasons for remand set forth in the February 2025 Board decision.  As such, the issues are remanded for compliance with the February 2025 Board remand directives, which are restated below.

4. Entitlement to service connection for fatty liver is remanded. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disability is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for fatty liver (hepatic steatosis) and a prostate disability are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ did not obtain a VA examination prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal regarding whether the Veteran's fatty liver or prostate disability is caused by any exposure to PFAs during service, to include chemicals such as aqueous film-forming foam.  The Veteran submitted multiple internet articles and congressional testimony regarding the existence of PFAs at different naval bases, to include the foam.  The AOJ should determine the level of the Veteran's exposure to the extent possible and obtain a nexus opinion.  As the issues are being remanded, the AOJ should also consider the Veteran's statements regarding whether his fatty liver disease is related to his MDD with alcohol use disorder.  

6. Entitlement to service connection for hydronephrosis, to include pyel ureteral junction syndrome, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hydronephrosis, to include pyel ureteral junction syndrome, is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a medical opinion in July 2022.  However, this medical opinion does not provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's hydronephrosis was aggravated by his service-connected disability.  Once VA determines that a medical opinion is necessary, an adequate opinion must be obtained.  As such, the AOJ should obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's hydronephrosis. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a medical opinion in January 2023 prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  However, this medical opinion does not provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's IBS was aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.  Once VA determines that a medical opinion is necessary, an adequate opinion must be obtained.  As such, the AOJ should obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's IBS.

8. Entitlement to service connection for mild to moderate partially visualized stool burden is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a partially visualized stool burden is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a medical opinion in January 2023 prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  However, this medical opinion does not provide an opinion on whether the Veteran's stool burden was aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.  Once VA determines that a medical opinion is necessary, an adequate opinion must be obtained.  As such, the AOJ should obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's stool burden.

9. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for a right arm disability claimed as right arm pain is remanded.

The Board will address the issues of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability and right arm pain together as they stem from the same legal and factual basis.  The issues are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran submitted lay evidence that he fell from a ladder and was injured during basic training for the Army.  Specifically, the statement notes that the Veteran injured his right side, to include his shoulder and arm.  Additionally, he was then discharged for being unable to complete basic training.  As such, a remand for a VA examination and nexus opinion is necessary before a decision on the merits may be made.  

11. Entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome is remanded.

The Board is remanding the issue of entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The Veteran's VA treatment records noted chronic pain.  The Veteran has not had an examination specifically to determine if he has a diagnosed chronic pain syndrome.  Therefore, the issue is remanded to obtain a medical examination and nexus opinion.  

12. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee osteoarthritis is remanded.

The Board notes that a review of the record reveals the Veteran uses medication for his right knee osteoarthritis.  Specifically, his VA medication list shows that the Veteran used Tylenol for his right knee, especially during flare-ups.  As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of such medication, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's right knee osteoarthritis.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

13. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

14. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2023 and August 2023 rating decisions on appeal.  The Board notes that review of the record reveals the Veteran was unable to bear weight on his legs and had numbness throughout his legs in May 2023.  The Veteran was diagnosed with transverse myelitis.  At this time, no VA examiner has differentiated the symptoms of radiculopathy and transverse myelitis.  Given the overlap of functional impairment, the Board finds a remand is necessary before a decision on the merits may be made.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his right hip osteoarthritis. The claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right hip osteoarthritis was caused or aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis. Aggravation is defined for these purposes as a worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary flare-up of symptoms. 

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately.

The examiner should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record. 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his left hip disability.  The claims file and a complete copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician.  All diagnostic testing deemed necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.  

Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, the clinical records, and the lay statements, the clinician is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following questions:

a.)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left hip disorder was incurred in service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include an in-service fall in 1999?

b.)	Is it at least as likely as not that, but for a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis, he would not have his current left hip disorder?

c.)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left hip disorder would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis?

The clinician is instructed to address (i) causation and (ii) aggravation separately for the claimed disability.  If separate opinions are not provided for causation and aggravation, the opinion will be returned as inadequate. 

If aggravation is shown, the clinician should indicate to the extent possible the baseline level of severity of the disorder (that is, the approximate level of severity of the disorder prior to the onset of the worsening). 

In forming opinions, the clinician must address the November 2021 buddy statement and the lay statements from the Veteran in the May 2022 and July 2022 VA examinations describing how he developed severe hip pain following an in-service fall in 1999. 

It would be helpful to the Board if the clinician could explain why the medical evidence is either consistent with or inconsistent with a finding that the Veteran's left hip disorder was either directly incurred in or related to service.  It would also be helpful if the clinician could explain why the medical evidence is either consistent or inconsistent with findings that the Veteran's left hip disorder was caused or worsened by a service-connected disability, to specifically include spondylolisthesis.  

A thorough rational for any opinion must be provided.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his obstructive sleep apnea. The claims file must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must specify in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise due to his service, to include any work in gas chambers. 

The examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected sinusitis. Aggravation is defined for these purposes as a worsening of the underlying condition versus a temporary flare-up of symptoms.

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately

Finally, the examiner is asked to opine as to whether obesity was an intermediate step between his service-connected spondylolisthesis and sleep apnea. 

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any service-connected disability:

a.)	caused the Veteran to become obese or.

b.)	aggravated the Veteran's obesity.

The examiner is again reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct concepts, and each must be addressed separately. 

If so, then the examiner is asked to opine as to whether the obesity or aggravation of obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's current sleep apnea. 

The examiner should consider all evidence, including lay statements, medical records, and other medical opinions of record. Any opinions offered should be accompanied by a clear rationale consistent with the evidence of record.

The examiner is also asked to opine as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis. 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination regarding his fatty liver disease and prostate disability.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Is the Veteran's fatty liver causally related to his reported exposure to PFAs during his military service?  The examiner should address the articles submitted in June 2022 and the March 2020 congressional testimony.  

b.)	Is the Veteran's fatty liver causally related to his service-connected MDD with alcohol use disorder?

c.)	Is the Veteran's fatty liver aggravated by his MDD with alcohol use disorder?

d.)	Does the Veteran have a currently diagnosed prostate disability?

e.)	Is the Veteran's prostate disability causally related to his reported exposure to PFAs during his military service?  The examiner should address the articles submitted in June 2022 and the March 2020 congressional testimony.  

f.)	Is the Veteran's prostate disability causally related to his service-connected MDD with alcohol use disorder?

g.)	Is the Veteran's prostate disability aggravated by his MDD with alcohol use disorder?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  

5. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's hydronephrosis and pyel ureteral junction syndrome.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Is the Veteran's hydronephrosis causally related to his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

b.)	Is the Veteran's hydronephrosis aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an additional examination is required for the examiner to sufficiently address the above questions, then a new examination should be afforded.

6. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's IBS.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

c.)	Is the Veteran's IBS causally related to his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

d.)	Is the Veteran's IBS aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an additional examination is required for the examiner to sufficiently address the above questions, then a new examination should be afforded.

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding his claim for a partially visualized stool burden.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of stool burden?

b.)	Has he had a diagnosis of stool burden at any time during the period on appeal?

c.)	Is the Veteran's current stool burden or stool burden diagnosed at any time during the period on appeal causally related to his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

d.)	Is the Veteran's current stool burden or stool burden diagnosed at any time during the period on appeal aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include his treatment for any disability?

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.

8. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding his claim for a right shoulder and a right arm disability.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Does the Veteran have a currently diagnosed right shoulder disability?  The examiner should consider any functional impairment due to pain. 

b.)	Does the Veteran have a currently diagnosed right arm disability?  The examiner should consider any functional impairment due to pain.

c.)	Is the Veteran's right shoulder disability causally related to his active service, to include the described fall during service?

d.)	Is the Veteran's right arm disability causally related to his active service, to include the described fall during service?

The examiner should consider the lay statements regarding an injury during service, but should also note the December 2010 injury when the Veteran partially fell into a manhole.  

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.

9. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding his claimed chronic pain syndrome.  Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Do the Veteran's symptoms of pain manifest as a diagnosed disability, to include chronic pain syndrome?

b.)	If so, is the Veteran's chronic pain syndrome causally related to his active service, to include any fall from a ladder during basic training in 1999?

c.)	Is the Veteran's chronic pain syndrome causally related to his service-connected spondylolisthesis?

d.)	Is the Veteran's chronic pain syndrome aggravated by his service-connected spondylolisthesis?

The examiner should consider the lay statements regarding an injury during service, but should also note the December 2010 injury when the Veteran partially fell into a manhole.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.

10. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the Veteran's right knee disability.  An examination should only be scheduled if the clinician deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinions. 

a.)	The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran are productive of ameliorative effects on the service connected right knee osteoarthritis. 

b.)	If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record. 

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).  

11. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination regarding his right and left lower extremity radiculopathy.    Following a complete review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming the statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

a.)	Please differentiate between the symptoms of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and the diagnosed transverse myelitis.  The examiner should note the Veteran's complaints of numbness and weakness in the legs.  

b.)	If the examiner cannot differentiate between the symptoms of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy and transverse myelitis, then please provide an overall picture of the Veteran's functional impairment of his lower extremities, to include any pain, loss of sensation, trophic changes, muscle loss, or weakness.

If the Veteran does not appear for an examination, the examiner is asked to respond based upon the Veteran's treatment records regarding his myelitis and his radiculopathy.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service or to a service-connected disability does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service or a service-connected disability, the examiner should decide favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veresink, Patricia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.