Citation Nr: A25031102
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-457645
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served active duty from May 1974 until May 1994.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2022 decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  

In July 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), where he elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ unless rebutted by evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In May 2022 the AOJ made the following favorable findings: (1) the Veteran's private examination diagnosed the Veteran with sinusitis; (2) evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service; (3) sinusitis is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to the Veteran's military service; and (4) the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  

In August 2023, the AOJ corrected a favorable finding regarding the Veteran's diagnosis of sinusitis.  The AOJ noted the private examination does not clinically diagnose the Veteran.  As such, the favorable finding was to be incorrect.  See 38 CFR 3.104(c).

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for sinusitis. 

The VA has a duty to assist veterans and must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(1).  The medical examination or opinion must also be adequate.  A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311. 

The Veteran submitted a private Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) from Dr. Wahrenbrock in December 2021.  Dr. Wahrenbrock diagnosed the Veteran with allergic rhinitis but did not diagnose the Veteran with chronic sinusitis.  However, Dr. Wahrenbrock completed the section for sinusitis documenting the Veteran's symptoms and did not complete the section for rhinitis.  In addition, Dr. Wahrenbrock's examination did not provide an opinion regarding etiology of the Veteran's claimed sinusitis.  The Board finds the examination is contradictory regarding the diagnosis identified versus the symptoms discussed.  The Board also notes that Dr. Wahrenbrock stated he did not review any of the Veteran's records.  Therefore, the Board finds this examination was not adequate for adjudication and minimally probative. 

A VA medical opinion was requested in April 2022.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran was not diagnosed with sinusitis in his 2017 VA examination nor his 2021 private examination.  The examiner noted the symptoms were subjective only.  The examiner was only able to review the records when rendering the opinion.  The Board finds the opinion did not adequately address the private examination and therefore is inadequate and minimally probative.

The Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran's lay statements regarding symptoms were not considered in the April 2022 examination and therefore, the examination is inadequate.  However, while the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, the Veteran is not competent to diagnose medical conditions or to opine regarding a nexus between active service and a disability.  The Veteran was informed that his private examination was not completed correctly and that he needed to attend a VA examination.  The Veteran refused to attend a VA examination.  See December 2021 Report of General Information and Statement in Support of Claim.  The Veteran is advised that the duty to assist is not a one-way street, and the Veteran must assist and cooperate with the VA in developing their claim or risk the possibility that evidence necessary to a positive outcome may not be available to adjudicators.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).

Based on the above, the Board finds it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ to rely on the April 2022 opinion.  As such, a remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed sinusitis.  

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

a)	Does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of sinusitis?

b)	Is the sinusitis at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's military service?

The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinion.  The examiner should also consider the Veteran's private examination which documents symptoms of sinusitis. 

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bond, Tyana N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.