Citation Nr: A25031612
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231017-385480
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for chronic sinusitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, claimed as secondary to service-connected fibromyalgia and/or cold induced urticaria, or as due to an undiagnosed illness or other chronic qualifying disability pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1117, is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, his current undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath is presumptively related to his service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War.

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's sinusitis did not result in any incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotic treatment, or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317. 

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for chronic sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, DC 6512.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1988 to October 1992, with additional service in the National Guard. Additionally, the Veteran served in Southwest Asia from January 1991 to June 1991. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in June 2023 and August 2023 by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In October 2023, the Veteran filed a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and selected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 and August 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, as the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

With respect to the characterization of the claims on appeal, the Board notes that the August 2023 rating decision, which adjudicated a July 2023 Supplemental Claim, found that new and relevant evidence had not been received so as to warrant readjudication of the appellant's claim for service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath and chronic fatigue syndrome, which had been previously denied on multiple occasions, to include most recently in January 2022 and October 2008, respectively.

In this regard, when a claimant files a Supplemental Claim, such as in the instant case, new and relevant evidence is generally required to readjudicate the claim as set forth at 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. However, when a change in law or regulation creates a new basis of entitlement to benefits by liberalizing the requirements for such entitlement, a claim for benefits is treated as a new claim that is separate and distinct from the previously denied claim. Spencer v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 283, 288-9 (1993), aff'd, 17 F.3d 368 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Stated another way, new and relevant evidence is not required for readjudication of a previously denied claim when an intervening liberalizing law creates a new basis for entitlement to benefits that did not exist at the time of the prior denial.

In this regard, on August 10, 2022, the President of the United States signed the PACT Act into law. In relevant part, the PACT Act provides such disability must become manifest to any degree at any time. Therefore, the PACT Act is a liberalizing law that created a new right to entitlement of benefits. The Veteran's claim for service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath and chronic fatigue syndrome is premised, in part, on his disabilities being presumptively related to his service in Southwest Asia, despite such disorders not manifesting to a degree of 10 percent or more. Therefore, new and relevant evidence is not required, and his claim is treated as a new claim that is separate and distinct from the previous claims that were denied.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) [(table)].

Service connection may also be granted for a disability due to a qualifying chronic disability of a veteran who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War provided that such disability became manifest during either active service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more, under the appropriate diagnostic code of 38 C.F.R. Part 4, not later than December 31, 2026, and by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, the disability cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1).

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), as of August 10, 2022, the foregoing statue and regulation has been amended to indicate that such disability must become manifest to any degree at any time.

In the instant case, the record reflects that the Veteran served in Southwest Asia, to include Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf War. Therefore, such laws and regulations are applicable to his claim.

A chronic qualifying disability means a chronic disability resulting from an (A) undiagnosed illness; (B) the following medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses (MUCMIs) that are defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; (2) fibromyalgia; (3) functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases); or (4) any other illness that the Secretary determines meets the criteria in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section for a MUCMI; or (C) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (d) warrants a presumption of service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i).

"Objective indications of chronic disability" include both "signs," in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(3).

Disabilities that have existed for 6 months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a 6-month period will be considered chronic. The 6-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(4).

Signs or symptoms which may be manifestations of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness include, but are not limited to: (1) fatigue, (2) unexplained rashes or other dermatological signs or symptoms, (3) headache, (4) muscle pain, (5) joint pain, (6) neurological signs and symptoms, (7) neuropsychological signs or symptoms, (8) signs or symptoms involving the upper or lower respiratory system, (9) sleep disturbances, (10) gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, (11) cardiovascular signs or symptoms, (12) abnormal weight loss, and (13) menstrual disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (b).

In the case of claims based on an undiagnosed illness under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, unlike those for direct service connection, there is no requirement of a nexus or association between the claimed disability and in-service incurrence or aggravation. Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004). However, there must be no affirmative evidence that relates the undiagnosed illness to a cause other than being in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (c). If signs or symptoms have been attributed to a known clinical diagnosis in the particular veteran's case being considered, service connection may not be provided under the specific provisions pertaining to Persian Gulf veterans. VAOPGCPREC 8-98 (Aug. 3, 1998).

The Veteran contends that he has shortness of breath that is related to his exposure to environmental hazards coincident with his deployment to Saudi Arabia from June 1991 to October 1991.  

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referable to a respiratory disorder, to include shortness of breath. However, the Board notes that his service personnel records (SPRs) reflect service in Southwest Asia. 

In this regard, in the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran served in Southwest Asia from January 1991 to June 1991, as reflected in his SPRs and that he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity. The Board is bound by such favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Upon VA examination, in May 2021, it was noted that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of a respiratory disorder. However, the Veteran reported that his shortness of breath began in 1991, after his service in Southwest Asia, and that he has continued to experience shortness of breath since that time. The examiner noted that the Veteran's shortness of breath impacts his ability to work in that he has lost up to one week of work in the last twelve months, and that his shortness of breath makes it difficult to open a door, lift a phone, and that he feels faint due to tightness in his chest.  The examiner opined that the Veteran is suffering from severe anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder and that his shortness of breath is directly related to these diagnoses.  Furthermore, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's shortness of breath, was considered a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology. However, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner provided the rationale that there is no evidence of persistent or recurrent symptoms or concern of a diagnosis for shortness of breath.

An October 2021 VA examiner reported that the Veteran does not have a respiratory disorder. Upon examination the Veteran reported the onset of his respiratory symptoms in 1991, at which time he reported that he went to sick call, however he did not receive medical treatment. He further reported that he has self-treated with over-the-counter medications since service and that his symptoms have continued to worsen since such time, to include persistent daily shortness of breath with dizziness occurring mostly when he is anxious. The examiner reported that the Veteran's respiratory disorder does not impact his ability to work, further noting that the complaints of limitation and functional loss were identified only by the Veteran's report. Furthermore, the examiner opined that the Veteran has subjective symptoms of Gulf War Syndrome to include shortness of breath, although she was unable to determine a diagnosis of Gulf War Syndrome from the subjective evidence and that pulmonary function testing (PFT) or chest x-rays were not ordered, as the Veteran denied radiology testing. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, at which time the examiner reported that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed respiratory disorder. During the examination, the Veteran reported the onset of his respiratory symptoms in 1990 and that he has continued to have trouble breathing, usually when he is anxious, since service. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's disability pattern is either an undiagnosed illness, or a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptoms illness of unknown etiology. However, in a March 2023 addendum, the examiner opined that there was no objective evidence to support a diagnosis, and that earlier opinion that the Veteran's disability pattern is either an undiagnosed illness, or a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptoms illness of unknown etiology was in error. The examiner further noted that the Veteran failed to show for the PFT diagnostics therefore the report was sent without the additional diagnostics. 

In May 2023, the Veteran underwent a subsequent VA examination, at which time the VA examiner reported that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed respiratory disorder.  However, it was noted that the Veteran had scars due to pulmonary conditions. During the examination, the Veteran again reported that his symptoms began in 1991, and that his symptoms have continued since such time. In this regard, the examiner opined that the Veteran's pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The examiner provided the rationale that she was unable to confirm a chronic diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis or emphysema with currently available records. Thus, finding that the current symptoms are subjective only. 

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records indicate that he was seen for dyspnea associated with panic attacks in July 2008, and an August 2008 record reflects that he was seen for shortness of breath. Such records further show that in September 2014 the Veteran was seen for shortness of breath, which was noted  seemed to have some anxiety component,  in January 2016 the Veteran reported that he experienced trouble breathing during panic attacks, a September 2020 record reflects that he complained of shortness of breath, in October 2020 the Veteran reported constant dyspnea and reported doing breathing exercises to reduce his symptoms, and he was again seen in August 2021 and December 2021 for continuing complaints of a cough and shortness of breath. Private treatment records dated May 2020 reflect that the Veteran sought care for shortness of breath and abdominal pain. A June 2020 record reflects that the Veteran presented to the emergency room with complaints of breathing difficulty and shortness of breath. At which time, he was admitted for a cough and chest x-ray reflected a normal chest. 

The May 2021, October 2021, September 2022, March 2023 and May 2023 VA examiners are medical professionals who are competent to address the etiology of the Veteran's respiratory disorder, considered all relevant facts, and provided rationales for their conclusions, their opinions are entitled to equal probative weight. Therefore, as the evidence is in relative equipoise as to the etiology of the Veteran's shortness of breath, the Board resolves all doubt in his favor and finds that, based on the May 2021 VA examiners' determination, he has a current undiagnosed illness manifested by a shortness of breath that is presumptively related to his service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War. Furthermore, the October 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran has subjective symptoms of Gulf War Syndrome to include shortness of breath. Specifically, both examiners found that his reported shortness of breath, was symptomatology of an undiagnosed illness. Moreover, such has clearly been chronic since the Veteran's military service as evidenced by his reports that such has persisted since service. Moreover, while the AOJ had acknowledged in the September 2021 VA rating decision that the VA examiners' determinations that such condition was an undiagnosed illness, which is presumptively related to the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia, his prior claims were denied based on a finding that such had not manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more. However, as indicated previously, the PACT Act eliminated such requirement. Consequently, presumptive service connection for the Veteran's undiagnosed illness manifested by shortness of breath is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for chronic sinusitis.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.  

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

For the entire appeal period stemming from May 1, 2023, the date of service connection, the Veteran's sinusitis has been assigned a noncompensable rating under DC 6512. Such provides a noncompensable rating for sinusitis detected by X-ray only. A 10 percent rating is assigned for chronic sinusitis where one or two incapacitating episodes of sinusitis per year require prolonged (lasting 4 to 6 weeks) antibiotic treatment or where there are three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. A 30 percent evaluation is assigned when there are three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. A 50 percent is assigned following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries. A Note provides that an incapacitating episode of sinusitis means one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

The Veteran's private and VA treatment records are negative for any relevant complaints or treatment referable to his service-connected sinusitis. 

At a September 2022 VA examination, it was noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of rhinitis and did not address the Veteran's sinusitis other than noting that the Veteran reported sinus congestion. 

At a May 2023 VA examination, a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis affecting the maxillary, frontal and ethmoid sinuses was rendered.  On examination the Veteran reported persistent rhinorrhea, runny nose, nasal congestion, watery, itchy, red eyes, sneezing, cough, itchy nose, sore throat, postnasal drip, shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion and daily fatigue. The Veteran reported that he was not currently receiving treatment for his sinusitis. It was noted on examination that the Veteran has current findings, signs or symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis that was detected only by imaging studies. On examination it was noted that the Veteran did not have non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and purulent discharge or crusting in the past 12 months. In addition, it was reported that the Veteran has not had incapacitating episodes of sinusitis requiring prolonged (4 to 6 weeks) of antibiotics in the past 12 months. Further, it was noted that the Veteran has not undergone sinus surgery. Additionally, the examiner reported that the Veteran's sinusitis did not impact his ability to work.  In a June 2023 VA medical addendum, the examiner confirmed that the Veteran's had diagnoses of sinusitis and allergic rhinitis. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's sinusitis is not warranted. In this regard, the probative evidence of record does not support a higher rating of 10 percent as such disability is not shown to result in one or two incapacitating episodes per year requiring prolonged antibiotic treatment or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. Significantly, during the May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran denied experiencing any incapacitating or non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis, characterized by headaches, pain and purulent discharge or crusting in the past 12 months. Furthermore, VA treatment records and private treatment records do not reflect a history of sinus infections at any time during the appeal period. Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran's sinusitis does not more nearly approximate one or two incapacitating episodes per year requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. Therefore, an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's chronic sinusitis is not warranted.

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board has considered the Veteran's contention with respect to the nature of his service-connected sinusitis and notes that he is competent to describe certain symptoms associated with his disability. However, in evaluating this claim, the Board finds that the most probative evidence regarding the severity of his sinusitis disability is the medical evidence of record which considers the Veteran's reported symptoms, including the frequency and severity thereof, but also provides clinical evaluation of the disability, as well as evaluation of functional impairment caused thereby.

In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's sincerely held belief that his service-connected chronic sinusitis is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned rating. In this regard, while the Board recognizes that he is competent to describe his symptomatology and resulting functional impairment, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert, supra. Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of his disability.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, and Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected chronic sinusitis; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings is not warranted. Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, in regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board finds that a compensable rating for sinusitis is not warranted. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's increased rating claim. As such, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and his claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome.

The Veteran contends that he has a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome, or a disability manifested by chronic fatigue, that is the result of his exposure to environmental hazards coincident with deployment to Southwest Asia. In the alternative, the Veteran claims that his chronic fatigue synrome is secondary to his service-connected fibromyalgia and/or cold induced urticaria. 

While the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to chronic fatigue syndrome, his service personnel records (SPRs) reflect that he was stationed in Southwest Asia. 

In this regard, in the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran served in Southwest Asia from January 1991 to June 1991, as reflected in his SPRs and that he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity. Thus, the Board is bound by such favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records, dated July 2008 reflects that the Veteran reported fatigue. An August 2008 record reflects that the Veteran was having fatigue syndrome since Desert Storm and reported having little energy. Additionally, a December 2008 record reflects that the Veteran has continued to expereince fatigue, and a January 2022 sleep medicine consult the Veteran reported daytime fatigue. 

In May 2021 and September 2022 the Veteran underwent VA Gulf War examinations, however the examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. 

Thus, given that the foregoing evidence suggests that the Veteran may have a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome that would be presumptively related to his military service, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional error by affording him a VA examination so as to address the nature and etiology of such claimed disorder. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed chronic fatigue syndrome, or a disability manifested by chronic fatigue. The record should be made available for review. Thereafter, the examiner should address the below inquiries:

(A) State whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome, or a disability manifested by chronic fatigue. If such is not found on examination, reconcile such determination with the treatment records reflecting such possible diagnosis.

(B) If chronic fatigue syndrome is diagnosed, but not found to be related to the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia, offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that such disorder is caused or aggravated by his service-connected fibromyalgia and/or cold induced urticaria. For any aggravation found, the examiner should state, to the best of their ability, the baseline of symptomatology and the amount, quantified, if possible, of aggravation beyond the baseline symptomatology.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Sharrocks-Marchione

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.