Citation Nr: A25031942
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 250220-518358
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (initially claimed as depression/anxiety) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (initially claimed as right sciatic nerve pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity (initially claimed as left sciatic nerve pain) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1968 to June 1970, for which he was awarded the Parachute Badge.  He has subsequent duty in the Army Reserves and the Army National Guard of his home state, but as of this adjudication, the Board can only grant benefits attributable to active duty reflected on a Form DD-214.  If the Veteran has any line of duty determinations that may be pertinent to any of the claims on appeal, then he is free to file a Supplemental Claim at any time.  These claims come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 29, 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The January 2024 rating decision was later subjected to Higher-Level Review, and the HLR rating decision was issued on October 16, 2024.

In the February 20, 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 29, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding all claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As noted, the appellant selected the Direct Review Docket.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), an appellant may modify a NOD to change the Board docket being requested. The time limit for such modification is "within one year from the date that the [AOJ] mails notice of the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date that the Board receives the [NOD], whichever is later." See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  "[T]he Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up." See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  As a result of Williams, supra, the Board could normally be precluded from adjudicating this claim until October 16, 2025.  This date would afford the Veteran one year after a rating decision to switch dockets, by which time a 60-day period to submit a new Notice of Disagreement would have lapsed as well.  In these circumstances, the Board determines that remanding all claims cannot prejudice the Veteran in any way, because nothing will be adjudicated-let alone adjudicated to grant less than maximum available benefits.  As such, if this remand is in error for being too early against Williams, supra, then the error is harmless.   

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by earlier in time findings of fact that are favorable to the appellant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  If relevant, the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity has been conceded.  That concession is due to the Veteran's military occupational specialty of Light Weapons Infantry (11B10). See generally 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  The Veteran's DD-214 also confirms the Veteran's receipt of the Parachute Badge. Id.  The Veteran is accordingly competent to offer testimony about circumstances consistent with his MOS, including daily duties.

This appeal is advanced on the docket on account of the Veteran's advanced age. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2). 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (initially claimed as depression/anxiety) is remanded.

A VA examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). See also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2), 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by earlier in time findings of fact that are favorable to the appellant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  As relevant here, the January 2024 rating decision confirms a diagnosis of depression.  If necessary, the Board can expand the claim to encompass service connection for any acquired psychiatric disorder. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

It appears that the AOJ processed the claim as due to toxic exposure risk activities, and then determined that no TERA examination was required. See generally Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010) (holding that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury or disease in service).  Notwithstanding any of the above, the Board cannot locate any other VA psychiatric examination, in case depression is directly attributable to active duty service.  

A claimant may "limit a claim or appeal to the issue of entitlement to a particular disability rating which is less than the maximum disability rating allowed by law" via "clearly expressed intent to limit the appeal to entitlement to a specific disability rating for the service-connected condition." See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 39 (1993) (citing Hamilton v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 528, 544 (1993)).  The Veteran did not limit his claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder as only possibly due to a TERA. See VA Form 21526EZ (rec'd Mar. 13, 2023).  As such, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist, when the AOJ failed to administer a VA examination and obtain an etiological opinion for direct service connection, and when the RO instead simply denied the whole claim as not due to a TERA.  In the alternative, the RO granted claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, so the failure to obtain an etiological opinion as secondary to those is also a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist. 

This claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder accordingly must be remanded.  The Board sincerely regrets the delay that may be incurred as a result of this remand and the previous pre-decisional errors in violation of the duty to assist the Veteran in developing this claim.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disorder is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for male reproductive organ conditions (including prostate cancer) in December 2023. See C&P Exam (Dec. 6, 2023, rec'd Dec. 11, 2023).  The examination report suggests that he denies any mental health issues. Id. at Page 2, Section II, Question No. 2A.  This is clearly erroneous, because the Veteran has been prosecuting a claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder throughout this appellate period.  The Board interprets this as a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist, because the negative etiological opinions that follow are based upon an inaccurate factual premise, see Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993) (medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value), and the RO ultimately denied the claim based upon an inadequate etiological opinion.

Assuming arguendo that the above is not a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist, e.g., if the AOJ were correct in accepting the Veteran's purported denial of any mental health issues, then the AOJ committed the same pre-decisional error as for the psychiatric claim above.  A claimant may "limit a claim or appeal to the issue of entitlement to a particular disability rating which is less than the maximum disability rating allowed by law" via "clearly expressed intent to limit the appeal to entitlement to a specific disability rating for the service-connected condition." See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 39 (1993) (citing Hamilton v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 528, 544 (1993)).  The Veteran did not limit his claim for service connection for a prostate disorder as only possibly due to a TERA. See VA Form 21526EZ (rec'd Mar. 13, 2023).  As such, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist, when the AOJ only obtained an etiological opinion as due to a TERA, and then ultimately denied the whole claim for service connection without considering direct service connection other than due to a TERA.  

Notwithstanding any of the above, the Board would also remand this claim as inextricably intertwined with the psychiatric claim. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a Veteran's claim for the second issue).  One etiological opinion for erectile dysfunction (not otherwise on appeal, but at least as likely as not relevant to this claim for a prostate disorder, as a male productive organ disorder) states that "the most common cause [of] ED is anxiety and other mental health issues." See C&P Exam (Opinion) (rec'd Dec. 11, 2023 ), at Page 3 of 4, Section VII.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the claim on appeal for service connection for a prostate disorder should be remanded, because the intertwined claim for a psychiatric disorder is being remanded as stated above. 

This claim for service connection for a prostate disorder accordingly must be remanded.  The Board sincerely regrets the delay that may be incurred as a result of this remand and the previous pre-decisional errors in violation of the duty to assist the Veteran in developing this claim.

3. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (initially claimed as right sciatic nerve pain) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity (initially claimed as left sciatic nerve pain) is remanded.

A VA examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). See also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2), 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  

The Veteran was afforded a relevant VA examination for peripheral nerves disorders in December 2023.  See C&P Exam (Dec. 6, 2023, rec'd Dec. 11, 2023).  The Board cannot reconcile how the Veteran could have severe intermittent pain of the bilateral lower extremities, id. at Page 2, Section III, severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias of the bilateral lower extremities, id., and moderate incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic nerves, id. at Page 6, Section XI, but still no diagnosed disorder, id. at Page 2, Section I, Question No. 1A.  The AOJ committed pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist, when the RO simply denied the claim without attempting to reconcile these disparate conclusions within the same VA examination.

If the above is not a pre-decisional error, see generally cf., e.g.: Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992) (stating that service connection presupposes a current diagnosis of the condition claimed, to at least confirm the Veteran has it; without this minimum level of proof, there can be no valid claim), then the presence of a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist is confirmed later in the same VA examination report.  The examiner concluded as such:  

For the claimant's claimed condition of Left Sciatic Nerve Condition with Pain there is no diagnosis because it is not possible to make a diagnosis as there has never been an x-ray or MRI of the back or any work up at all for this problem.  Any discussion of the problem would be pure speculation. For the claimant's claimed condition of Right Sciatic Nerve Condition with Pain there is no diagnosis because it is not possible to make a diagnosis as there has never been an x-ray or MRI of the back or any work up at all for this problem.  Any discussion of the problem would be pure speculation.

Id. at Page 9, Section XVII, Question No. 17.

The claim for service connection for the back is not on appeal, so the Board cannot have an opinion about that claim, and the Board cannot state that the radiculopathies are inextricably intertwined with any other claim on appeal.  That being said, if the examiner could not diagnose anything based upon a lack of other development, then the opinion is inadequate for only being based upon a lack of evidence of record. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  If there was no evidence, and if evidence could have been obtained by the AOJ through obtaining a current x-ray or MRI, then the RO's denial of the claim without undergoing this necessary development is a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist.

This claim for service connection for bilateral radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities accordingly must be remanded.  The Board sincerely regrets the delay that may be incurred as a result of this remand and the previous pre-decisional errors in violation of the duty to assist the Veteran in developing these claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action(s):

1. Readjudicate the Veteran's claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (including but not limited to depression).  This readjudication should include consideration of all theories of service connection, including whether it is directly attributable to active duty service for any reason-not just due to a TERA, or secondary to any service-connected disorder (including but not limited to hearing loss and tinnitus). 

The Veteran's MOS was Light Weapons Infantry (11B10), and he was awarded the Parachute Badge, so he is competent to offer testimony about his daily duties pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). 

2. Readjudicate the Veteran's claim for service connection for a prostate disorder.  A previous examination report stated that the Veteran is not claiming any mental disorder, but that answer should have been deemed erroneous, because a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder has always been prosecuted throughout the appellate period.

This readjudication should include consideration of all theories of service connection, including whether it is directly attributable to active duty service for any reason-not just due to a TERA, or secondary to any service-connected disorder.

If the Veteran is ultimately granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, then the AOJ must ensure that a specific etiological opinion is on file that specifically considers whether a prostate disorder is secondary to it. 

3. Readjudicate the Veteran's claim for service connection for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities (initially claimed as bilateral sciatic nerve pain).  If there is still no diagnosis, then the AOJ must specifically explain how this is so, despite documented severe intermittent pain of the bilateral lower extremities, see C&P Exam (Dec. 6, 2023, rec'd Dec. 11, 2023), at Page 2, Section III, severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias of the bilateral lower extremities, id., and moderate incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic nerves, id. at Page 6, Section XI. 

The Veteran's MOS was Light Weapons Infantry (11B10), and he was awarded the Parachute Badge, so he is competent to offer testimony about his daily duties pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).

To the extent that any x-rays, MRI, or similar investigation of the Veteran's back would be helpful for the claim, that development should be undertaken.  The Veteran's back is not on appeal, but the Board is concluding that identifying absent evidence as helpful if present, but not obtaining that evidence, was a pre-decisional error in violation of the duty to assist.

(This space intentionally left blank.  VLJ signature on next page.)

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Engle, Michael B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.