Citation Nr: A25031673
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-465862
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with anxiety is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD with anxiety symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with anxiety have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1997 to April 2005.  

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2023 rating decision.  In May 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Finally, the Board notes that even though the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) has not elapsed, a docket switch waiver letter (see Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363, U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024) is not necessary because the Veteran has effectively waived her right to switch dockets. In written correspondence submitted with the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran's attorney requested that the NOD be accepted on the Direct Docket "without a Board hearing." She also stated, "[W]e will not submit any additional evidence in support of this appeal."  The Board interprets this written communication from the Veteran's attorney as an effective waiver of the right to switch dockets and clear desire for this matter to be adjudicated on the Direct Docket.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with anxiety is denied. 

The Veteran seeks a higher rating and asserts that the private evaluation of record supports a total rating.  See April 2024 HLR informal conference.   

The Veteran's PTSD with anxiety is rated under Diagnostic Code 9411.  Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of a non-initial evaluation, consideration of the evidence up to one year prior to the filing of the claim is appropriate.  See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  The appeal period before the Board begins one year prior top August 11, 2023, the date VA received the claim for an increased rating.  Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010); see August 2023 VA claim.   

VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran had anxiety, poor sleep, panic attacks occurring once per week, and a great deal of workplace stress and changes.  See February 2023 VA treatment records.  Specifically, the Veteran reported resigning from her prior job as a nursing director of a long term care home after several stressful events, to include a resident death, investigation, coworker injury, and long hours.  Objective testing was utilized with scores showing moderate depression and mild anxiety.  The Veteran's husband was supportive.  There was no suicidal ideation, and the risk assessment indicated that she was not at significant risk for self-harm.  In March 2023 VA treatment records, she reported improved symptoms after starting her new job, to include no panic attacks, and lower stress levels.  Mental status examination revealed that the Veteran was alert, oriented, cooperative, and engaged throughout the session.  Her mood seemed euthymic.  Her speech was within normal limits.  She voiced no evidence of a thought disorder, psychotic or manic symptoms, and suicidal or homicidal ideation, plan or intent.

In support of her claim, the Veteran submitted a disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) that was completed in May 2023 by Dr. S., a private psychologist.  Dr. S. examined the Veteran in person. She noted that the Veteran reported a perpetually strained relationship with her significant other due to being emotionally closed off, reserved, disliking affection, and constantly being on guard.  She also reported a lack of trust and meaningful connections.  During anxiety attacks, the Veteran reportedly struggled to focus, lost track of thought process, and seemed to mentally spiral out of control.  As to occupational impairment, the Veteran reported that she is currently employed, and had stress from work resulting in heart palpitations, insomnia, and eyelashes falling out.  The Veteran reported that she has openly displayed her symptoms at work and thus colleagues are aware of her mental health issues. She reported that this has also helped her avoid disciplinary action from management. The Veteran also reported missed work when unable to physically and mentally cope with the symptoms of stress.   

Dr. S. endorsed symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short-and long-term memory; flattened affect; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired abstract thinking; gross impairment in thought processes or communication; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); obsessional rituals which interfere with routine; spatial disorientation; and disorientation to time or place.  Dr. S. also noted impact on her ability to function with episodes of disorientation and dissociation due to inability to recall simple tasks and events when stressed; inability to communicate and process information effectively; difficulties with formulating words or talking in a face paced speech; and difficulty completing assigned tasks in stressful situations.  Dr. S. indicated that the Veteran was not an immediate threat or danger to herself or others. Following the interview and examination, Dr. S. opined that the Veteran's level occupational and social impairment was best summarized as 'occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.'  

In September 2023, Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran lived with her spouse and daughter.  She indicated that she has ongoing difficulties in these relationships due to her aversion to anxiety and other symptoms of her PTSD.  The Veteran currently worked as a clinical nurse reviewer.  The VA examiner endorsed symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The examiner observed that the Veteran was alert and oriented, with intact cognition and recall of her personal history.  She displayed a somber mood with flat affect.  There was no evidence of unusual thinking or psychosis.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation. 

Upon review, the Board finds that a higher 100 percent rating is not warranted during the period on appeal.  The Veteran's PTSD with anxiety resulted in symptoms which more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating.

The VA examination report, private DBQ, treatment records, and the Veteran's lay statements show that her PTSD with anxiety was manifested by symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating.  These symptoms included flattened affect; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); obsessional rituals which interfere with routine; and spatial disorientation.  

She also had symptoms associated with a less than 70 percent rating.  These included depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; panic attacks more than once a week; mild memory loss; impairment of short-and long-term memory; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impaired abstract thinking; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.   

The May 2023 DBQ also identified several symptoms which are not associated with a specific rating but are similar to symptoms associated a less than total disability rating.  At the May 2023 private evaluation, the Veteran reported constantly being on guard, lack of trust, and being emotionally closed off.  This is similar to the symptoms of suspiciousness and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The evaluation also reported physical manifestation of stress, which appears similar to difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  The Veteran's reported difficulty in completing assigned tasks in stressful situations appears to combine difficulty in understanding complex commands and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. 

The May 2023 DBQ shows several symptoms which are associated with a 100 percent rating.  Of note, the Dr. S. noted episodes of disorientation and dissociation which have caused the Veteran to be unable to recall simple details when stressed, as well as disorientation to time or place.  In addition, she noted gross impairment in thought processes or communication, with the Veteran's "clouded mind," difficulty in focusing, impaired thought process and inability to process information effectively.  

However, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms did not more closely approximate those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The Veteran did not report, and the evaluation did not show, that these symptoms were present daily.  Further, the VA treatment records, and VA examination report indicate that these symptoms were not present on a regular basis.  Mental status examinations in VA outpatient visits and at the VA examination were within normal limits, and free of the gross abnormalities associated with a total disability rating.  She was not assessed to be a risk to herself or others. 

More importantly, total occupational and social impairment was not reflected in the Veteran's treatment records, the VA examination, private evaluation, or the lay statements. In the April 2024 informal conference, the Veteran's representative urged that the private evaluation was highly probative due to the thorough nature of the evaluation.  The Board agrees that the DBQ is probative evidence, however, it is significant that Dr. S. did not find the Veteran's overall level of impairment due to her psychiatric symptoms was consistent with total impairment of occupation and social functioning.  Dr. S. was aware of the Veteran's her self-described symptoms and the nature, frequency and duration of such, including but not limited to her reportedly perpetually strained relationship with her spouse, disorientation, thought processes and difficulty communicating at times, as well as the fact that she has at times missed work due to stress.  Nonetheless, Dr. S. specifically opined that based on the Veteran's reported history and in-person examination, her overall level of impairment was best characterized as social and occupational impairment in most areas.  The Board notes that this level of impairment is consistent with a 70 percent, not a total rating. Dr. S.'s assessment is probative due to her clinical education and credentials and her in-person evaluation of the Veteran.

Further, while the Veteran has reported and demonstrated substantial negative symptoms associated with her PTSD with anxiety, the ability to continue in her marriage and continue in fulltime employment - despite the noted difficulties therein- are evidence against there being total social and occupational impairment.  

Overall, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's PTSD with anxiety resulted in symptoms that more nearly approximate a total disability rating.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).  A rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted at any time during the appeal period.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

-	Continued -

There are no additional expressly or reasonably raised issues presented on the record.  The appeal is denied. 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Vuong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.