Citation Nr: A25031592
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 241219-495598
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected ischemic heart disease status post myocardial infarction (MI) and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) (hereinafter referred to as heart disability) is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for the service-connected post sternotomy scar is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected heart disability was productive of a METs workload of greater than 5 METs, resulting in dyspnea and angina.

2. The Veteran's post sternotomy scar is on his anterior trunk, measures 25 x 0.2 centimeters and is asymptomatic.

3. The Veteran has at least as likely as not been unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of his service-connected disabilities throughout the pendency of this claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected heart disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7005-7017.

2. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for the service-connected post sternotomy scar are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, DC 7802.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from October 1964 to July 1967. 

The Veteran's claim for an increased rating for his heart disability was initially denied by way of a June 2018 rating decision, which was issued in response to a claim for increase filed on April 19, 2018. The Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement with that decision. In December 2018, the Veteran elected to have his appeal processed under the modernized review system by opting into the Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP). At that time, he elected the supplemental claim review option. In a September 2019 RAMP rating decision, the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for the heart disability was denied. The Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) in September 2020. In a January 2021 HLR rating decision, it was determined that there had been a duty to assist error prior to the issuance of the September 2019 rating decision. An April 2021 rating decision was issued following the remediation of the duty to assist error. The Veteran then filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in April 2022. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) then issued a decision continuing the 30 percent rating for the heart disability in August 2022. The Veteran then submitted an August 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, listing the heart disability rating and Board decision. The Veteran's timely supplemental claim provides for continuous pursuit of the claim following the Board decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c)(3), 3.2501. The Regional Office (RO) then issued a December 2023 rating decision, which continued the 30 percent rating for the heart disability, and also found a compensable rating is not warranted for the post sternotomy scar associated with the heart disability. The Veteran then filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in December 2024, which listed the December 2023 rating decision and both the heart disability rating and the scar rating as issues being appealed. Based upon this procedural history, the Board finds the rating for the heart disability, and its associated scar, have been continuously on appeal since the April 19, 2018 claim. Thus, the evidentiary review will begin April 19, 2017, one year prior to the increased rating claim. See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

As for the matter of whether a TDIU is warranted, the Board, in its August 2022 decision, found the Veteran's claim for a TDIU to be part and parcel of the increased rating for the heart disability under Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The Board remanded this issue and the RO then adjudicated the TDIU claim in a January 2024 rating decision. The Veteran also listed this issue and the January 2024 decision on the December 2024 VA Form 10182. As it is part and parcel of the increased rating claim for the heart, the Board also finds the period for evidentiary review for the TDIU claim to also begin on April 19, 2017 (which includes consideration of the one year look back period from the April 2018 claim).

On the December 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his representative, with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the rating decisions on appeal and prior to receipt of the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating - Heart Disability

The Veteran has asserted that the symptoms of his heart disability are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned 30 percent rating. During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating cardiovascular disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104 were amended effective November 14, 2021. 86 Fed. Reg. 54093 (Sept. 30, 2021). Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to November 14, 2021, and both the old and new rating criteria from November 14, 2021. The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.

In the year prior to the Veteran's claim, his VA treatment records show consistently reported stable heart disease with an encouragement of regular exercise and medication management. For example, in May 2017, August 2017 and December 2017, the Veteran's VA primary care physician noted the condition as stable with exercise tolerance producing no symptoms. The Veteran was instructed to follow up with cardiology and continue with regular exercise. His medication management was also noted throughout his VA medical records.

In January 2018, private cardiology records show the Veteran reporting having shortness of breath, which was described as worse after his CABG. The private clinician noted that the Veteran had undergone multiple stress tests, which were unremarkable. He also reported occasional chest pain, which was noted to be atypical and nonexertional.

Shortly following his April 2018 claim, the Veteran was afforded a May 2018 VA examination. The examiner confirmed the Veteran's use of continuous medication for control of his heart disability. There was no evidence of congestive heart failure (CHF), arrhythmia, heart valve conditions, infectious heart disease, or pericardial adhesions. Physical examination revealed heart rate and rhythm within normal limits as well as normal heart sounds. There was no jugular-venous distension, and auscultation of the lungs was clear. Peripheral pulses were normal, and there was no peripheral edema noted. There was no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac dilatation. Electrocardiogram (EKG) and chest X-ray were both normal. The examiner noted that a May 2018 echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 70-75 percent, with normal wall motion and thickness. The examiner noted that the Veteran had an exercise stress test in May 2018, which revealed a METs workload of 10 with dyspnea, and was negative for ischemia. Interview based METs testing was also performed, which revealed a METs workload of greater than 5-7, with dyspnea. However, the examiner noted that the exercise stress test was the more accurate reflection of the Veteran's current cardiac functioning. The examiner further noted that the limitation in METs workload was due to both his cardiac functioning and his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but that it would not be possible to accurately estimate the percent of METs limitation attributable to each condition.

Private medical records revealed that the Veteran underwent a cardiac catheterization in November 2018 and January 2019 following complaints of angina and shortness of breath with and without exertion.

At a February 2019 VA examination, the Veteran was noted to require continuous medication for control of his heart disability. There was no evidence of CHF, arrythmia, heart valve conditions, infections heart conditions, or pericardial adhesions. Upon physical examination, the Veteran's heart rate and rhythm were not noted to be abnormal, and heart sounds were normal. There was no jugular-venous distension, and auscultation of the lungs was clear. Peripheral pulses were normal, and there was no evidence of peripheral edema. There was no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac dilatation. EKG was normal, and the Veteran's chest X-ray did not reveal any interval changes when compared with his May 2018 chest X-ray. The examiner cited to a January 2019 echocardiogram, which revealed LVEF of 60-65 percent with normal wall motion and thickness. An exercise stress test was not performed. However, interview based METs testing revealed a METs workload of 1-3 METs with dyspnea. The examiner noted that the reduction in METs workload was due to multiple medical conditions, but it could not be accurately estimated the percentage of METs limitation attributable to each medical condition. In a February 2019 addendum, the examiner noted the degenerative joint disease of the shoulders, low back and knees contribute to the METs level and it is not based solely on cardiac manifestations. In a July 2019 addendum report, a VA examiner noted the results of the Veteran's May 2018 cardiac stress test, which was negative for ischemia, and revealed a METs workload of 10 was the accurate reflection of the Veteran's METs workload based solely on cardiac functioning.

January 2020 private cardiology notes show the Veteran reported stable shortness of breath and he denied having chest pain. In July 2020, the Veteran reported occasional nonexertional chest pain and some shortness of breath. October 2020 records show the Veteran in follow-up treatment reporting nonexertional atypical chest pain and exertional shortness of breath. The physician noted that the Veteran has complex coronary artery disease, but that he seems to remain free of angina and the "chest pain sounds noncardiac."

The Veteran was again afforded a VA examination in March 2021. At this time, the Veteran was again noted to require continuous medication for control of his heart disability. There was no evidence of CHF, arrythmia, heart valve conditions, infectious heart conditions, or pericardial adhesions. Upon physical examination, the Veteran's heart rate and rhythm were normal, and heart sounds were normal. There was no jugular-venous distension, and auscultation of the lungs was clear. Peripheral pulses were normal, and there was no evidence of peripheral edema. There was no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac dilatation. The examiner noted that an April 2021 echocardiogram revealed a LVEF of 60-65 percent. Exercise cardiac stress testing was not performed due to active angina. Interview based METs testing was performed, at which time the Veteran reported dyspnea and angina. The examiner noted that the Veteran had a METs workload of greater than 5-7 METs. The examiner noted that the identified METs workload was that which was attributable solely due to his cardiac functioning. The examiner further noted that the Veteran had both emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis, which result in symptoms that can be pulmonary and cardiac in nature. However, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported shortness of breath and intermittent angina in the face of documented progressing coronary artery disease, but also admitted to being able to walk for 15 minutes on the treadmill and daily walking outside on flat surfaces, as well as being able to climb a stair before becoming symptomatic, all of which is consistent with the identified METs workload of greater than 5-7.

January 2021 and July 2021 private cardiology treatment records show the Veteran was continuing medication and regular follow up. He was described as fairly chest pain free, walking outside and on the treadmill, with some stable shortness of breath but no exertional chest pain.

VA primary care records in both October 2022 and April 2023 show the Veteran continuing with his medication and maintaining regular exercise of daily walks on the treadmill. The notes suggest some weakness with exertion, to include when mowing the lawn. These notes suggest recent stress tests without any indication of symptoms.

The Veteran was then afforded another VA examination in September 2023. The use of continued medication to control the heart condition was again reported. The examiner confirmed there was no cardiac arrhythmia, no infectious heart conditions, regular rhythm, normal heart sounds and clear lungs. Peripheral pulses were normal and there was no peripheral edema. The examiner noted interview-based METs testing was conducted because exercise stress testing was not required as part of the Veteran's current treatment plan and because the test was not without significant risk. The examiner indicated the interview-based testing yielded breathlessness and the METs level was greater than 5 to 7 METs, which was described as consistent with activities such as walking one flight of stairs, golfing without a cart, mowing a lawn and heavy yard work. This finding is consistent with the notations in the Veteran's treatment records. The Veteran underwent an echocardiogram in October 2023 after the examination, which was noted in the report of the September 2023 examination as normal. The report is in the claims file and a LVEF estimated at 60 percent.

Based on the foregoing, under the criteria in effect prior to November 14, 2021, the Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to a rating in excess of 30 percent for his heart disability. In this regard, the Board finds there is no evidence of record indicating that the Veteran's heart disability resulted in a METs workload of less than 5 METs, more than one episode of acute CHF, or a LVEF of 30-50 percent. In fact, the Veteran was consistently found to have a METs workload of greater than 5 METs, he did not have CHF, and his LVEF was noted to be, at worst, 60 percent. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was noted to have a METs workload of 1-3 METs at the time of his February 2019 VA examination. However, exercise stress testing was not performed at that time, and the METs workload identified was based solely on interview-based METs testing. In July 2019, an addendum was sought in an effort to clarify the decrease in the Veteran's METs workload that could be attributed solely to his decrease in cardiac functioning. At that time, based on a review of the record, the examiner determined that the May 2018 exercise stress test showing a METs workload of 10 was a more accurate reflection of the Veteran's decrease in METs workload due solely to cardiac functioning. Additionally, as discussed in detail above, a subsequent VA examination confirmed a METs workload of greater than 5-7 METs, and the examiner specifically discussed the finding that such METs workload was an accurate reflection of limitation in cardiac functioning for this Veteran, without consideration of additional limitations caused by his nonservice-connected pulmonary disabilities. Accordingly, a rating in excess of 30 percent for a heart disability is not warranted under the criteria in effect prior to November 14, 2021. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7017-7005.

Based on the amended criteria in effect beginning November 14, 2021, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a rating in excess of 30 percent for his heart disability. In this regard, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran had a METs workload of 3.1-5.0 METs resulting in heart failure symptoms, including but not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope. While the Veteran has been noted to have symptoms of both dyspnea and angina, the March 2021 and September 2023 VA examination reports noted a METs workload of greater than 5. As such, a higher rating is not warranted for the Veteran's heart disability under the criteria in effect beginning November 14, 2021. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7017-7005.

Consideration has also been given to the private and VA clinical records; however, the findings in these are consistent with what is noted in the various VA examination reports.

Moreover, the Board has considered assigning a higher rating under another diagnostic code pertaining to the heart. However, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran's heart disability causes any other functional impairment other than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. As the Veteran's symptoms are accurately reflected by the rating assigned, a higher rating under another diagnostic code is not warranted. 

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings are warranted. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 30 percent for the service-connected heart disability. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 30 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th. 776 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 17, 2021). The appeal is denied.

Increased Rating - Post Sternotomy Scar

The Veteran was awarded service connection for a scar, status post CABG associated with ischemic heart disease by way of an April 2015 rating decision, which followed his CABG surgery. A noncompensable rating was assigned effective November 12, 2014, the date of the surgery, under DC 7805. Following the Veteran's August 2023 supplemental claim, the RO afforded the Veteran an updated VA examination of the scar and addressed the rating in the December 2023 rating decision on appeal. The noncompensable rating was continued, but the disability was recharacterized as a post sternotomy scar and the noncompensable rating was assigned under DC 7802. The change in diagnostic code was listed as effective August 14, 2023.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating scars under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118 were amended effective August 13, 2018. Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to August 13, 2018, and both the old and new rating criteria from August 13, 2018. The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied. 

The Board notes that DC 7805 was not changed by the August 13, 2018, amendments. DC 7805 instructs that any disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under DCs 7800-7804 to be rated under an appropriate DC.

Prior to August 13, 2018, DC 7802, was for burn scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that were superficial and nonlinear. Under these criteria, a scar with an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or greater warrants a 10 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118. Note 1 to DC 7802 instructed that a superficial scar was one not associated with underlying soft tissue damage. Id. Since August 13, 2018, DC 7802 is for burn scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118. DC 7802 was otherwise unchanged by the August 13, 2018, amendments.

The scar rating was listed on the Veteran's VA Form 10182, but no argument was made as to why a compensable rating is warranted. The Veteran is seeking a higher rating, but has not provided any statements to suggest why he feels a compensable rating is warranted.

The Veteran's clinical records throughout the pendency of this claim and appeal have included no treatment for symptomatic scarring related to the Veteran's heart surgery.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the severity of the scar in September 2023. The examiner confirmed the presence of the scar on the Veteran's trunk is not painful, not unstable, and not due to a burn. It was described as affecting the anterior trunk in the area of the sternum and measuring 25 x 0.2 centimeters. The scar was not tender to palpation and was without underlying soft tissue damage. The scar produced no limitation of function and no impact on work ability. No other physical findings were described. To summarize, the Veteran's scar is on his anterior trunk, measures 25 x 0.2 centimeters and is asymptomatic.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable rating for the Veteran's post sternotomy scar under DC 7805, 7802, or any other DCs, because the scar is not of the head, face, or neck, is not deep and nonlinear, and is not associated with underlying soft tissue damage, not unstable and not painful. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects. Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, but he has not done so in this case.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The Veteran does not assert, the clinical records do not show, and the VA examiner did not find that the Veteran's post sternotomy scar is manifested by any disabling effects.

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for the service-connected post sternotomy scar. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th. 776 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 17, 2021). The appeal is denied.

TDIU

As noted, the Veteran's claim for TDIU was deemed a part of the Veteran's claim for increased rating. Given the date of receipt of the increased rating claim, April 19, 2018, the period of appellate review for the TDIU entitlement also includes consideration of the one-year look back period prior to receipt of the claim. 

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. Therefore, rating boards should submit to the Director, Compensation Service, for extra-schedular consideration all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards set forth in paragraph (a) of this section. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Relevant to this appeal, the Veteran's combined rating was 60 percent for the entirety of the appeal period. His service-connected disabilities include the heart disability, which is rated as 30 percent disabling throughout the period on appeal, along with the noncompensably rated associated scar. The Veteran has a 40 percent rating for status post operative removal of prostate gland, with associated erectile dysfunction which is noncompensably rated. He is also service connected for left ear hearing loss, which is noncompensably rated and tinnitus, which is rated at 10 percent. 

The Veteran filed a VA Form 21-8940 in July 2022 on which he reported getting short winded with any movement, and indicating he does not have to do much to get to a point where he is breathing hard. Because of this, he reported that when he is doing anything he requires frequent breaks. He reported he could not safely work around any machinery because of the blood thinners he takes for his heart disability. He also noted that he had worked around machinery his whole life. The Veteran indicated on this form that he has a high school education. The Veteran also reported having difficulty communicating due to his service connected hearing loss and tinnitus, especially communicating by telephone. The Veteran also reported having to urinate frequently due to his prostate condition, which requires frequent breaks and also gets him up several times at night interfering with his sleep. He reported having short term memory issues. Thus, the Veteran is clearly contending he is unemployable due to the combined impact of the symptoms of his service-connected disabilities.

In July 2022, with the TDIU claim, the Veteran submitted the June 2022 opinion of a private clinician. This clinician summarized the symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, which were consistent with what is shown in VA records and examination reports as well as in the Veteran's TDIU claim. The clinician then opined that based on these symptoms, the Veteran is more likely than not unable to meet the basic requirements of all work, even work at the sedentary exertional level, on a consistent and reliable basis due to his service connected heart disability, prostate disability, left ear hearing loss and tinnitus. The clinician suggested this impact on his employability was present since at least August 2017.

Because the Veteran's VA compensation rating does not meet the criteria for schedular consideration of a TDIU, the Board, in August 2022, remanded this matter for the RO to initially consider whether an extraschedular award of TDIU is warranted. Following the remand, the RO referred the matter to the Director, Compensation Service, for an opinion. In July 2023, an opinion listed several individual opinions related to the impact of disabilities on the Veteran's ability to work and concluded that a TDIU on an extraschedular basis should be denied. No explanation or consideration of the collective impact of symptoms was provided. The RO sought another opinion in September 2023. This opinion more thoroughly discussed the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and the combined nature of the symptoms. This opinion determined that a person need not be college educated or highly skilled to be productive in a work environment. The opinion concluded that the Veteran could obtain some work despite his disability level and suggested that the overall evidence fails to support the contention that any of the service-connected disabilities or a combination of the effects of those disabilities support an exceptional situation that prevents gainful employment.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that in this case there is at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to whether the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. Accordingly, the Board finds a TDIU is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Adamson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.