Citation Nr: A25031161
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-472549
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), including as due to the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder (hereinafter referred to as a psychiatric disability), is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has a current disability of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

2. The Veteran is service connected for a psychiatric disability.

3. The Veteran did not experience an in-service injury, disease, or event associated with OSA.

4. The current OSA was not caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to OSA, including as due to the service-connected psychiatric disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from November 1996 to October 2004.

The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), creates a new framework of review for veterans disagreeing with VA's decision on their claim. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 AMA rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), previously referred to as the Regional Office (RO). The AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for OSA, including as due to the service-connected psychiatric disability, but denied the claim on its merits. The Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim in April 2023. 

In an October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for OSA, including as due to the service-connected psychiatric disability, but denied the claim on its merits again. 

In September 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) and requested Direct Review by the Board. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Legal Authority for Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires medical evidence sufficient to show that a current disability exists and that the current disability was either caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

The determination as to whether the requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (a); Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to OSA, including as due to the service-connected psychiatric disability, is denied.

The Veteran contends that the OSA was caused by the service-connected psychiatric disability; he explains that when his psychiatric symptoms worsen, he is unable to relax and go to sleep. See January 2023 Fully Developed Claim.

In the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current disability of obstructive sleep apnea and is already service-connected for a psychiatric disability. See February 2023 VA Examination (diagnosing the Veteran with OSA); October 2023 Codesheet (The most recent Codesheet indicating that the Veteran is service connected for a psychiatric disability).

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that the Veteran experienced an in-service injury, disease, or event associated with OSA. The Veteran does not assert, and the medical evidence of record does not suggest that the Veteran experienced an in-service injury, disease, or event associated with OSA. The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatments, or manifestations of OSA. In a May 2001 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied frequent trouble sleeping. In a May 2001 Report of Medical Examination, the military medical examiner did not note any OSA symptoms. Just prior to service separation, in a July 2004 Report of Medical Assessment, the Veteran indicated that he was in the same health as his last medical assessment in May 2001. As there is no evidence of an in-service injury, disease, or event associated with OSA, the question of whether there is a nexus between the current disability and service is moot.

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that the OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disability. The record contains two negative secondary service connection opinions in VA examinations conducted in February 2023 and September 2023. The Board noted that there are no private opinions of record. 

In a February 2023 VA examination opinion, the VA examiner opined that the OSA is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected psychiatric disability. The VA examiner reasoned that, while there is some medical research linking the development of OSA to certain psychiatric disorders, other studies come to "different conclusions," so there is not sufficient medical evidence to establish a nexus. The VA examiner also reasoned that the Veteran has a Body mass Index (BMI) of 30, which is considered obese, and the more likely cause of the OSA. The VA examiner explained that "[o]besity is the single most important risk factor for development of OSA." The VA examiner explained that sleep apnea is due to airway obstruction when the muscles in a person's airway relax during the REM cycle of sleep, generally occurring in people who are overweight. According to the VA examiner "there is no controversy regarding the role of obesity in being the major risk factor for developing the mechanical airway obstruction in the neck that is the cause of snoring and OSA." 

In the September 2023 VA examination opinion, the VA examiner opined that the OSA is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected psychiatric disability. The VA examiner explained that the current OSA and the service-connected psychiatric disability are not medically related and are separate entities. The VA examiner also explained that medical literature does not establish a causal relationship between the two.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to OSA, including as due to the service-connected psychiatric disability, have not been met; thus, the claim must be denied.  

 

David H. Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Costantino, Danielle K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.