Citation Nr: A25031468
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-465923
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2019 to October 2020.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that the Veteran attempted to appeal the issues of service connection for left wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right calf strain, service connection for right thumb pain, and service connection for tinnitus on the August 2024 VA Form 10182.  Unfortunately, the Veteran was notified of a May 30, 2023 rating decision denying entitlement to the above listed claims on June 5, 2023.  As a general matter, within one year of the date the AOJ issues a decision, a claimant may elect one of three review options, or lanes: (i) Higher-Level Review by the AOJ; (ii) Supplemental Claim; or (iii) appeal to the Board.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(1).   If no action is taken within the one-year time period, the AOJ decision becomes final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.160(d), 20.200, 20.201, 20.1103.  Here, the Veteran had until June 5, 2024 to appeal to the Board.  Hence, the Board finds that the August 2024 VA Form 10182 is untimely with respect to the issues of service connection for left wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right calf strain, service connection for right thumb pain, and service connection for tinnitus and is therefore procedurally deficient.  The Veteran has not asserted, nor demonstrated, good cause for why the deadline to submit a timely VA Form 10182 should be extended.  38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b); Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024).  The untimeliness of the filing of the August 2024 VA Form 10182 is a procedural defect in complying with a mandatory claims-processing rule and is a distinct basis for dismissing the appeal.  Accordingly, as there is no evidence showing good cause for waiver of the claims-processing rule, the appeal as to the issues of service connection for left wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome, service connection for right calf strain, service connection for right thumb pain, and service connection for tinnitus must be dismissed.

1. Service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is remanded.

The Board is not able to make a fully informed decision regarding the issue of service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder.

The Veteran contends that he has as psychiatric disability related to his deployment to and experiences in Iraq.  Specifically, the Veteran recalled an intercontinental ballistic missile attack in January 2020 during which several servicemen suffered concussions.  

The Veteran underwent a posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination in May 2023.  The examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD that conformed to DSM-5 criteria but did have another mental disorder diagnosis of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder.

Service treatment records demonstrate that the Veteran complained on feeling tired or having low energy, trouble sleeping, memory problems, becoming easily annoyed or irritable, and finding it hard to make up his mind or make decisions within the past month during a November 2020 Post Deployment Health Re-Assessment.  The Veteran further endorsed being bothered by feeling little interest or pleasure in doing things and feeling down, depressed, or hopeless over the prior 2 weeks.

The Board finds that remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  In light of the Veteran's deployment to Iraq, his descriptions of symptoms post deployment, and the current diagnosis of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, the AOJ should have obtained a medical examination and opinion to determine whether there is a nexus between the current disability and the in-service event, injury, or occurrence.  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder.  The examiner should review the claims file and address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, i.e., nearly equal probability) that the current other specified trauma and stressor related disorder manifested during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active service.

In formulating an opinion, the examiner must acknowledge and consider the November 2020 Post Deployment Health Re-Assessment.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report in-service events, his symptoms and history, to include the missile attack in Erbil.  Such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  Lay statements of record cannot be disregarded solely due to lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.

A thorough rationale, to include reference to relevant evidence of record as appropriate, should be provided for all opinions expressed.  If the examiner is unable to provide a requested opinion, a supporting rationale must be given concerning why the opinion cannot be provided. 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B Jackson, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.