Citation Nr: A25031230
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-443267
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition with sleep disturbances is denied.

An initial compensable rating for a left hand scar is denied.

REMANDED

An initial compensable rating for left hand bennet's fracture is remanded.

An initial compensable rating for a right elbow disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's anxiety is part of the symptomatology contemplated under the rating criteria for his current service-connected unspecified depressive disorder and, therefore, does not result in a distinct, separate disability.

2. The Veteran has one non-painful scar on his left hand.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for anxiety as a separate condition from service-connected unspecified depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for a left hand scar for have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 7801.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active-duty service from October 2018 to October 2022.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for increased ratings for his left hand and right elbow disabilities, and service connection for a neck disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §?1131; 38 C.F.R. §?3.303. Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. §?3.303(d).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The regulations caution that the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is generally to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. The critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); see also Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998) (when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected and non-service-connected disabilities, the benefit of the doubt doctrine described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 dictates that such signs and symptoms be attributed to the service-connected disability or disabilities).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition with sleep disturbances

The Veteran seeks service connection for an anxiety disorder with sleep disturbances. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted.

The fact that the Veteran is already service connected for a depressive disorder does not necessarily preclude the Veteran from receiving service connection for anxiety. The scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 4 (2009). Further, there is no prohibition against a veteran being service connected for more than one diagnosed psychiatric disorder if the different diagnoses have different symptoms that do not overlap. See Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (noting that different psychiatric diagnoses may have symptoms that are not overlapping).

The Veteran's December 2022 examination noted anxiety, depressed mood, and chronic sleep impairment as symptoms attributed to his unspecified depressive disorder.

After reviewing the record, the Board finds, as fact, that to the extent the Veteran has anxiety and sleep impairment, the symptoms are already included in the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder rating. The Veteran's VA examination for psychiatric disabilities, as noted above, included a lengthy discussion of his symptoms. Stated another way, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms are overlapping and that he does not have anxiety distinct and separate from his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder. A separate award for anxiety would not result in additional benefit to the Veteran because all compensable symptoms are encompassed by his unspecified depressive disorder rating. Amberman, 570 F.3d at 1381. Therefore, to award service connection for anxiety and rate that disability would violate the prohibition against pyramiding. The Veteran's claim is denied.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 ; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. While the Board typically considers only those factors outside the specific rating criteria when appropriate in order to best determine the level of occupational and social impairment. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204, 208 (1994).

When there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Nevertheless, in cases where the Veteran's claim arises from a disagreement with the initial evaluation following the grant of service connection, the Board shall consider the entire period of claim to see if the evidence warrants the assignment of different ratings for different periods of time during these claims a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

2. An initial compensable rating for a left hand scar

The Veteran seeks a higher rating for a scar on his left hand. He generally contends that the assigned rating does not adequately contemplate the severity of the symptoms of the disability on appeal. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board determines that a higher rating is not warranted.

The Veteran is in receipt of a noncompensable ratings for his left hand scar. The Veteran's scar is evaluated under DC 7801. The rating criteria for evaluating scars are set forth at 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7800-7805. Diagnostic Code 7800 pertains to scars of the head, face, or neck and is therefore not for application in this claim.

Pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7801, burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are deep and nonlinear in an area or areas of at least 6 square inches (39 sq. cm.) but less than 12 square inches (77 sq. cm.) will be assigned a 10 percent rating. Note (1) indicates that a deep scar is one associated with underlying soft tissue damage. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7801.

Diagnostic Code 7802 pertains to burn scar(s) or scar(s) due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are superficial and nonlinear in an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or greater will be assigned a 10 percent rating. Note (1) indicates that a superficial scar is one not associated with underlying soft tissue damage. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802.

Diagnostic Code 7804 pertains to unstable or painful scars. One or two scars that are unstable or painful are rated at 10 percent disabling; three or four scars are rated at 20 percent disabling. Note (1) to DC 7804 provides that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7804.

Diagnostic Code 7805 provides that any other scars (including linear scars) and other disabling effects of scars should be evaluated even if not considered in a rating provided under diagnostic codes 7800-04 under an appropriate diagnostic code.

The Veteran received a VA examination in November 2022 to evaluate his service-connected scar. The examiner noted a single scar on the left hand. The scar was not noted to result in any physical limitation. The Veteran's scar was measured at 4x.02 centimeters (0.8cm squared).

The Veteran's medical records do not indicate that his scar has ever been unstable, tender, or painful.

Following a review of the record, the Board finds that a compensable rating is warranted. The Veteran's scar is not painful or unstable and covers 0.8 square centimeters. Moreover, this scar is not categorized as deep. Therefore, under the applicable rating criteria, a higher rating is not warranted for the Veteran's left hand scar.

The Board has also considered whether higher ratings for the scar are warranted under DC 7800, Note (4), and DC 7805 for scars, which are to be rated based on limitation of function of the part affected. However, the November 2022 VA examiner did not determine that the Veteran had any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms, such as muscle or nerve damage associated with any scar or that his scars caused any functional impact. Thus, there is no evidence of other disabling effects or limitation of function that would warrant a higher and/or additional rating. Therefore, higher ratings also are not warranted under DC 7800, Note (4), DC 7805, or any other relevant DC.

In considering the appropriate disability ratings, the Board has also considered the statements from the Veteran that his scar symptoms are worse than the ratings he is currently assigned contemplate. In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. While a Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to them through their senses, they are not competent to identify a specific level of disability of their disabilities according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) ("although interest may affect the credibility of testimony, it does not affect competency to testify").

On the other hand, such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's scar have been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him during the appeal period and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluation. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports) directly address the criteria under which his scar is evaluated.

In that regard, after a review of the record and consideration of the evidence, the Board finds that a compensable rating for the Veteran's left hand scar is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, because the evidence is persuasively against the claim, that doctrine does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107f; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The Veteran's claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. An initial compensable rating for left hand bennet's fracture is remanded.

2. An initial compensable rating for a right elbow disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

The Veteran seeks higher ratings for left hand and right elbow disabilities, and service connection for a neck disability. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the Veteran's claims must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 

The Veteran's left hand and right elbow disabilities were last examined by a VA examiner in November 2022. The VA is required to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code. In so doing, an examiner must discount any ameliorating effects of medication and indicate that such effects were not considered and were, in fact, discounted in formulating opinions pertaining to range of motion and functional impairment. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012); see also Ingram v. Collins, 23 Vet. App. 1798. (2025) (holding that the Board is to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted in assessing musculoskeletal ratings as such effects are not contemplated therein and, therefore, taking medication may make a veteran appear less disabled than in reality). 

In this case, the VA examiner(s), in rendering findings, did not note or indicate consideration and discount of any ameliorative effects of the Veteran's documented use of hydrocodone-acetaminophen when describing functional limitations in all worst-case scenarios (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.). Therefore, the Board finds the examinations and opinions inadequate. The AOJ's reliance on that inadequate opinion is pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring remand to correct.

The Veteran's was provided with a VA examination in January 2023 to assess his neck disability. The examiner concluded that the disorder was less likely than not related to active-duty service relying on a lack of documented symptoms in his service treatment records. This is an inadequate basis for such an opinion. As noted above, this failure by the AOJ is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for new VA examinations to determine the current severity of his left hand and right elbow disabilities. The claims folder must be made available to and be reviewed by any examiner(s).  All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

The full range of motion testing must be performed in both active and passive motion, in weightbearing and non-weightbearing with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.

If the examiner(s) is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, they should clearly explain why that is so.

The examiner(s) should address in detail the additional functional impairment and range of motion loss due to factors such as pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and flare-ups for each disability. The examiner(s) should estimate any additional loss of motion to the best of their ability. 

The examiner(s) must specifically evaluate the severity of the Veteran's left hand and right elbow disabilities, including during flare-ups and speak to the severity of his symptoms absent the ameliorative effects of any medication that would alleviate his symptoms, including both prescriptions and over-the-counter medications.

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner(s) should state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. Any opinion must include a discussion of the Veteran's lay statements. 

If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

2. Schedule the Veteran for new examinations, with an appropriate clinician, to determine the nature, extent, onset, and etiology of neck disorder. 

The complete claims file should be made available to the examiner(s).  The examiner(s) should provide opinions as to whether it is at least as likely as not that his neck disorder is etiologically related to the Veteran's period of service, or to another diagnosed disorder.  

The examiner(s) is reminded that the secondary service connection opinions must discuss both causation and aggravation (beyond a natural course) separately.

Any opinion must include a discussion of the Veteran's lay statements. 

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Hernan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.