Citation Nr: A25031451
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240319-426426
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's chronic kidney disease disability had its onset in service.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2006 to April 2010.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in September 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

A November 2022 rating decision denied the Veteran's original, March 2022, claim for entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease, and in December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of that decision.  In March 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a HLR return, in which the Higher-Level Reviewer identified a duty to assist error and ordered additional development to correct such error.  The AOJ carried out the additional development, and in September 2023 issued the HLR decision on appeal.  

In March 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Based on the Veteran's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed chronic kidney disease is related to his active service, including his exposure to burn pits and other toxic substances during his Gulf War service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

The procedural history leading to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal includes a series of higher-level reviews, duty to assist errors identified in such reviews, and the generation of several medical opinions based on such errors.  In that regard, the Board notes that the Veteran filed his original claim for service connection for chronic kidney disease in March 2022 (as noted).  In a June 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection but favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability of stage III chronic kidney disease, citing a May 2022 VA examination reporting such diagnosis, and that evidence shows the Veteran performed service in Iraq from July 2007 to October 2008.  The Veteran requested a higher-level review of that decision in June 2022, and in July 2022, the AOJ issued a HLR Return and rating decision identifying a duty to assist error requiring further development for additional evidence to obtain an adequate medical examination and opinion.  In the rating decision, the AOJ further favorably found that evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service, noting that a post-deployment health assessment in October 2008 shows a report of exposure to smoke from burning trash or feces while serving in Iraq, from which the Veteran's in-service exposure to burn pits was conceded.  Moreover, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's service treatment records show abnormal kidney function lab results on November 30, 2009, and that exposure to environmental hazards (including fine particulate matter) in Southwest Asia also was conceded.  After obtaining the requested medical opinion, in August 2022, the AOJ issued the November 2022 rating decision, which again denied service connection for the Veteran's diagnosed chronic kidney disease.  In doing so, however, the AOJ reiterated the favorable findings noted above, and further stated 1) that "[a] nexus, or link, has been established between your claimed issue and an in-service event or injury" in that "service treatment records show abnormal kidney function lab results on November 30, 2009" and 2), that "[a] nexus, or link, has been established between your claimed issue and an in-service event or injury" again citing the October 2008 post-deployment health assessment showing a report of in-service exposure.  Finally, following the Veteran's December 2022 HLR request, and the AOJ's March 2023 identification of a further duty to assist error requiring yet more development, the AOJ issued the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, again denying service connection.  This rating decision reiterated the favorable findings of a conceded toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) and the current disability of diagnosed chronic kidney disease.  The Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in AMA appeals absent a finding of clear and unmistakable error to the contrary.  The Board finds no such clear and unmistakable error in the instant case.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

As these favorable findings reflect, therefore, the Veteran has a current disability of chronic kidney disease, and two conceded in-service events or injuries, namely an abnormal kidney function lab result from November 2009 and conceded TERA activities, including burn pit and other exposure.  Importantly, favorable findings also stated a "nexus" has been established between the current claimed issue (the Veteran's conceded chronic kidney disease disability) and each of these conceded in-service incurrences of an event, disease, or injury.  As the Board finds no evidence of "clear and unmistakable error" contrary to any of these findings, it will not disturb them and remains bound by them.  As such, all three elements necessary for a grant of service connection are reflected in the favorable findings. 

Consistent with the favorable findings, and in further support of a nexus between the Veteran's current diagnosed chronic kidney disease and his in-service abnormal kidney function lab result, the Board notes that the November 2009 urinalysis included abnormal GFR (glomerular filtration rate) and protein levels, which are noted in the interpretation notes of the result as factors associated with kidney damage or a kidney condition.  The Board observes that this abnormal kidney function result was shortly after the Veteran returned from deployment in the Persian Gulf, during which it has been conceded that he was exposed to various toxic substances, and only a few months prior to his leaving service.  

With respect to the nexus between the Veteran's disability and his conceded toxic exposures, including at least burn pits and other fine particulate matter, the Board observes that based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) reflecting his service in a mechanized unit and deployment in the Persian Gulf for more than a year, he may have had additional toxic exposures.  Indeed, there are FACT sheets of record generated by VA and associated with the file reflecting this, and further indicating that some of these exposures can impact the kidneys.  These include a FACT sheet, associated with the file in August 2022 providing notice to examiners that VA considers this Veteran exposed to burn pit toxins, with the FACT sheet specifically noting that some of the recited toxins can affect the kidneys.  Additionally, a separate FACT sheet associated with the file in April 2022 similarly provided notice to examiners that VA considers this Veteran exposed to hexavalent chromium, and also states that this toxin has been shown to be associated with abnormal kidney tests.  Accordingly, in addition to the explicit recital of favorable nexus findings by the AOJ, there is evidence in the record further supporting such findings.

The medical evidence of record also includes the August 2022 and July 2023 medical opinions noted above, upon which the rating decision on appeal relied, as well as a May 2022 VA examination and medical opinion.  The Board observes that the July 2022 HLR return indicated that the medical opinion completed on May 24, 2022 "is insufficient for rating purposes as the examiner failed to note the [V]eteran's burn pit exposure whatsoever in the rationale," and the Board concurs with this assessment.  The AOJ's instructions upon identifying this duty to assist error included requesting the examiner review the "medical and other evidence in the claims folder, including the fact sheets" and provide new medical opinions addressing the Veteran's burn pit exposure, as well as an opinion as to whether the Veteran's current kidney disease at least as likely as not first manifested in service, as evidenced by his abnormal lab results in November 2009.  The above-noted August 2022 opinion provided a negative direct service connection nexus opinion, upon which the November 2022 rating decision again denying service connection was based.  The March 2023 HLR return again identified a duty to assist error and instructed consideration of the Veteran's toxic exposure.  The July 2023 opinion was provided in connection with this request and service connection was again denied in the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, on the basis of the August 2022 and July 2023 opinions.  After review of the record, the Board finds both opinions inadequate.  

In the August 2022 opinion, the examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of stage III chronic kidney disease and a November 2020 biopsy revealing findings of "focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with negative IF and patchy foot process effacement," as well as a history of alcohol abuse, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension.  In the rationale, the examiner noted the Veteran's November 2009 urine analysis showing high protein, high albumin, and low GFR, and stated the Veteran had several drinks of alcohol that day.  The examiner asserted that high amounts of alcohol can cause a high protein and low GFR result, opining that it is unlikely that the Veteran's chronic kidney disease (CKD) is "due to" the elevated levels in urinalysis during service, and that the "Veteran's CKD is likely due to his hypertension."  The examiner thus concluded that the Veteran's current kidney disease did not first manifest in service based on the abnormal lab results and that a nexus has not been established.  

The Board finds this opinion inadequate at least because it fails to provide a full or clear medical rationale for its conclusion.  It merely states that high amounts of alcohol "can cause" an abnormal lab result at the time of the test, and therefore simply speculates that the abnormal result was due to the Veteran having had several drinks that day, despite the result being consistent with the Veteran's later confirmed chronic kidney disease diagnosis.  It further speculates that the Veteran's chronic kidney disease is "likely due to his hypertension" but provides no reasoning or rationale to arrive at that conclusion.  The medical evidence therefore is too speculative to establish a nexus and thus also too speculative to establish the lack of a nexus.  The Board also notes that the record indicates several instances of complaints of back pain by the Veteran, including a March 2011 post-deployment health reassessment, and an April 2011 treatment record in which the provider noted the Veteran had ongoing sharp lower back pain.  The Board also observes that a December 2021 VA treatment record indicates an urgent care visit for back pain in which the Veteran's wife indicated this made her concerned for his kidneys.  The examiner did not address these reports and whether and to what extent, if any, the early experienced back pain might have been associated with his now confirmed chronic kidney disease or attributable to other causes.  For at least these reasons, the Board finds the August 2022 direct service connection opinion to be inadequate and assigns it no probative weight.

In the July 2023 (TERA-only) negative opinion, the examiner's rationale stated that the "claimed condition of chronic kidney disease was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  ILER summary reviewed.  Kidney disease not listed as possible long-term effect to list exposures."  The rationale therefore provided no medical analysis or reasoning other than to simply say that because kidney disease was not listed as a possible long-term effect of the exposures listed in the ILER, the Veteran's kidney disease was less likely than not a result of his TERA.  Moreover, while the examiner indicated that the ILER summary was reviewed, there is no indication that other evidence associated with the file relating to the Veteran's toxic exposures was reviewed or considered when rendering the negative TERA opinion, particularly the above-referenced FACT sheets specifically reciting potential impacts of the recited toxins on the kidneys (despite the July 2022 HLR return specifically directing review of all fact sheets in the file.)  Accordingly, the Board finds the July 2023 TERA opinion also inadequate and similarly assigns it no probative weight. 

Finally, although the September 2023 rating decision relied in part on the August 2022 direct service connection opinion, it did not address the Veteran's contentions in his March 2023 HLR informal conference worksheet challenging the examiner's assertion that alcohol consumption affected the November 2009 lab result.  Specifically, the Veteran stated that "[t]he nurse practitioner who did my VA examination said I was drunk when I had the test during military service.  I was not drunk, I was on duty.  Back then I didn't even drink very much."  

In view of the above, therefore, the competent evidence of record contains no adequate medical nexus opinions regarding the Veteran's diagnosed current chronic kidney disease disability that the Board can rely upon when adjudicating the claim. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence of record, including the conceded in-service incurrence of an abnormal kidney function result, the conceded and other potential toxic exposures related to the Veteran's active service, lay statements, and the various favorable findings by which the Board is bound, is at least approximately equal as to the etiology of the Veteran's chronic kidney disease disability.  Thus, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that the Veteran's disability had its onset in service.  Accordingly, service connection is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Finally, the Board could remand the claim decided herein for still further medical opinions, but such a request could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim"). 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Skacel, Patrick T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.