Citation Nr: A25031871
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-457713
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left knee osteoarthritis is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis is related to active duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria of service connection for left knee osteoarthritis have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1994 to August 1998.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial of service connection for left knee osteoarthritis, finding that new and relevant evidence had been received, a favorable finding by which the Board is bound.  This followed a November 2023 rating decision that identified a duty to assist error in the prior, June 2023 rating decision, that failed to obtain VA medical examinations and opinions on the Veteran's claim. Previously, the Veteran filed a July 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review after the AOJ issued the above-mentioned June 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for left knee osteoarthritis. Previously, the Veteran submitted an April 2023 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Accordingly, the Board will consider the evidence of record as of the date of the July 2024 rating decision, including evidence associated with the claims file while the record was closed because the claim was pending adjudication after identification of a duty to assist error during a Higher-Level Review. 38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii), 20.301. The Board will not consider evidence added to the record after the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. If evidence was added during any ineligible period, the Board did not consider it. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is granting the benefit sought in full, it need not consider expiration of the time period in which to switch dockets.  Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

1. Entitlement to service connection for left knee osteoarthritis is granted.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran indicated service connection for left knee osteoarthritis secondary to his service-connected right knee meniscus tear, limitation of flexion is warranted. However, as discussed below, the Board is granting the claim on a direct basis, thus, discussion of other theories of entitlement is unnecessary, as the grant of service connection on another  basis would not result in an earlier effective date.  Cf. Johnson v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-7589, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 383 (Mar. 26, 2025) (indicating that effective date consequences can be considered by the Board in cases in which the issue before it is entitlement to service connection); Stender v. Wilkie, No. 19-0068, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 520, *5 -*7 (Mar. 27, 2020) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (the Board erred in granting service connection based on the Camp Lejeune Contaminated Water (CLCW) presumption without considering other theories of entitlement that could warrant an earlier effective date because of the effective date of the CLCW presumption); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service disease or injury; and (3) a relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The May 2023 VA examination report contains a diagnosis of left knee osteoarthritis, as favorably found by the AOJ.  The current disability requirement has thus been met.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STR) are negative of findings of a left knee injury. However, in the May 2023 examination the Veteran reported he injured his knee in 1996, during service, after falling from a military vehicle. This is consistent with the type of work that the Veteran would do in his military occupation specialty of general construction equipment operator.  The Board thus finds his statement in this regard competent and credible.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service records). The in-service disease or injury requirement has therefore been met.

The remaining issue is thus whether there is a relationship between the current left knee osteoarthritis and the in-service left knee injury.  

In April 2023 VA treatment records the VA clinician reported the Veteran had complaints of pain in his left knee. The Veteran reported that he had a fracture to his left knee in the remote past. The clinician noted that the Veteran's reported symptoms are consistent with classic arthritis symptoms. In additional treatment records, the Veteran reported he had left knee pain for over a year, but did not recall an injury at that time. However, the clinician reported that following further questioning, the Veteran reported he had an incident during his military service where he jumped down from a military vehicle. He had symptoms to include, immediate pain and swelling. The Veteran reported that he did not seek medical care at the time and it took him about a year to recover from the injury.  These statements are competent and the Board finds them credible.

In a May 2024 VA opinion, the clinician found it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis was related to service. In coming to her conclusion, the clinician opined that based on a review of the available evidence, there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of left knee osteoarthritis and military service. As a rationale, the clinician opined that without chronicity of care during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be more likely the etiology of the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis. The examiner found there was "no chronicity of care." Thus, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis is less likely than not a result of an in-service injury. In this regard, "chronicity of care" is a flawed basis for a negative nexus opinion, because symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology."  Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997) (citing Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991) ("regulation requires continuity of symptomatology, not continuity of treatment")).

While the Board could request another medical opinion, to address the medical and lay evidence (summarized in the Veteran's statements and VA treatment records above), such a request could be interpreted as a prohibited attempt to develop evidence with the intention of denying the Veteran's service connection claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim"). The evidence is sufficient to decide the claim, as it shows an in service injury to the knee and continuous symptoms until the post-service diagnosis.

To the extent that the grant of service connection for left knee osteoarthritis is based upon the plausible, consistent, and credible lay evidence, "[n]othing in the regulatory or statutory provisions [relating to evidence to be considered] requires both medical and competent lay evidence; rather, they make clear that competent lay evidence can be sufficient in and of itself". Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1335.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For the above reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis is related to service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for left knee osteoarthritis is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.D. Strain, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.