Citation Nr: A25031894
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240217-418379
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from April 1979 to October 1980. 

This claim is before the Board of Veterans Appeals upon appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) for GERD. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for GERD

The Veteran filed her claim for service connection contending that she has GERD that had onset in or are otherwise related to her period of active service.

Consideration is given to whether the Veteran's claim can be presumptively linked to a toxic exposure in service.  In February 2023 and May 2023 toxic exposure risk assessment (TERA) memoranda, the VA concluded that the Veteran had not had a military toxic risk exposure. Accordingly, service connection may not be established for GERD, based upon a toxic exposure. 

However, the claim must nevertheless be reviewed to determine whether service connection can be established on a different basis. 

VA treatment records reflect ongoing treatment for GERD including an existing diagnosis of GERD with the Veteran noting that she had been prescribed pantoprazole "for some time" for reflux symptoms omeprazole had not been effective. 

The matter is remanded for the following actions:

Request a VA examination from an appropriate clinician in order to provide an opinion regarding the Veteran's GERD. The entire claims file must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner. All appropriate tests, studies, and consultations should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. 

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's GERD more likely than not had onset in service or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active service. 

Although an independent review of the treatment records is anticipated, the Board calls the examiner's attention to a February 1980 entry in the Veteran's service treatment records assessed as viral gastroenteritis.

The examiner is reminded that the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the service treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). The Board also notes that the absence of documented treatment, in and of itself, is not a basis for discrediting the Veteran's lay statements of continuity. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The medical opinions provided must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Adams Hill, Denise

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.