Citation Nr: A25031734
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231023-386642
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, claimed as cervical radiculopathy, is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for irritable colon syndrome is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition manifested by gastrointestinal symptomatology is denied.  

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent prior to February 27, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent therefrom, for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder, is denied.  

Entitlement to a compensable rating for coccidioidomycosis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has hypertension, nor has he had diagnosable hypertension during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim.

2. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has a diagnosable cervical spine condition, nor has he experienced such a condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim.

3. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has a diagnosable right shoulder condition, nor has he experienced such a condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim.

4. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has a diagnosable left shoulder condition, nor has he experienced such a condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim.

5. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has  diagnosable chronic fatigue syndrome, nor has he experienced such a condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable symptomatology pertaining to the claimed chronic fatigue syndrome, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to chronic fatigue syndrome.  

6. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has  diagnosable irritable bowel syndrome or irritable colon syndrome, nor has he experienced such conditions during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable gastrointestinal symptomatology pertaining to the claimed irritable bowel or irritable colon syndrome, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to irritable bowel or irritable colon syndrome.  

7. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has diagnosable erectile dysfunction, nor has he experienced the condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable symptomatology pertaining to the claimed erectile dysfunction, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to erectile dysfunction.  

8. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has diagnosable fibromyalgia, nor has he experienced the condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable symptomatology pertaining to the claimed fibromyalgia, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to fibromyalgia.  

9. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has  diagnosable rhinitis or sinusitis, nor has he experienced such conditions during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable upper respiratory symptomatology pertaining to the claimed rhinitis and sinusitis, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to rhinitis or sinusitis.  

10. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has  diagnosable hemorrhoids, nor has he experienced the condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable symptomatology pertaining to the claimed hemorrhoids, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to hemorrhoids.  

11. The competent evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran currently has a  diagnosable stomach condition manifested by gastrointestinal symptomatology, nor has he experienced such a condition during the pendency of the appeal or recent to the filing of the claim; moreover, without observable gastrointestinal symptomatology, there is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a chronic, undiagnosed illness and/or a MUCMI manifested by symptoms potentially attributable to the claimed stomach condition.  

12. During the one-year period prior to February 27, 2023, it was not factually ascertainable that the Veteran was experiencing suicidal ideation and that he engaged in obsessional rituals; from this date, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is shown to be productive of a disability picture that equates to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but there is no evidence that he experiences total social and occupational impairment.

13. The probative evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's coccidioidomycosis has manifested in minimal symptoms such as occasional minor hemoptysis or productive cough; moreover, there are no current residuals of the Veteran's service-connected coccidioidomycosis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1112, 1116, 1137; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1112, 1116, 1137; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1112, 1116, 1137; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a left shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1112, 1116, 1137; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

6. The criteria for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

7. The criteria for service connection for irritable colon syndrome, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

8. The criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

9. The criteria for service connection for fibromyalgia, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

10. The criteria for service connection for rhinitis, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

11. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

12. The criteria for service connection for a stomach condition characterized by gastrointestinal symptomatology, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

13. The criteria for service connection for hemorrhoids, to include as a manifestation of a chronic undiagnosed illness attributable to service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

14. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent prior to February 27, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent therefrom, for an acquired psychiatric disorder, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.14, 4.40, 4.59, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

15. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for coccidioidomycosis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6835.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2004 to April 2012, with verified service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War Era.? The present appeal arises out of the Veteran's submission of a March 2023 claim seeking entitlement to service connection for the above-listed issues, as well as entitlement to increased ratings for a service connected acquired psychiatric disorder in addition to increased ratings for service connected coccidioidomycosis.? In a series of August 2023 rating decisions, the regional office denied service connection for each of these claimed conditions as well as a compensable rating for coccidiomycosis.  Furthermore, the August 2023 rating decisions awarded an increased 70 percent rating for the acquired psychiatric disorder, effective February 27, 2023.  

The Veteran thereafter submitted an October 2023 notice of disagreement on VA Form 10182 and selected direct review of the evidence.? As such, the Board's consideration is limited to that evidence that was of record at the time of the underlying August 2023 rating decisions.? To that end, the Board highlights that no evidence was added to the claims file outside this evidentiary review period, and so the Board may consider the entirety of the record in the present appeal. 

In view of the facts found, and to provide broader consideration on appeal, the Board has combined the separate claims of entitlement to service connection for back pain and spine into one claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition.  Additionally, the Board has recharacterized the claim of an increased rating for major depressive disorder as one for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder.

The Board notes that it has considered whether a claim for TDIU has been raised by the Veteran during the pendency of this appeal.  In ba v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that VA must address the issue of entitlement to TDIU in increased rating claims when the issue of unemployability either is raised expressly or by the record.  Here, the Veteran has not contended that his acquired psychiatric disorder together with his coccidioidomycosis precludes his ability to secure substantially gainful employment at any point during the appeal period.  Moreover, the examiners who evaluated the severity of both conditions during the below-detailed VA examinations did not find that either condition would contribute to a significant impairment of occupational functioning.  Furthermore, the Board highlights that available evidence suggests that the Veteran continues to work full-time and has done so since graduating from college following service.  As such, the issue of entitlement to TDIU is not raised by the record and will not be addressed herein.

Service Connection

Entitlement to service connection requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Hypertension

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for hypertension. Without delving into the question of the potential etiology of the claimed hypertension, the Board finds that the Veteran has never been diagnosed with hypertension and there is no evidence to suggest that such a diagnosis is appropriate; as such, entitlement to service connection must be denied.

Entitlement to service connection requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

To begin, for VA compensation purposes, the term "hypertension" means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension means that the systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm.  Multiple blood pressure readings are required to confirm the diagnosis of hypertension with two or more readings on at least three different days.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, Note 1.

A review of available VA medical records does not reflect that the Veteran has ever been diagnosed with hypertension, and he has never been prescribed anti-hypertensive medication for treatment of hypertensive symptomatology.  He was afforded a VA hypertension examination in May 2023, during which he reported that he does not have any hypertensive symptomatology and has never been treated for high blood pressure.  Testing during the examination did not reveal blood pressure readings that would suggest that a diagnosis is appropriate.  Moreover, the examiner's review of the claims file confirmed that the Veteran has never been diagnosed with or treated for hypertension.  As such, the examiner declined to opine as to the likely etiology of the condition.

Ultimately, there is no competent evidence that the Veteran has hypertension.  As noted above, the diagnosis of the condition requires consistent blood pressure readings at a certain level, which is simply not shown by the record.  Additionally, the Veteran himself denies ever having been treated for high blood pressure. Accordingly, without supporting records, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have diagnosable hypertension and has not had the condition during the appeal period.  The Veteran himself does not have the medical training or credentials to offer an opinion as to a diagnosis or its etiology.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Service connection is denied. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

2. Cervical Spine Condition

3. Right Shoulder Condition

4. Left Shoulder Condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a cervical spine condition as well as bilateral shoulder conditions, all as directly attributable to service.  Without delving into the question of the potential etiology of each of these musculoskeletal conditions, the Board finds that the Veteran has never formally sought treatment for or been diagnosed with a cervical spine condition or bilateral shoulder conditions and there is no evidence to suggest that such a diagnosis is appropriate; as such, entitlement to service connection must be denied, even though there the Veteran had documented treatment for cervical spine and bilateral shoulder symptoms while in service.

The Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination in July 2023, during which he reported that he sought treatment while in service for right-sided neck pain that radiated down to his shoulders.  According to the examiner's review of the record, this symptomatology resolved while the Veteran was still in service with medication.  When queried, the Veteran did not endorse experiencing any current cervical spine symptomatology.  An in-person evaluation did not reveal any abnormalities.  Accordingly, the examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a cervical spine condition, and furthermore declined to set forth an opinion as to the likely etiology of the claimed cervical spine condition. 

Similarly, the Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in May 2023, during which he reported that he experienced bilateral shoulder pain related to his spine while in service.  When queried, however, he denied undergoing any treatment for shoulder pain, either during service or following his discharge, and did not endorse experiencing any functional impairment as due to any shoulder symptomatology.  An in-person evaluation did not reveal any abnormalities.  Accordingly, the examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a right or left shoulder condition, and furthermore declined to set forth an opinion as to the likely etiology of the claimed bilateral shoulder conditions. 

There are no available post-service medical records which reflect that the Veteran has ever been diagnosed with or treated for any cervical spine or bilateral shoulder condition. 

Ultimately, there is no competent evidence that the Veteran has a diagnosable cervical spine condition or bilateral shoulder conditions, or symptomatology that suggests that a diagnosis of such claimed conditions would be appropriate.  The Board has considered this case in light of Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  In Saunders, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) concluded that "pain is an impairment because it diminishes the body's ability to function, and that pain need not be diagnosed as connected to a current underlying condition to function as an impairment." Id. at 1364.  "[A] physician's failure to provide a diagnosis for the immediate cause of a veteran's pain does not indicate that the pain cannot be a functional impairment that affects a veteran's earning capacity."  Id. at 1367.  Ultimately, the Federal Circuit in Saunders held that, to establish the presence of a disability, a veteran will need to show that his or her pain reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity.  Id. at 1368.

That having been noted, the Board finds the present case to be readily distinguishable from Saunders, as the Veteran did not endorse experiencing cervical spine or bilateral shoulder symptoms during the respective examinations, and there is no further evidence to suggest that the Veteran has experienced such symptomatology at any point during the appeal period.  Accordingly, without supporting records, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a diagnosable cervical spine condition or a bilateral shoulder condition and has not had such conditions during the appeal period.  The Veteran himself does not have the medical training or credentials to offer an opinion as to a diagnosis or its etiology.  Jandreau, supra.  Service connection is denied.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The benefit-of-the-doubt standard of proof does not apply. 38U.S.C. §5107 (b).

5. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

6. Irritable Bowel Syndrome

7. Irritable Colon Syndrome

8. Erectile Dysfunction

9. Fibromyalgia

10. Rhinitis

11. Sinusitis

12. Stomach Condition manifested by Gastrointestinal Symptoms

13. Hemorrhoids

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for the following conditions, all of which he contends are attributable to service on a presumptive basis as manifestations of a chronic disability resulting from undiagnosed illness and which are due to his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations: chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, irritable colon syndrome, erectile dysfunction, fibromyalgia, rhinitis, sinusitis, hemorrhoids, and a stomach condition manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms. 

Service connection may be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifested either during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026.  38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R.              § 3.317(a)(1).  A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i).

The term MUCMI refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  38 C.F.R.      § 3.317 (a)(2)(ii).  Examples of MUCMIs include chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal disabilities like GERD).  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(B).

The Persian Gulf War began on August 2, 1990, and the Southwest Asia theater of operations encompasses Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, and the Red Sea.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2 (i), 3.317(e)(2). 

The first question for the Board is whether the Veteran has diagnosable conditions manifested by symptomatology pertaining to the various claimed disabilities on appeal, and, if so, whether these diagnosable conditions began during service or are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include exposure to environmental or chemical hazards in service.  In the alternative, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran has symptomatology pertaining to the various claimed disabilities which results from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness.

With regard to the first query, the Board's review of the record confirms that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis pertaining to any of these claimed conditions.  He was afforded a VA chronic fatigue examination in May 2023, during which he reported experiencing no symptomatology indicative of the condition; the examiner therefore declined to diagnose chronic fatigue syndrome, and highlighted that a diagnosis requires specific exclusion of other possible causes for the Veteran's assumed symptomatology.  Similarly, on a May 2023 fibromyalgia examination, the Veteran specifically declined experiencing any symptoms of fibromyalgia, and the examiner also declined to diagnose the condition, once again highlighting that a diagnosis requires specific exclusion of other possible causes for the Veteran's assumed symptomatology.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA intestinal condition examination in May 2023, during which he reported that he has periods of time when he experiences diarrhea for several days straight.  After confirming that the Veteran has never been treated for either irritable bowel syndrome or irritable colon syndrome, the examiner declined to diagnose either condition. 

When queried, the Veteran on a May 2023 sinusitis and rhinitis examination reported that he experiences sinus headaches that can be incapacitating.  However, upon evaluation, the VA examiner found no evidence to suggest that the Veteran exhibited any symptomatology potentially indicative of either sinusitis or rhinitis.  Diagnostic testing, to include a radiographic examination, did not reveal any abnormalities.  Therefore, in light of the lack of a historical diagnosis for either condition, and in the absence of symptomatology, the examiner declined to diagnose sinusitis or rhinitis. 

On a May 2023 VA male reproductive system examination, the Veteran detailed that he has had difficulty having and maintaining an erection.  The examiner noted, however, that the Veteran has never been diagnosed with erectile dysfunction and experienced no other symptomatology potentially indicative of the condition.  As such, the examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. 

During a May 2023 VA stomach examination, the Veteran reported that he experiences nausea associated with vertigo.  Upon evaluation, the VA examiner found no evidence to suggest that the Veteran exhibited any symptomatology potentially indicative of a gastrointestinal condition.  Diagnostic testing also did not reveal any abnormalities.  Therefore, in light of the lack of a historical diagnosis, and in the absence of symptomatology, the examiner declined to diagnose a stomach condition manifested by gastrointestinal symptomatology. 

On a May 2023 VA rectum and anus condition examination, the Veteran reported that he noticed that he experienced hemorrhoids while in service in 2004 or 2005.  An in-person evaluation did not reveal any symptoms or any other indication of hemorrhoids, and so the examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of the condition. 

As detailed, there are no post-service medical records available to review to determine whether the Veteran has exhibited any symptomatology that potentially could be attributed to any of the above-listed conditions on appeal. 

Ultimately, there is no competent evidence that the Veteran has a diagnosis pertaining to any of the conditions on appeal.  Moreover, as outlined above, he also does not exhibit symptomatology that suggests that a diagnosis of such claimed conditions would be appropriate.  With this in mind, the presumptive portions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1) also do not apply, as there are no symptoms which can be attributed to a diagnosable disability (since there are no symptoms whatsoever).  Although the Veteran contends generally that these various claimed disabilities are attributable to his exposure to environmental hazards while in service in the Southeast Asia theater of operations, he has presented no objective medical evidence to support this contention, and there is no evidence in the record showing that he has the medical training, credentials, or other expertise to competently conclude that he has symptomatology pertaining to chronic fatigue syndrome irritable bowel and colon syndrome, erectile dysfunction, fibromyalgia, rhinitis and sinusitis, hemorrhoids, or a stomach condition, or that any such symptomatology is due to his exposure to any environmental hazards while in service.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 491 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

The Board also notes that it finds the various VA medical examinations to be highly probative as to the ultimate determination of whether the Veteran has diagnosable conditions pertaining to the claimed disabilities, as well as whether the Veteran has any symptomatology which has not been attributed to a diagnosable condition and which is otherwise attributable to an undiagnosed illness that in turn is due to the Veteran's service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. Specifically, the examiners reviewed the claims file and referred to the Veteran's medical history in finding that there was no evidence of diagnosable conditions pertaining to the claimed disabilities.  Sklar v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 140 (1993). 

Finally, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has alternatively asserted that the liberalizing regulations of the recently signed PACT Act may also serve to allow for service connection in the present appeal.  Although the PACT Act, which was signed into law on August 10, 2022, expanded VA health care and benefits for veterans exposed to burn pits or other toxic substances during military service, these new regulations do not apply in the present appeal as the Veteran does not have diagnoses pertaining to any of the claimed disabilities.  

Accordingly, without supporting records, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have diagnosable chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, irritable colon syndrome, erectile dysfunction, fibromyalgia, rhinitis, sinusitis, hemorrhoids, or a stomach condition manifested by gastrointestinal symptoms.  The Board reiterates that the Veteran himself does not have the medical training or credentials to offer an opinion as to a diagnosis or its etiology.  Jandreau, supra.  Service connection is therefore denied for each of these claimed disabilities.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The benefit-of-the-doubt standard of proof does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. §4.1.  In cases in which a claim for a higher initial evaluation stems from an initial grant of service connection for the disability at issue, multiple ("staged") ratings may be assigned for different periods of time during the pendency of the appeal.  See generally Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994); 38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  

Staged ratings are, however, appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran is service connected for an acquired psychiatric disorder, characterized as major depressive disorder.  The disability is rated as 50 percent disabling prior to February 27, 2023, and 70 percent therefrom.  He seeks ratings in excess of these for the entirety of the appeal period, which extends back to February 27, 2022, one year prior to the date that VA received the Veteran's intent to file, provided that any increase in the severity of the condition was "factually ascertainable" during the period of time. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R.            § 3.400(o); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (1998).

The ratings at issue are assigned pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders as outlined in 38 C.F.R. §4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434. Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood due to symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.  Id.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating agency shall assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms.  The use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the Diagnostic Code. VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.  When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign for psychiatric disabilities, however, the Board's "primary consideration" is the Veteran's symptoms.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

During the appeal period, the Veteran was afforded a VA psychiatric examination in April 2023, wherein he reported that he has a good relationship with his immediate family that has improved since he ceased working away from home.  According to the Veteran, his major symptom is an inability to get a quality night's sleep, which he attributes to chronic anxiety.  After an in-person evaluation, the examiner noted the following symptoms: depression, anxiety, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation and obsessional rituals which interferes with routine activities.  Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran has not attended mental health treatment sessions since 2019, which the examiner found to be due to a lack of motivation attributable to the psychiatric disorder.  In summation, the examiner found that the disorder contributed to occupational and social impairment with occasional decreased in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. 

There are no post-service medical records available in the claims file that pertain to the relevant period on appeal.  The Veteran has not presented any additional lay testimony in support of his increased rating claim. 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against a determination that a rating in excess of 50 percent is warranted for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder during the one-year period prior to the filing of the claim.  At the outset, the Board highlights that there are no records documenting any treatment for mental health symptomatology during this period of time, and so it was not "factually ascertainable" that the Veteran was experiencing the more severe symptomatology noted on the April 2023 examination.  To that end, the Board notes that the April 2023 examination is the first instance of the Veteran having exhibited some of the more severe symptomatology which underlies the increased 70 percent rating, namely, suicidal ideation and obsessional rituals associated with his psychiatric disorder.  Without any evidence to suggest that the Veteran was experiencing this symptomatology prior to the April 2023 examination, the Board cannot find that it was "factually ascertainable" that the Veteran warranted a higher 70 percent rating at any point during the one-year period prior to the filing of the claim. 

Moving on, the Board also finds that Veteran's symptomatology did not meet the criteria for a 100 percent rating at any time during the appeal period.  While the Veteran did endorse experiencing suicidal ideation as well as engaging in obsessional rituals, he did not exhibit grossly inappropriate behavior, which is a component of a 100 percent evaluation.  Moreover, there is no indication that the Veteran experienced hallucinations or memory loss for his own name or the names of close relatives during the appeal period.  Most significantly, there is no indication that he experienced total occupational and social impairment as due to his service-connected psychiatric disorder; to that end, the Board highlights that he maintains a close relationship with his immediate family and appears to be holding a steady job.  Accordingly, a 100 percent evaluation is not warranted.

2. Coccidioidomycosis 

The Veteran is in receipt of a noncompensable rating for coccidioidomycosis and seeks a compensable rating for the condition for the entirety of the appeal period, which, once again, extends back to extends back to February 27, 2022, one year prior to the date that VA received the Veteran's intent to file.

The noncompensable rating in this case is assigned pursuant to Diagnostic Code 6835, which in turn is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mycotic Lung Disease. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6835.  Under those rating criteria, a noncompensable rating is warranted for healed and inactive mycotic lesions that are asymptomatic.  Id.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for chronic pulmonary mycosis with minimal symptoms such as occasional minor hemoptysis or productive cough.  Id.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for chronic pulmonary mycosis requiring suppressive therapy with no more than minimal symptoms such as occasional minor hemoptysis or productive cough.  Id.  A 100-percent rating, the highest available, is warranted for chronic pulmonary mycosis with persistent fever, weight loss, night sweats, or massive hemoptysis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6835, General Rating Formula for Mycotic Lung Disease.

Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6835 states, "Coccidioidomycosis has an incubation period up to 21 days, and the disseminated phase is ordinarily manifest within six months of the primary phase.  However, there are instances of dissemination delayed up to many years after the initial infection which may have been unrecognized.  Accordingly, when service connection is under consideration in the absence of record or other evidence of the disease in service, service in southwestern United States where the disease is endemic and absence of prolonged residence in this locality before or after service will be the deciding factor."

The severity of the coccidioidomycosis was evaluated in a July 2023 VA respiratory examination, during which the examiner detailed that the Veteran was diagnosed with the condition while in service in 2011.  According to the examiner, the condition was noted to have resolved in April 2011 after a month-long course of treatment.  When queried during the examination, the Veteran denied experiencing any respiratory symptoms.  A radiographic examination of the lungs also revealed no abnormalities, and the examiner did not find that pulmonary function testing was necessary in light of the apparent resolution of symptoms.  In summation, the examiner did not find that the condition contributed to any impairment of occupational functioning, as it was entirely asymptomatic.  

As detailed, there are no post-service medical records available which pertain to the period on appeal.  

Upon review of the record, the Board confirms that a compensable rating is not warranted for the coccidioidomycosis.  There are no symptoms attributable to the condition, and it has apparently resolved after treatment while in service.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has implicitly asserted that the condition has increased in severity and recognizes that lay statements are competent evidence as to observable symptomatology.  However, the Veteran is not competent to provide an opinion that his service-connected coccidioidomycosis is active and that he has residual symptoms of this condition.  The issue is medically complex, and the Veteran has not demonstrated that he has the medical education, training, or expertise to render such an opinion.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the medical evidence, specifically the July 2023 VA medical examination, and finds that the record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's coccidioidomycosis has manifested in minimal symptoms such as occasional minor hemoptysis or productive cough.  Furthermore, there are no current residuals of the Veteran's service-connected coccidioidomycosis.

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Thus, entitlement to a compensable rating for the service-connected coccidioidomycosis is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for GERD as well as a low back condition and a headache condition, each of which he contends are directly attributable to service.  In support thereof, he was afforded VA examinations in August 2023 to evaluate the nature and likely etiology of all three conditions.  

In the May 2023 back examination, the chosen examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a low back condition despite the Veteran's reporting of having experienced low back pain that began in service and has continued to the present.  According to the Veteran, this low back pain limits his mobility, which in turn impedes his productivity.  

Similarly, in the May 2023 headache examination, the chosen examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a headache condition despite the Veteran's reporting of having experienced headaches ever since service.  To that end, the Veteran detailed that his headaches are characterized by photosensitivity and pain that radiates to his eyes.  

During the May 2023 gastroesophageal condition examination, the chosen examiner also declined to endorse a diagnosis of GERD even though the Veteran reported having experienced chronic reflux and other gastrointestinal symptomatology that began in service.  The examiner offered no explanation as to why she dismissed a GERD diagnosis other than to note that the Veteran's reported symptoms were "subjective" in nature.  

The Board cannot rely on these examinations, as the examiner ignored clear evidence suggesting that the Veteran has diagnosable GERD as well as a low back and a headache condition.  Remand is necessary in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in affording him deficient VA examinations in support of all three conditions. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018)

4. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, which he contends is secondary to his service connected acquired psychiatric disorder.  In support thereof, he was afforded a VA examination in August 2023, wherein the chosen examiner found that it was less likely than not that the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to the acquired psychiatric disorder.  As a rationale, the examiner highlighted that there is "no research based data to support" a determination that the obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to the acquired psychiatric disorder.  However, the examiner did not address the aggravation prong of the secondary service connection analysis whatsoever.  Accordingly, remand is necessary to correct a failure of the duty to assist in neglecting to secure an opinion discussing the possibility that the acquired psychiatric disorder has aggravated the obstructive sleep apnea.   

5. Entitlement to service connection for right and left hip, wrist, ankle, elbow, knee, hand, and foot conditions is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip, elbow, foot, hand, knee, ankle, and wrist conditions.  The regional office denied these claims without scheduling the Veteran for VA examinations in support of the claims on the ground that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that the Veteran has a diagnosis accounting for his reported symptomatology.  Although there are no post-service medical records available to review, nevertheless, the Veteran's subjective complaints of experiencing pain and other symptomatology attributable to the above-listed joints is sufficient to trigger VA's duty to afford the Veteran an examination in support of his claim.  McLendon?v. Nicholson,?20?Vet. App.?79, 83?(2006); see also Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Accordingly, a remand is necessary to correct a failure of the duty to assist in neglecting schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to evaluate the nature and likely etiology of each of these claimed musculoskeletal conditions.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the purpose of providing an opinion as to whether he has diagnosable GERD as well as a low back condition and a headache condition, in addition to bilateral hip, elbow, foot, hand, knee, ankle, and wrist conditions.  The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the individual designated to examine the Veteran, and the examination report should include discussion of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions relating to his diagnosis of and treatment for each of these claimed conditions.  All necessary special studies or tests must be accomplished. 

The examiner must first determine the proper diagnosis or diagnoses that account for all of the Veteran's claimed musculoskeletal symptomatology, as well as any gastroesophageal and headache symptomatology.  The examiner must explicitly discuss all documented symptomatology and ensure that all symptomatology is encompassed by those disorders that are endorsed in the examination report.  Specifically, with regard to the claimed GERD, the examiner must address the Veteran's reporting on the August 2023 examination that he has experienced chronic reflux and heartburn ever since service.  Similarly, the examiner must address the Veteran's reporting on the August 2023 examination that he experiences low back pain the impedes his ability to function in an occupational setting.  As for the claimed headache condition, the examiner must address the Veteran's reporting on the August 2023 examination that he experiences chronic head pain with photosensitivity.  

After confirming diagnoses for each of these claimed disabilities, or providing a thorough rationale for why such a diagnosis is not appropriate, the examiner is requested to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any claimed low back condition, GERD, headache condition, bilateral hip condition, bilateral elbow conditions, bilateral foot condition, bilateral hand condition, bilateral knee condition, bilateral ankle condition, and/or bilateral wrist condition is related to the Veteran's service, to include the physical toll of his various duties while in service.  Specifically, the examiner must comment on documentation of the Veteran having sought treatment for gastroesophageal and headache symptomatology as well as low back pain while in service. 

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered in full. 

2. Provide the claims file to a qualified examiner in order to secure an opinion as to the likely etiology of the claimed obstructive sleep apnea.  The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the individual designated to provide such an opinion, and the opinion report(s) should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions.

The chosen examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is it at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was incurred in or is otherwise attributable to service.  The examiner must address the Veteran's reporting that he was told that he snored while sleeping at night in service. 

Irrespective of the answer to the above, the examiner is also requested to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by the service connected acquired psychiatric disorder.  If the opinion is that the acquired psychiatric disorder aggravated the obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner should specify, so far as possible, the degree of disability resulting from such aggravation.

The Board notes that causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationales.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  The examiner is reminded that there is NO requirement of "permanent aggravation"; rather, the question is whether there was aggravation in general. 

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered in full.

 

 v

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher M. Collins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.