Citation Nr: A25031524
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432582
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for a back condition is remanded.

The claim for service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from July 1987 to March 1993, to include service in the Southwest Asia.  He also served in the Army Reserve.

A rating decision in April 2024 denied service connection for a back condition and hypertension. In April 2024, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review Docket, a process by which the Board is only allowed to review the evidence up to the April 2024 rating decision.  Since the Board is remanding the issues for further development, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) may review evidence received after the April 2024 rating decision that the Board could not consider in this decision.  

1. Back  

In a statement dated March 2023, the Veteran reported that he injured his back during service due to heavy lifting, waking steep hills and falling in the mess hall; that he was seen for back pain several times during service; that he continued to have back pain since separation, and that he received treatment from civilian doctors and used over the counter medication for back pain. 

Service treatment records (STRs) did not show that the Veteran was treated for back condition during service. However, on his report of medical history at the time of separation, he reported recurrent back pain. The medical officer noted low back discomfort, which was relieved by rest and aggravated by prolonged standing. 

A VA examination in April 2023 diagnosed the Veteran with lumbar spondylosis and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. In an addendum opinion dated August 2023, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability was etiologically related to his active service. The examiner noted that while the Veteran reported recurrent back pain at the time of his separation, the STRs do not show any treatment records for back condition; and that the medical records in the claims file do not contain any post-service treatment for back condition until April 2022, which was approximately 29 years after the Veteran separated from his service. However, the examiner also noted that the Veteran's STRs were silent for back problems, which is factually inaccurate, since recurrent back pain was noted at the Veteran's separation physical.

VA treatment records show that the Veteran established his VA care in April 2022. At that time, he complained of low back pain radiating down the left leg. A diagnosis of degenerative disc of lumbar spine with radiculopathy was given. An MRI in May 2022 showed lumbar spondylosis.

The Board notes that the Veteran reported in his statement dated March 2023 that he continued to experience back pain after service and received treatment from civilian doctors. However, no private treatment records are associated with the file and there were no records showing that the AOJ had tried to obtain the relevant private medical records. As such, a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred, and a remand is warranted. 

2. Hypertension  

In a statement dated March 2023, the Veteran contends that his hypertension was the result of weight gain caused by his service connected PTSD. 

STRs show that the Veteran was 67 inches tall and weighted 180 lbs at the time of enlistment with BP reading of 120/68. He weighed 156 lbs at the time of separation with BP reading of 151/69. 

A VA examination in April 2023 diagnosed the Veteran with hypertension. The Veteran reported that this condition began in about 2000, but during his active service, he was told that his blood pressure (BP) was elevated at times. The examiner opened that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's hypertension was due to his service connected PTSD. The examiner explained that medical literature does not support a causal relationship between PTSD and hypertension. The examiner indicated that the causes of hypertension include: obstructive sleep apnea, kidney problems, adrenal gland tumors, thyroid problems, certain birth defects in blood vessels, certain medications, such as birth control pills, cold remedies, decongestants, over-the-counter pain relievers and some prescription drugs, illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines.

Here, use of over-the-counter pain relievers was identified by the April 2023 as one of the causes of hypertension, and the Veteran has reported that he used over-the-counter pain medication for his back pain.  Since the Board has remanded the issue of service connection for a back disability, the issue of service connection for hypertension should also be remanded as an intertwined issue. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain private treatment records for the Veteran's back condition. If such records are not available, a determination of unavailability should be made. 

2. Obtain a VA medical opinion to address the etiology of the Veteran's back disability. The examiner should answer the following question:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current back disability began during or was otherwise caused by his active service? Why or why not?

In doing so, the examiner should address (i) the Veteran reported recurrent back pain at the time of his separation; and (ii) the Veteran's statement dated March 2023 that he continued to have back pain since separation, and sought treatment from civilian doctors and used over the counter medication for his back pain. 

3. Re-adjudicate the claim of service connection for hypertension. 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Wang, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.