Citation Nr: A25031624
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453719
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 50 percent, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the whole period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD manifested with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, but did not manifest with occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 50 percent, for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1997 to September 2000.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). VA's determination of the present level of a disability may result in a conclusion that the disability has undergone varying and distinct levels of severity throughout the entire time period the increased-rating claim has been pending. Hart v. Mansfield, supra.

Entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 50 percent, for PTSD is denied.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating, in excess of 50 percent, for his service-connected PTSD.  

The Veteran is currently rated at 50 percent for PTSD under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  The appeal period begins on August 3, 2022, one year prior to the Veteran's August 3, 2023, VA claim for an increased rating.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 (2018).  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Turning to the evidence, the Board notes that in a September 13, 2022, VA treatment record shows that the Veteran was seen for follow-up treatment for his PTSD. He reported that he had "a busy [] summer" and his children enjoyed the summer "at the summer house." He reported that he still avoided watching the TV news due to triggering "vivid nightmares, anxiety, irritability, anger" He further reported taking his medications, "which he finds helpful most of the time;" however, "the Paxil is giving him ED." The clinician noted no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, acute physical distress, gross thought disorder, or psychosis. The Veteran had good eye contact and normal speech, anxious mood, good reality testing, good insight and judgment, and good past and recent memory. The clinician noted no major changes from previous MSE.

An April 10, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran was seen for follow-up treatment for his PTSD. He reported that he "had a pleasant Easter Holidays with his family at home." He reported that he still avoided watching the TV news due to triggering "anxiety, irritability, anger, inability to concentrate and anhedonia." He further reported taking his medications, "which he finds helpful most of the time." The examiner noted no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, acute physical distress, gross thought disorder, or psychosis. The Veteran had good eye contact and normal speech, anxious mood, good reality testing, good insight and judgment, and good past and recent memory. The clinician noted no major changes from previous MSE.

A June 12, 2023, VA treatment record shows that the Veteran was seen for follow-up treatment for his PTSD. He reported that he had a "quiet and uneventful Memorial Day weekend" and he and his family were planning to go to their summer house for Father's Day as well. He reported that he still avoided watching the TV news due to triggering "anxiety, irritability, anger, inability to concentrate and anhedonia." He further reported taking his medications, which the clinician  noted as having "some encouraging effect." The clinician noted no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, acute physical distress, gross thought disorder, or psychosis. The Veteran had good eye contact and normal speech, anxious mood, good reality testing, good insight and judgment, and good past and recent memory. The examiner noted no major changes from previous MSE.

An August 14, 2023, VA treatment record shows that the Veteran was seen for follow-up treatment for his PTSD. He reported that he "had a quiet and uneventful summer, working at his job" and spent weekends "at his summer house with his family." He reported that he still avoided watching the TV news due to triggering "anxiety, irritability, anger, inability to concentrate and anhedonia." He further reported taking his medications, "which he finds helpful most of the time." The clinician noted no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, acute physical distress, gross thought disorder, or psychosis. The Veteran had good eye contact and normal speech, anxious mood, good reality testing, good insight and judgment, and good past and recent memory. The examiner noted no major changes from previous MSE.

During a September 14, 2023, VA examination, the Veteran reported continuing PTSD symptoms that led to distress and functional impairment. He reported that he remained married to his wife and raising two children. The examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  On examination, he was found to have symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation or mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. His behavior showed that he was oriented to time, place, persons, and events; his mood was anxious and depressed; his speech was within normal limits, logical, and linear; his insight and judgment were fair; and his memory was diminished. There was no suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, hallucinations, or delusions found.

The Board finds that during the whole period on appeal the Veteran's PTSD manifested with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

To that end, the September 14, 2023, VA examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran's worst symptoms of panic attacks that occurred more than once a week, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships match at most the 50 percent rating criteria.  The remaining symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss match the 30 percent rating criteria.  

Additional symptoms reported during the appeal period include irritability, anger, inability to concentrate, and anhedonia.  The Board finds that the frequency, severity, and duration of these symptoms more closely align with that of the 30 percent rating, see Vazquez-Claudio, supra, due to the lack of documented examples reported in the record, the routinely positive lay statements between treatment sessions, and the Veteran's self-report that his medication is "helpful most of the time."  See, e.g., August 14, 2023, VA treatment record.

To warrant a higher 70 percent rating, the evidence must show symptoms such as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Here, the evidence shows that the Veteran maintained positive relations with his wife and two children.  See, e.g., April 10, 2023; September 14, 2023, VA treatment records.  The Veteran also regularly had "quiet and uneventful" holidays and seasons.  See, e.g., April 10, 2023; June 12, 2023; August 14, 2023, VA treatment records.  The Veteran was also routinely noted as having good eye contact, normal speech, good judgment, and good insight.  Although the Veteran reported irritability at his September 13, 2022, VA treatment, there was no evidence of periods of violence.  The evidence does not show suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, impaired speech, near-continuous panic or depression, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, or an inability to establish or maintain effective relationships at a frequency, severity, or duration to meet the 70 percent rating criteria.  

Moreover, a 100 percent rating is not warranted as the evidence does not show symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Board is mindful of the Court's decision in Bankhead v. Shulkin, in which it was held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130). Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017). Under the unique facts of Bankhead, the claimant was noted to have had recurrent suicidal thoughts and behaviors of varying severity, frequency, and duration throughout the relevant appeal period. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 19-23.  In the current appeal, there are no reports of suicidal ideation.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not warrant a rating in excess of 50 percent at any time during the period on appeal.  Thus, the appeal must be denied.  

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990). 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. J. Hall, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.