Citation Nr: A25031582
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240728-459474
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for migraines is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's migraines have not been manifested with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over last several months.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial compensable rating for migraines have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.20, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the U.S. Army from August 2011 to January 2015.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), wherein the AOJ granted service connection for migraines with a zero percent disability rating, effective November 26, 2019.

In July 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) and requesting a "Direct Review" of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for migraines

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the Veteran's symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches are rated under DC 8100, which is specifically for migraine headaches. A noncompensable rating is assigned for migraine headaches with less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is assigned for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over last several months. A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once per month over the last several months. A maximum 50 percent rating is assigned for migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

In Johnson v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) cited to the Webster's Third New International Dictionary and stated that "prostrating" was "lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low." 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). In essence, the Court held that when rating headache disabilities, a "characteristic prostrating attack" is defined as "attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality." Id. The Court further stated that DC 8100 set forth successive rating criteria, and since characteristic prostrating attacks plainly described migraines that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality, to be "completely prostrating" meant that the headaches must "render the veteran entirely powerless." Id.

In a precedential decision, Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67 (2020), the Court, in discussing what kinds of symptoms would be contemplated by DC 8100, addressing migraine headaches, it cited to definitions of migraine headaches. It noted that the online version of Merriam-Webster defines migraine as "a condition marked by recurring moderate to severe headache with throbbing pain that usually lasts from four hours to three days [and] is often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light or sound, and is sometimes preceded by an aura and is often followed by fatigue." Migraine, Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/migraine; see also Migraine, Mayo Clinic, https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/migraineheadache/symptoms-causes/syc-20360201 (explaining that "[a] migraine can cause severe throbbing pain or a pulsing sensation, usually on one side of the head. [And is] often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound"). Id. at 70.

The Veteran believes his migraines should be rated at a compensable level.

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the award of a compensable rating for migraines. The reasons follow.

At the January 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his current symptoms included headaches, nausea, dizziness, sometimes diarrhea and lack of energy. The Veteran reported that during severe headaches, he loses the ability to communicate, both listening and speaking. The examiner documented that the Veteran took Advil for migraines. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran had pulsating or throbbing head pain; pain localized to one side of the head. The Veteran reported to the examiner that headaches occurred on both sides of his head but mostly on the left. Also, the January 2020 VA examination report showed the Veteran's migraines were aggravated by certain food, but, at times, it occurred by itself. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had non-headache symptoms, such as nausea, sensitivity to light, sensitivity to sound, and dizziness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's typical head pain lasted less than a day. The examiner also documented that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks. 

At the April 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had migraines twice a week. The Veteran reported that he had pain on both sides of the head. The examiner documented that the Veteran took magnesium, Imitrex, and melatonin for migraines. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had non-headache symptoms, such as nausea and sensitivity to sound. The examiner noted that the Veteran's typical head pain lasted less than a day. The examiner documented that the Veteran did had characteristic prostrating attacks or migraines with less frequent attacks than one in two months.

At the April 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had pain on both sides of the head and the migraines typically lasted less than a day. The examiner documented that the Veteran took magnesium and Imitrex for migraines. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had non-headache symptoms, such as nausea and sensitivity to sound. The examiner documented that the Veteran did have characteristic prostrating attacks or migraines with less frequent attacks than one in two months. The examiner noted that the Veteran must remain in a quiet environment during severe migraine headache flares, and he is unable to perform all activities during this time. 

The Veteran's claims file showed that he was seen in January 2021 by a VA medical professional. The medical professional noted that the Veteran reported in January 2021 that his headaches usually began in the left temporal area, occasionally radiate to right temporal area and back of head. The Veteran reported the headaches were worsened by noise and light, and relieved by quiet and darkroom. The headaches are associated with nausea/vomiting, visual lights, but no vertigo. The Veteran reported six to eight episodes each month. In August 2022, the Veteran reported he had headaches about two to three times a week. A December 2022 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran was most compatible with chronic migraine, stable and the Veteran could not tolerate various medications for migraines. While the evidence shows that the Veteran experiences headaches, the evidence persuasively establishes that to the extent that the Veteran has prostrating headaches, they are less frequent than one every two months, which falls under the 0 percent rating. 

The Board finds the above-described facts show, on average, that the Veteran reported headaches multiple times a month and migraines twice a month, but neither the headaches nor migraines manifested with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months. The Veteran also stated that his migraines were accompanied by nausea and/or vomiting. Although the record shows the Veteran complained of multiple migraines per month, those migraines subsided within a day, and he did not report that his migraines resulted in exhaustion or helplessness, nor has he contended that this was an example of a characteristic prostrating attack. Accordingly, the Board finds that the January 2020, April 2020, and April 2024 VA examinations are adequate, which do not show that the Veteran's migraine headaches rise to a compensable level. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial compensable disability rating for migraines is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.