Citation Nr: A25031757
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231003-383668
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1989 to January 1993, to include service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for eczema most recently addressed in a June 2015 rating decision.  In April 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 decision.  

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for eczema, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her eczema was caused by her service in Southwest Asia.  

The Veteran is currently diagnosed with eczema.  See February 2023 Skin Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ conceded toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  

Accordingly, the remaining question for the Board is whether there is a nexus, or link between the current disability and the Veteran's in-service injury/event.  

In this regard, a February 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's eczema was less likely than not incurred in or caused by her service.  As rationale, the examiner opined that, the Veteran's eczema "[i]s a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis. It is less likely than not that the...rash is related to the exposure event experienced in Southwest Asia."  The examiner also opined that eczema has a clear etiology and a condition that often begins before age 5, with risk factors of hay fever, asthma, and food allergies.  The negative nexus opinion is inadequate as it is not supported by clear and thorough rationale (i.e. there is no indication of a pre-existing condition) and does not address aggravation.   See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).  

The February 2023 examiner also rendered a negative nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's TERA participation.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  As rationale, the examiner essentially restated the rationale from her direct service connection opinion.  The Board finds that this medical opinion is inadequate, because it is conclusory. The VA examiner did not discuss the specific toxic exposures that the Veteran had during service.  A remand is required for an adequate TERA opinion.

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum to address the above-noted deficiencies.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  A remand is necessary to correct it.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the Veteran's eczema. 

The clinician must address the following: 

(A) The clinician must address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's eczema is related to her service to specifically include her exposure during her conceded participation in a TERA.  

In answering the above question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  In addressing this question, the clinician must specifically address the hazardous exposure to toxins and potential symptoms noted on the Veteran's Individual Longitudinal Exposure Report (ILER).  

(B) If the answer to (A) is negative, then the clinician must answer whether is its at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's eczema is due to the Veteran's service. 

The clinician is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The clinician is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

Jimmy L. Bardin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, S. L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.