Citation Nr: A25031754
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231208-398456
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED) is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating based on the award of basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine prior to October 1, 2023, and in excess of 10 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity sciatic nerve prior to October 1, 2023, and in excess of 10 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity sciatic nerve prior to October 1, 2023, and in excess of 10 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity femoral nerve prior to October 1, 2023, and in excess of 0 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity femoral nerve prior to October 1, 2023, and in excess of 0 percent thereafter is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for sinusitis is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from August 2011 to September 2012.

In April, May, and July 2023, the Regional Office (RO) issued rating decisions which addressed the above-noted disabilities.  Thereafter, in December 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), wherein he elected to appeal the claims in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) System.  He selected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the RO issued the April, May, and July 2023 rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding several of the above-referenced claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Chronic fatigue syndrome has not been present at any time during the pendency of this claim.

2.  The Veteran's claimed erectile dysfunction has not been diagnosed and is not shown to be consequentially related to either his military service or a service-connected disability. 

3.  The Veteran's service-connected tinnitus is assigned a 10 percent rating, which is the maximum rating authorized under Diagnostic Code 6260.

4.  Dependents' Educational Assistance is an ancillary benefit program, which does not provide for compensable disability ratings.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2.  The criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

3.  There is no legal basis for the assignment of a schedular evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260; Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

4.  There is no legal basis for the assignment of a separate schedular evaluation based on eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance.  38 U.S.C. § 35.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Duty to Assist

The Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA), codified in pertinent part at 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A, and the pertinent implementing regulation, codified at 38 C.F.R. § 3.159, provide that VA will assist a claimant in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim but is not required to provide assistance to a claimant if there is no reasonable possibility that such assistance would aid in substantiating the claim.

The Board finds VA has complied with its duty to assist the Veteran in the development of his claims.  In this respect, all available service treatment records (STRs) and post-service medical evidence identified by the Veteran have been obtained.  The Veteran also underwent appropriate VA examinations to address his claimed disabilities.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative have identified any outstanding, existing evidence that could be obtained to substantiate the claims; the Board is also unaware of any such evidence.  Therefore, the Board is satisfied that VA has complied with its duty to assist the Veteran in the development of the claims decided herein.  Accordingly, the Board will address the merits of the Veteran's claims.

Burden of Proof

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  The Secretary shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Legal Criteria-Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Service connection may also be granted for disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a).

"Congress specifically limits entitlement to service-connected disease or injury where such cases have resulted in a disability...in the absence of a proof of present disability there can be no valid claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Court has held that the requirement for service connection that a current disability be present is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

Service Connection Claims

The Veteran has asserted service connection is warranted for CFS and ED.  Since the resolution of these claims involves the application of identical law to similar facts, in the interest of judicial economy these issues will be addressed together.

At the outset, the Board notes the cornerstone of any VA disability compensation claim is the presence of a currently diagnosed disability.  Throughout the period of the claim, the Veteran has received outpatient treatment at the Birmingham VAMC.  The Board has carefully reviewed these records, but has not found a single instance in which the Veteran was diagnosed with either ED or CFS. 

In addition, the Board has scrupulously reviewed the Veteran's May 2023 VA chronic fatigue syndrome examination report.  During his examination, the Veteran reported experiencing daytime fatigue symptoms which developed in conjunction with his sleep apnea.  Here, the Board notes the Veteran's persistent daytime hypersomnolence has been evaluated as part of his sleep apnea disability evaluation.  Following his May 2023 examination, the examiner concluded the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria necessary for a diagnosis of CFS. 

 

Additionally, a review of both the Veteran's STRs and outpatient treatment notes from the Birmingham VAMC fails to show the Veteran has ever reported, been treated for, or been diagnosed with ED.  Further, in his January 2023 claim, the Veteran indicated his ED is consequentially related to his reported acquired psychiatric disorder.  However, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder has not been service-connected.  It is axiomatic that service-connection cannot be established for ED on a secondary basis if the primary disability, here the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, lacks a service-connection.

In sum, the Board finds the great weight of the evidence indicates the Veteran has not satisfied the clinical criteria necessary to establish a diagnosis of either ED or CFS at any time throughout the pendency of his claim.  VA must consider all favorable lay evidence of record.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995).  Accordingly, the Board has carefully considered the Veteran's reports.

A layperson is competent to testify in regard to the onset and continuity of symptomatology.  Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379, 384 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 403 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).  The Board has accepted the Veteran's accounts as competent.  However, a layperson is not considered capable of opining, however sincerely, in regard to the diagnosis of a disability.  Routen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 183, 187 (1997), aff'd sub nom Routen v. West, 142 F3d 1434 (Fed. Cir. 1998), cert denied, 119 S. Ct. 404 (1998).  Rather, it is the province of trained health care professionals to enter conclusions that require medical expertise, such as opinions as to diagnosis and causation.  Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137 (1994).  For example, a veteran is competent to state that he experiences symptoms, such as fatigue, but he is not competent to diagnose himself with CFS or otherwise state the etiology of his fatigue.  As discussed above, the medical evidence fails to show a diagnosis of CFS or ED.  The evidence also fails to demonstrate the Veteran's claimed ED has a relationship to service or a service-connected disability.  Therefore, the claims must be denied.  In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable to these claims because the extensive evidence is against the claims.

Legal Criteria-Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

Increased Rating for Tinnitus

The Veteran was awarded service connection and a 10 percent rating for tinnitus in a February 2017 rating decision.  The RO denied the Veteran's request for a higher rating for this disability in the April and July 2023 rating decisions under appeal, because the maximum schedular rating authorized by law has been assigned.

In Smith v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 63, 78 (2005), the Court held that the pre-1999 and pre-June 13, 2003, versions of Diagnostic Code 6260 required the assignment of dual ratings for bilateral tinnitus.  VA appealed this decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit).  In Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006), the Federal Circuit concluded that the Court erred in not deferring to VA's interpretation of its own regulations, 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 and Diagnostic Code 6260, which limit a veteran to a single 10 percent disability rating for tinnitus, regardless of whether the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral.

The Veteran's service-connected tinnitus is evaluated as 10 percent disabling, which is the maximum schedular rating available for such disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.  As there is no legal basis upon which to award a separate schedular evaluation for tinnitus in each ear or a higher schedular rating for tinnitus, the Veteran's claim for such benefits is without legal merit.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

Dependents' Educational Assistance Appeal

In his December 2023 appeal, the Veteran expressed disagreement with the RO's failure to assign a compensable disability rating for his Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA).  However, the Board notes that pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 35, DEA is an ancillary benefits program which is provided to veterans who are deemed totally and permanently disabled.  This program provides eligible dependents of veterans with education, training, and vocational counseling; however, there is no basis in the laws and regulations governing this ancillary benefit for the assignment of increased or additional compensable disability ratings for a veteran.  As such, the Veteran's claim for such benefits is also without legal merit, and must be denied.  Id.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.

The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

Under certain circumstances, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) require VA to obtain a VA examination or medical opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

The Board notes that to be considered adequate, a musculoskeletal examination must include an assessment of a veteran's flare-ups, as well as range of motion measurements in weight bearing, non-weight bearing, and in passive motion.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); see also Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).  The Veteran underwent a VA back examination in January 2023; however, the examiner failed to provide these important evaluation criteria, to specifically include both weight bearing and non-weight bearing range of motion assessments.  Additionally, in May 2023, the Veteran contacted VA to report a worsening of his back and lower extremity radiculopathies.  At that time, he stated he was prescribed additional medications to treat his disabilities.  The RO failed to obtain an updated examination to determine the severity of the Veteran's disability prior to issuing the July 2023 rating decision.  

Finally, by way of his December 2023 NOD, the Veteran indicated his allergic rhinitis and sinusitis affected him in ways you cannot see day to day.  Here, the Board observes these disabilities are the type which have the potential to wax and wane.  Though the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess these disabilities in January 2023, it does not appear his conditions were assessed during an active flare up.  In this regard, the Board notes that when a disease consists of active and inactive stages during which the condition improves, VA must provide for the conduct of an adequate examination during the active stage of the disease.  Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994).  The Board finds an additional VA examination, preferably during a flare-up, is needed to adequately evaluate the Veteran's upper respiratory disorders.

Based on the foregoing insufficiencies, the Board finds the RO failed to provide the requisite pre-decisional assistance in this matter.  As such, this case must be remanded.

Accordingly, the case is REMANDED for the following actions:

Obtain a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to fully assess the severity of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, allergic rhinitis, and sinusitis disabilities.  

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis/sinusitis examination should be conducted during a flare-up, if possible.  All pertinent evidence of record should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.

Ensure the examiner provides all information required for rating purposes, to specifically include both active and passive range of motion testing, as well as weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing range of motion assessments.

In addition, the examiner must consider and discuss all procurable and assembled data such as the frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, and the severity of the flare-ups, and then provide a retrospective assessment of the functional impairments the Veteran has experienced during flares, throughout the pendency of this appeal.

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary, he or she should be directed to clearly explain why that is so.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fraser, Gordon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.