Citation Nr: A25031818
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240318-426347
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the disability rating was improper; the disability rating of 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity (LLE), sciatic (herein LLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve), under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8720, is restored, effective February 28, 2024.

The reduction of the disability rating was improper; the disability rating of 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity (RLE), sciatic (herein RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve), under DC 8720, is restored, effective February 28, 2024.

Entitlement to an initial 20 percent disability rating for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, femoral (herein LLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve), under DC 8526 from January 10, 2024, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial 20 percent disability rating for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, femoral (herein RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve), under DC 8526 from January 10, 2024, is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to January 10, 2024, for the grant of a 20 percent disability rating for LLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to January 10, 2024, for the grant of a 20 percent disability rating for RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 20 percent for LLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 20 percent for RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis, left hand, is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis, right hand, is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, is dismissed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction of the disability ratings for the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve, under DC 8720, were improper because the evidence of record did not establish that an improvement in the disabilities actually occurred (necessarily indicating that there was also not improvement in the ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work).

2. Throughout the review period, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve disability pictures more nearly approximated moderate incomplete paralysis.

3. This decision has granted initial 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526, effective January 10, 2024; this is the date of service connection for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve and an earlier effective date for the initial ratings is not warranted prior to the date of service connection.

4. Throughout the review period, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve disability pictures did not more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis.

5. The appellant's OSA was caused by his service-connected hypertension, allergic rhinitis, acquired psychiatric disability, and lumbar spine disability.

6. An August 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for left- and right-hand arthritis.

7. As to the claim of service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, the appellant did not follow a mandatory claim-processing rule, outlined in 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b), that requires a NOD to be filed within one year of the date of the issuance of notice of the decision.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for restoration of 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve, under DC 8720, from February 28, 2024, are met.  38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

2. Throughout the review period dating to January 10, 2024, the criteria for initial disability ratings of 20 percent for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 are met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

3. The criteria for an effective date prior to January 10, 2024, for the grant of initial 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526, are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

4. Throughout the review period, the criteria for disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 were not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA were met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

6. The claims of entitlement to service connection for left- and right-hand arthritis has been granted and the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) no longer has jurisdiction.  Seri v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 441, 447 (2007); Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997); Barrera v. Gober, 122 F.3d 1030, 1032 (Fed. Cir. 1997); 38 U.S.C. § 7104, 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

7. The criteria for dismissal of the claim of service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, were met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.203.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 1996 to July 2016.

This case comes before the Board from three rating decisions, dated in May 2023, December 2023, and March 2024, of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration (the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)).  VA received the appellant's notice of disagreements (NODs), via VA Forms 10182, with these determinations in March 2024, whereon the appellant selected the Direct Review docket.

Applicable Evidentiary Window 

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review docket, only the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal may be considered.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  Evidence received after the AOJ decision will not be considered unless the appellant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The appellant has not filed such a request. 

If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decisions, it has not been considered.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Whether the Reduction of the Disability Ratings for LLE and RLE Radiculopathy of the Sciatic Nerve were Proper

The appellant, or his representative, did not provide specific contentions related to the whether the reductions at issue were proper.  On the March 2024 NOD, the appellant referenced the LLE and RLE radiculopathy reductions and stated regarding an area of disagreement that "[w]hen I was examined I said the pain was severe to moderate."

Legal Criteria

38 C.F.R. § 3.344, titled "Stabilization of disability evaluations," addresses rating reductions.  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b) are not applicable to this claim because the 20 percent ratings at issue assigned were not assigned for more than five years (they were assigned from February 23, 2021, until the reductions were initially effective from February 28, 2024).

In cases such as this where a disability rating has been in effect for less than 5 years, 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 states that "[r]eexaminations disclosing improvement, physical or mental, in these disabilities will warrant reduction in rating."

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) noted in Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1993) that "several general VA regulations [are] applicable to all rating reductions regardless of whether the rating has been in effect for five years or more" and discussed 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10 and 4.13.

38 C.F.R. § 4.13 provides that "[w]hen any change in evaluation is to be made, the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the conditions, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in thoroughness of the examination or in use of descriptive terms."  

Following quotation of this regulation, the Court stated in Brown that the "Board [is] required in any rating-reduction case to ascertain, based upon review of the entire recorded history of the condition, whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations." 

The Court also stated, following quotation of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2 and 4.10, that "in any rating-reduction case not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work."

The Court additionally stated, regarding the burden of proof in a rating reduction case, that "the Board was required to establish, by a preponderance of evidence and in compliance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a), that a rating reduction was warranted."

More recently, the Court stated in Stern v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51, 59 (2021) that "Brown established that two factual findings must be made for a valid reduction of a non-protected disability rating: (1) actual improvement in the disability and (2) that improvement reflects 'improvement in the...ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.'"

Procedural History

"This is a rating reduction case, not a rating increase case."  Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991).  

A July 2018 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for LLE radiculopathy and assigned a 10 percent rating under DC 8520.  An October 2019 rating decision also granted service connection for LLE radiculopathy and assigned a 20 percent rating under DC 8520.  A November 2019 rating decision found clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the October 2019 rating decision that granted service connection a second time for LLE radiculopathy.  This rating decision also assigned a 10 percent rating under DC 8520.

A May 2021 rating decision granted an increased 20 percent rating for LLE radiculopathy, now under DC 8720, effective February 23, 2021.  This rating was noted to be based on moderate incomplete paralysis.

The May 2021 rating decision also granted entitlement to service connection for RLE radiculopathy and assigned a 20 percent rating under DC 8720, effective February 23, 2021.  This rating was also noted to be based on moderate incomplete paralysis.

The appellant filed a June 2022 increased rating claim for his service-connected back disability (lumbar degenerative disc disease, status post laminectomy and spinal fusion; herein lumbar spine disability).  This claim was addressed in an October 2022 rating decision, which also decreased from 20 percent to 10 percent the ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy.  The appellant requested a higher-level review of the October 2022 rating decision in October 2022.  A December 2022 rating decision was issued in response, which found that the prior reduction of the LLE and RLE radiculopathy ratings were not proper.  The 20 percent ratings under DC 8720 were restored.

The rating decision stated that "[w]hen comparing the examination on May 10, 2021, with the July 18, 2022, examination there was no improvement in this condition, therefore the reduction was not proper."  The 20 percent ratings were noted to be assigned based on moderate incomplete paralysis.

The current claims on appeal stem from a January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The appellant requested service connection for a new disability of peripheral neuropathy.  The appellant stated "[a]fter my [back] surgery both of my feet went numb and would be painful to walk on.  I was told it would go away 1 year after my surgery.  It has been over 3 years now and my feet are still numb and very, very, painful while walking, sleeping and just sitting.  This has made life hard to live and not able to be active."

The AOJ seemed to interpret and develop the January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ as increased rating claims for the LLE and RLE radiculopathy ratings under DC 8720.  The March 2024 rating decision on appeal decreased the prior 20 percent ratings under DC 8720 to 10 percent under DC 8520.  The rating decision did not result in a decrease of the appellant's combined disability rating.

The service-connected disabilities were also recharacterized as being sciatic radiculopathy (presumably for clarity in light of the separate grant of service connection for femoral radiculopathy in the same rating decision).  The effective date of the reduction was February 28, 2024, which was noted to be the date of a VA examination.  This VA examination was the only evidence discussed by the AOJ in the reduction rating decision.  The 10 percent ratings were stated to be based on mild incomplete paralysis.  It is noted that the AOJ did not address whether there was (or find) an improvement in the appellant's LLE and RLE sciatic radiculopathy.  

Given the procedural history outlined, the issues on appeal at this time are whether the reduction of the disability rating for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve were proper.  See Hedgepeth v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 318, 323 (2018) ("Where a veteran's disability rating is reduced, the Board must determine whether the reduction of the veteran's disability rating was proper and must not phrase the issue in terms of whether the veteran was entitled to an increased rating, including whether the veteran was entitled to restoration of a previous rating").

Analysis

Upon review, the reduction of the disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve under DC 8720 were not proper and accordingly the prior 20 percent disability ratings are restored, effective February 28, 2024.

The reductions at issue were not proper because the evidence did not establish that an improvement in the disabilities at issue (LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve) actually occurred.

As referenced above, in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal the AOJ reduced the relevant disability ratings and only discussed a February 2024 VA examination report.  Comparing this VA examination report to the July 2022 VA examination report, it is not clear that improvement actually occurred in the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.  The July 2022 VA examination report is relevant because it was the most recent VA examination report for the disabilities at issue and because the AOJ used this evidence the last time it addressed the disability ratings at issue, specifically in the December 2022 rating decision that restored the prior 20 percent ratings.

The July 2022 VA examination report was a Back Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), completed by Dr. F.S.  Under the medical history section, it was stated that "now, he experiences numbness in the bottom of the legs and ball bottom of the feet."  Also stated was that "he cannot stand, sit or walk for a long period of time due to pain and there is numbness when kicks in.  He cannot also drive for long to pick up his kids or go to work without the numbness and the extreme pain is kicking in and at times he is not sure if the foot is touching the pedal when driving due to the extreme numbness" and that "[t]he impact of the condition is claimant is worried about picking up kids from school and day care or driving to work, due to the pain is so extreme and the numbness is so extreme that cannot drive at times, worried about being able to keep job due to the job requires to do a lot of walking, and cannot walk for long without the extreme numbness and pain started."

The February 2024 VA examination report was a Peripheral Nerves Conditions DBQ, completed by Dr. M.M.  Under the medical history section, it was stated that "[h]e is still experiencing sharp pain in legs...numbness in feet...and burning sensation in legs."  Also stated was that "[t]he impact of the condition on his ability to perform occupational functioning and ordinary activities was described as -- hard for h[im] to get ready in the morning, his wife helps him.  Painful to walk longer than a minute...It is very difficult for him to interact with his kids.  He is in pain all day and takes medication to lessen the pain."  It was noted that the nerve condition impacted the appellant's ability to work, with limitation of movement due to pain noted.

Comparing the July 2022 DBQ and the February 2024 DBQ, a similar picture was described regarding functional impairment.  Specifically, both DBQs described impairment related to walking.  While the July 2022 DBQ referenced "he cannot... walk for a long period of time due to pain," the February 2024 DBQ stated "[p]ainful to walk longer than a minute."  The reference to it being painful to walk longer than a minute appears to represent a decline in functional ability (i.e., worsening) when compared to the July 2022 DBQ's reference to being unable to walk for a long period of time due to pain.

Moving on to physical examination findings, the July 2022 DBQ and February 2024 DBQs both noted that the appellant did not have muscle atrophy.

The July 2022 DBQ noted muscle strength testing as reduced (4/5, active movement against some resistance) for bilateral hip flexion; knee extension; ankle plantar flexion; ankle dorsiflexion; and great toe extension.  The February 2024 DBQ noted normal muscle strength testing (5/5, normal strength) for bilateral knee extension; ankle plantar flexion; and ankle dorsiflexion.  Accordingly, the February 2024 DBQ did suggest improvement in that normal muscle strength was noted compared to the reduced muscle strength noted by the July 2022 DBQ.

The July 2022 and February 2024 DBQs both noted reflexes (deep tendon reflexes (DTRs)) as normal (2+) for the bilateral knee and ankles.

The July 2022 DBQ noted sensory examination was decreased, but not absent, for the bilateral upper anterior thigh (L2); the thigh/knee (L3/4); the lower leg/ankle (L4/L5/S1); and the foot/toes (L5).  The February 2024 DBQ noted normal sensory examination for the bilateral upper anterior thigh (L2); the thigh/knee (L3/4); and the lower leg/ankle (L4/L5/S1).  Decreased, but not absent, sensory examination was noted for the bilateral foot/toes (L5).  Accordingly, the February 2024 DBQ did suggest improvement in that normal sensory examination was noted for some areas compared to the July 2022 DBQ.  Both DBQs, however, still noted decreased sensation in at least one area (the bilateral foot/toes).

The July 2022 and February 2024 DBQs both noted symptoms of bilateral paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.  The severity of such was noted as mild, and not moderate or severe.  

The July 2022 DBQ noted bilateral intermittent pain (usually dull) and, by way of a marked checkbox for "None," noted that the appellant did not experience bilateral constant pain (may be excruciating at times).

The February 2024 DBQ, in contrast, noted, by way of a marked checkbox for "None," that the appellant did not experience bilateral intermittent pain (usually dull), but did note that he experienced bilateral constant pain (may be excruciating at times).  The severity of this pain was noted as mild, and not moderate or severe.  Accordingly, the February 2024 DBQ indicated worsening of the appellant's disability in that constant pain was noted as compared to the July 2022 DBQ that did not note constant pain but only intermittent pain.

The July 2022 DBQ noted the nerve root involved to be the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  The February 2024 DBQ noted that the appellant had bilateral incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  The severity was noted to be mild.  No explanation was provided for this characterization.  The July 2022 DBQ did not include a similar characterization of the severity of the appellant's condition by the examiner, so a comparison between the examinations is not possible as to this particular data point.

In review, the February 2024 DBQ did not establish that an improvement in the disabilities at issue (LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve) actually occurred.  The same findings were noted as to some symptoms (as to reflexes, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness).  While some improvement was suggested as to some symptoms (as to muscle strength and sensory testing), worsening was suggested as to other symptoms or functional impairment (as to constant pain and walking).  Such mixed findings do not demonstrate actual improvement in disability generally, let alone improvement in the ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

Beyond the February 2024 DBQ, the remaining evidence did not otherwise demonstrate the required improvement necessary for a proper reduction.

As to lay evidence, the appellant did not report an improvement in his disability or symptoms.  In actuality, his statements suggested a disability picture that was static or unchanged.  In this regard, as noted, on the January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ he stated that "[i]t has been over 3 years now and my feet are still numb and very, very, painful while walking, sleeping and just sitting.  This has made life hard to live and not able to be active."  The reference to 3 years and that his feet are "still" numb and painful suggests a static disability picture rather than an improved one.

In addition, other medical records did not clearly demonstrate an improvement in the appellant's disability.  In this regard, VA treatment records reflected that the appellant regularly was seen by a physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) doctor related to his chronic pain.  The most recent notes to the March 13, 2024, rating decision on appeal from this doctor were in January 2024 and March 5, 2024.  

The January 2024 treatment record stated, in a "Concise Longitudinal History" that was the same as in prior records, that "[s]ince his second surgery, he has had severe bilateral foot pain, with sensations of swelling, burning, and tingling."  Specific to this note, under the interval history heading, it was stated that "[p]atient says his back pain has improved with his medications, but his feet continue to be extremely painful."  This language ("continues to be") suggests again a static disability picture rather than an improved one.  The doctor also stated "[h]e was doing better the last time I saw him," which was in August 2023.  This statement indicates a worsening of the appellant's disability picture between August 2023 and January 2024.

The most recent March 2024 PM&R treatment record contained the same longitudinal history information quoted above from the January 2024 record.  Specific to this note, under the interval history heading, it was stated that "[p]atient says he tries to do what he can, but the pain in his feet and legs limits his mobility."  This note did not indicate actual improvement in the appellant's disability.

Overall, the February 2024 DBQ, and the remaining evidence of record, did not establish than an improvement in the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve actually occurred.  Lacking such improvement, this necessarily also indicates that there was not improvement in the appellant's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  Based on the lack of improvement demonstrated, the reductions at issue were not proper.  See Stern v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51, 59 (2021) ("two factual findings must be made for a valid reduction of a non-protected disability rating: (1) actual improvement in the disability and (2) that improvement reflects 'improvement in the...ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work'"); Hedgepeth v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 318, 324 (2018) ("VA may not reduce a veteran's disability evaluation without first finding...that the veteran's service-connected disability has improved to the point that he or she is now better able to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work").

In sum, the reduction of the disability ratings for the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve, under DC 8720, were improper because the evidence of record did not establish that an improvement in the disabilities actually occurred (necessarily indicating that there was also not improvement in the ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work).  As such, the criteria for restoration of 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve, under DC 8720, from February 28, 2024, are met and, to this extent, the appellant's appeal is therefore granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

Entitlement to Initial Disability Ratings in Excess of 10 Percent for LLE and RLE Radiculopathy of the Femoral Nerve

The appellant, or his representative, did not provide any specific contentions as to why a higher rating is warranted for this disability or identify a specific disability rating that is appropriate.  On the March 2024 NOD, the appellant referenced the LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve ratings and stated regarding an area of disagreement that "[w]hen I was examined I said the pain was severe to moderate."

Procedural History

Similar to the reduction issues discussed above, the current claims on appeal stem from a January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The appellant requested service connection for a new disability of peripheral neuropathy.

In response to this claim, the AOJ issued the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  In this decision, service connection was granted for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve and separate 10 percent ratings were assigned under DC 8526, effective January 10, 2024 (noted as the date of receipt of claim/intent to file).  The assigned ratings were noted to be based on mild incomplete paralysis.

In review, this claim is an initial rating claim on appeal from the March 2024 rating decision that granted entitlement to service connection.  Based on the procedural history, the relevant review period for this claim is from January 10, 2024 (the date service connection was granted) to March 14, 2024 (the date notification was mailed of the March 2024 rating decision).

Legal Criteria Generally for Initial/Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.

Where entitlement to compensation has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Where an appeal is based on an initial rating for a disability, however, evidence contemporaneous with the claim and the initial rating decision are most probative of the degree of disability existing when the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an original rating on appeal was erroneous."  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  In either case, if later evidence indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time.  Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. At 126; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (noting that staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct time periods in which a disability exhibits symptoms that warrant different ratings).  When adjudicating an increased rating claim, the relevant time period for consideration is the time period one year before the claim was filed.  Hart, 21 Vet. App. At 509.

38 C.F.R. § 4.3 states "[w]hen after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant."  38 C.F.R. § 4.7 states "[w]here there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned."

Legal Criteria Specific to LLE and RLE Radiculopathy of the Femoral Nerve

As noted, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve has been rated under DC 8526 (for paralysis of the anterior crural nerve (femoral)).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

Under DC 8526, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis.  A 40 percent rating, the highest schedular rating available under the DC, is warranted for complete paralysis of quadriceps extensor muscles.    

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).  

Analysis 

Upon review, entitlement to increased initial disability ratings of 20 percent for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerves are warranted.

As noted, the appellant was assigned 10 percent ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526.  The next higher 20 percent rating under DC 8526 is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis.  After resolving any reasonable doubt in the appellant's favor, the appellant's radiculopathy disability pictures are found to more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The appellant was afforded one relevant VA examination during the review period in February 2024 and a Peripheral Nerves Conditions DBQ was completed by Dr. M.M.  This DBQ is found to be the most probative evidence of record as to the severity of the appellant's disability picture during the review period, as such was based on an in-person examination by a medical professional who documented relevant findings that relate to the applicable rating criteria.

The majority of the relevant information from the February 2024 DBQ was outlined above as part of the decision of the reduction issues.  Additional relevant information is that the DBQ noted that the appellant had bilateral incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  The severity was noted to be mild.  No explanation was provided for this characterization.

While the clinician's characterization of the appellant's femoral nerve paralysis has been considered, it is afforded only limited probative value as to the severity of the appellant's disability picture in this case because there is no explanation provided for such characterization.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion...that contributes probative value to a medical opinion").

In review of the frequency and severity of pain noted by the DBQ, along with the functional impairment described, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve disability pictures are found to more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis.  In this regard, as outlined above, the DBQ noted "sharp pain in legs...numbness in feet...and burning sensation in legs."  Also stated was that "[t]he impact of the condition on his ability to perform occupational functioning and ordinary activities was described as -- hard for h[im] to get ready in the morning, his wife helps him.  Painful to walk longer than a minute...It is very difficult for him to interact with his kids.  He is in pain all day and takes medication to lessen the pain."  It was noted that the nerve condition impacted the appellant's ability to work, with limitation of movement due to pain noted.  The DBQ also noted bilateral constant pain (may be excruciating at times).

Other evidence also reflected a disability picture that more nearly approximated moderate incomplete paralysis.  As quoted, the appellant stated on the January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that "[a]fter my [back] surgery both of my feet went numb and would be painful to walk on.  I was told it would go away 1 year after my surgery.  It has been over 3 years now and my feet are still numb and very, very, painful while walking, sleeping and just sitting.  This has made life hard to live and not able to be active."  

VA treatment records contained similar information.  As discussed, January and March 2024 VA treatment records both stated that "[s]ince his second surgery, he has had severe bilateral foot pain, with sensations of swelling, burning, and tingling."  The January 2024 record also stated "[p]atient says his back pain has improved with his medications, but his feet continue to be extremely painful" and the March 2024 record stated that "[p]atient says he tries to do what he can, but the pain in his feet and legs limits his mobility."

Another factor that indicates that the appellant's disability picture more nearly approximates moderate incomplete paralysis relates to the appellant's use of medication.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted that "[h]e is currently taking Pregabalin 300 mg twice a day, Tizanidine 4 mg 1 tablet 3 times a day, Nabumetone 500 mg twice a day and Buprenorphine patch 20 mcg wear all the time."  A March 1, 2024, VA primary care treatment record contained an active outpatient medications list that included buprenorphine (an opiod) patches for chronic pain and pregabalin to be taken daily.  January 2024 and March 2024 PM&R VA treatment records noted treatment of BuTrans, which is a brand name for buprenorphine.  A March 2024 VA treatment record noted the appellant's main concern of "generalized pain...legs" and that this concern was most important because "maxed out on pain medications."  The February 2024 DBQ also stated the appellant "is in pain all day and takes medication to lessen the pain."  Accordingly, the DBQ indicated that the appellant experienced an ameliorative effect of his medication of lessened pain.

In Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012), the Court stated that "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria."  The rating criteria in this case do not specifically contemplate medication.  In Ingram v. Collins __Vet. App. __ (2025), the Court stated that "because the applicable diagnostic codes (DCs)...do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation."  Applying Jones and Ingram, the Board is tasked with discounting beneficial medication effects (i.e., ameliorative effects) when assigning a rating.  

In this case, as noted, the February 2024 DBQ indicated that the appellant experienced an ameliorative effect of his medication of lessened pain.  Discounting the beneficial medication effects would mean that the appellant's pain would not be lessened, or, in other words, it would be increased or worse.  It is noted that the February 2024 DBQ, which presumably did not discount beneficial medication effects, noted bilateral constant pain (may be excruciating at times) as being as mild.  When the beneficial medication effects are discounted, the appellant's pain would be increased or worse than the mild constant pain noted on the DBQ.  Overall, discounting the beneficial medication effects in this case further supports the conclusion that the appellant's disability pictures more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis.  

In sum, throughout the review period, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve disability pictures more nearly approximated moderate incomplete paralysis.  As such, throughout the review period dating to January 10, 2024, the criteria for initial disability ratings of 20 percent for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 were met and, to this extent, the appellant's claims are therefore granted.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

Entitlement to an Effective Date Prior to January 10, 2024, for the Grant of 20 Percent Disability Ratings for LLE and RLE Radiculopathy of the Femoral Nerve

While, as explained, initial 20 percent ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 are warranted throughout the review period effective January 10, 2024, these ratings are not warranted prior to this date.

Service connection for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve was granted effective January 10, 2024, and on appeal are initial rating claims.  An earlier effective date for the initial ratings is not warranted because the assigned effective date was the date of service connection, and an initial rating cannot be assigned prior to the effective date of service connection.  See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 245 (2019) ("compensation cannot be paid for a disability, at any evaluation level, before the effective date of service connection for the disability").

Stated differently, applying the default effective date rule, the appropriate effective date is the date of claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a) ("Unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, the effective date of an award based on an initial claim...of compensation...shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor"); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 ("Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of...compensation...based on an initial claim...will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later").

Here, the date entitlement arose for an initial rating cannot be earlier than the date of service connection and thus January 10, 2024, is the earliest possible date for when entitlement arose.  As such, even assuming (without deciding) that there was an earlier relevant date of claim prior to January 10, 2024, the appropriate effective date would be the later date when entitlement arose, which cannot be earlier than January 10, 2024, in this case.

In sum, this decision has granted initial 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526, effective January 10, 2024; this is the date of service connection for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve and an earlier effective date for the initial ratings is not warranted prior to the date of service connection.  As such, the criteria for an effective date prior to January 10, 2024, for the grant of initial 20 percent disability ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526, were not met, and, to this extent, the appellant's claims are denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Entitlement to Initial Disability Ratings in excess of 20 Percent for LLE and RLE Radiculopathy of the Femoral Nerve

While, as explained, initial 20 percent ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 are warranted throughout the review period effective January 10, 2024, even higher ratings are not warranted.

As noted, the appellant has (as granted herein) been assigned 20 percent ratings for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 based on disability pictures that more nearly approximates moderate incomplete paralysis.  Assigning this rating considered discounting the appellant's beneficial medication effects.

For DC 8526, the next higher 30 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis.  The appellant's disability pictures did not more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis.

Recall that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance, with consideration also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120, 4.123, 4.124.

Regarding impairment of motor function, the February 2024 DBQ stated that "[t]he impact of the condition on his ability to perform occupational functioning and ordinary activities was described as -- hard for h[im] to get ready in the morning, his wife helps him.  Painful to walk longer than a minute."  It was noted that the nerve condition impacted the appellant's ability to work, with limitation of movement due to pain noted.  As such, this DBQ indicated impairment of motor function related to walking and movement (the DBQ did also note that the appellant had a normal gait).

Regarding trophic changes, such was not shown during the relevant period.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted no trophic changes.

Regarding sensory disturbance, such was shown during the review period.  In general, the findings reflected some normal findings and one decreased finding but did not reflect absent findings.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted normal sensory examination for the bilateral upper anterior thigh (L2); the thigh/knee (L3/4); and the lower leg/ankle (L4/L5/S1).  Decreased, but not absent, sensory examination was noted for the bilateral foot/toes (L5).

Regarding loss of reflexes, evidence during the review period did not show this.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted reflexes (DTRs) as normal (2+) for the bilateral knee and ankles.

Regarding pain, such was shown during the review period.  The February 2024 DBQ noted bilateral constant pain (may be excruciating at times), which was described as mild.  

Other symptoms were shown during the relevant period that are closely related to pain, specifically paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness.  The February 2024 DBQ noted for the bilateral lower extremities mild, but not moderate or severe, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness.  

Regarding muscle atrophy, such was not shown during the relevant period.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted no muscle atrophy.

Similarly, muscle strength was not shown to be decreased during the relevant period.  In this regard, the February 2024 DBQ noted normal muscle strength testing (5/5, normal strength) for bilateral knee extension; ankle plantar flexion; and ankle dorsiflexion.

In addition, the February 2024 DBQ noted that the appellant had bilateral incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, with the severity was noted to be mild.   As noted, there was no explanation provided for such characterization and accordingly this notation is afforded only limited probative value.

Overall, upon review of the entirety of the relevant evidence, the appellant's disability picture did not more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis.

The appellant's disability was manifested by impairment of motor function related to walking and movement, sensory disturbance, pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.  Constant pain was shown, which was characterized by the February 2024 DBQ as mild.  As explained, medication lessened the appellant's pain and such beneficial medication effects were discounted in the finding that the appellant's disability picture more nearly approximated moderate incomplete paralysis.

The findings shown, however, did not more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis.  Sensory disturbance was shown to be decreased, but not absent, for one area tested and also to be normal for other areas tested.  Impairment of motor function related to walking and movement was noted, but the appellant's gait was also noted as normal.  Paresthesias and/or dysesthesias were shown to be mild, but not moderate or severe.  The appellant's disability picture was not shown to be manifested by trophic changes, loss of reflexes, or muscle atrophy (or decreased muscle strength).  

The appellant (or his representative) did not specifically contend that he had severe incomplete paralysis during the relevant period or present any specific argument as to why a higher rating is warranted.  The most probative evidence of record did not indicate that the appellant's disability picture more nearly approximated that of severe incomplete paralysis for the femoral nerve during the relevant review period and thus higher ratings under DC 8526 are not warranted.

In sum, throughout the review period, the appellant's LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve disability pictures did not more nearly approximate severe incomplete paralysis.  As such, throughout the review period, the criteria for disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for LLE and RLE radiculopathy of the femoral nerve under DC 8526 were not met and, to this extent, the appellant's claims are therefore denied.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8526.

Entitlement to Service Connection for OSA

The appellant, and the record, have raised various theories of service connection, to include direct service connection and secondary service connection related to multiple service-connected disabilities.  On the March 2024 NOD, the appellant stated "[i]ssues in service and a lot now.  VA issued CPAP."

It is noted that in the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ addressed this claim on the merits.  This is interpreted as an implicit finding that new and relevant evidence had been received (a prior May 2021 rating decision had denied this claim).  In light of this favorable finding, the Board will address this claim on the merits.

Legal Criteria

"Veterans may claim benefits for disabilities connected to their military service subject to statutory and regulatory requirements."  See George v. McDonough, 596 U.S. 740, 742 (2022).  Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38?U.S.C. §?1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). 

Generally, in order to establish direct service connection, three elements must be established: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury, which is often referenced as the "nexus" element.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

Secondary service connection is warranted for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability or for disability that was aggravated (increased in severity) by a service-connected disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

"When evaluating a veteran's claim for service-related disability benefits, the [VA] applies a unique standard of proof known as the 'benefit-of-the-doubt rule.'"  See Bufkin v. Collins, 604 U.S. __ (2025).  In this regard, 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) states that "[w]hen there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, [VA] shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant" and 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 states that "[w]hen...a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  By reasonable doubt is meant one which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim."  See also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) ("[I]f the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt").

Analysis

Upon review, and after resolving any reasonable doubt in the appellant's favor, entitlement to service connection for OSA is warranted.

Initially, the December 2023 rating decision on appeal included relevant favorable findings.  First, a favorable finding was that the appellant had been diagnosed with OSA, with citation to a November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ.

The rating decision also favorable found that the appellant serviced in Bahrain and Djibouti; that he was exposed to burn pits and other toxins during service; and that he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

Multiple medical opinions were obtained related to OSA.

First, of record is a negative May 2021 direct service connection opinion.  This opinion was provided by D.P., Physician Assistant.  This clinician also examined the appellant and completed a May 2021 Sleep Apnea DBQ.  On that DBQ, under the medial history section, it was stated:

Claimant's condition started in 2[01]4 while at Virginia/Bahrain; he was not sure how it started when was not having much sleep after undergoing a surgery in 2015 due to his back issues and being on different medication.  Initially he had lack of sleep, tired during the day, a[n]d fall asleep while driving"

The rationale that accompanying the negative direct service connection opinion stated:

The Veteran has a diagnosis of (a) sleep apnea that is less likely than not incurred in or caused by (the) sleep issues during service.  Record dated 26 MARCH 2016 claimant stated trouble sleeping since back problems in 2015. Sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax.  These muscles support the soft palate, the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate (uvula), the tonsils, the side walls of the throat and the tongue.  When these muscles relax, airway narrows or closes as you breathe in and can't get enough air.  Based on the history sleeping problem was due to back and does not have causal relationship with the pathology of sleep apnea.

Review of this rationale indicated that the clinician, essentially, opined that in-service sleep issues related to the appellant's back problems and that his back problems did not cause sleep apnea.

Also of record is a negative November 2023 TERA opinion.  This opinion was provided by C.Y., Nurse Practitioner.  This clinician also examined the appellant and completed a November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ.  On that DBQ, under the medical history section, it was stated that the condition began "[a]round 2000" and that the symptoms when the condition began were "[s]noring, headache, throat pain, daytime sleepiness."  

The rationale accompanying the negative TERA opinion was not specific to the TERA issue.  The AOJ requested a clarifying opinion from the clinician, stating in a November 2023 Exam Rework Scheduling Request that "[e]xaminer described what sleep apnea is and the symptoms of sleep apnea.  Please review medical opinion and provide clear rationale related specifically to the relationship (or lack thereof) between [OSA] and the veterans TERA of exposure to burn pits and fine particulate matter."  Essentially, the AOJ found the November 2023 negative TERA opinion inadequate.  

The same clinician provided a new opinion in December 2023, stating:

The Veteran has a diagnosis of sleep apnea that is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the exposures to burn pits and fine particulate matter.  Sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax. These muscles support the soft palate, the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate (uvula), the tonsils, the side walls of the throat and the tongue.  When these muscles relax, airway narrows or closes as you breathe in and can't get enough air. 

Risk Factors for OSA includes excess weight/obesity, neck circumference, smoking, being male, being older, family history, use of alcohol, sedatives or tranquilizers, nasal congestion, medical conditions such as high blood pressure, type II diabetes and congestive heart failure.  Review of medical records show that the veteran has risk factors outside of military service such as excess weight/obesity, being male gender, Hypertension, Type II Diabetes and Allergic Rhinitis.

There is no scientific or medical evidence that shows a relationship between the TERA and developing OSA, furthermore medical records show that the veteran has several risk factors of developing OSA.  The claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.

Review of this rationale indicated that the clinician, essentially, opined that the appellant's OSA was not related to his in-service TERA because there is no scientific or medical relationship between the TERA and the development of OSA.

To summarize the opinions discussed so far, of record is a negative May 2021 direct service connection opinion and a negative December 2023 TERA opinion.

As to the issue of direct service connection, the May 2021 opinion is found to be insufficient to decide this issue.  In this regard, the May 2021 rationale discussed issues that had been identified as relevant at the time of that examination, such as whether OSA was related to a reported onset in approximately 2014-2015 related to back problems.  The subsequent November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ contained information that was different than the prior May 2021 Sleep Apnea DBQ, to include as to the date of onset (2000 compared to 2014) and the additional identification of in-service symptoms of snoring, headache, and throat pain.  The December 2023 TERA opinion only addressed whether OSA was related to an in-service TERA and did not more generally provide a direct service connection opinion, to include addressing the lay contentions regarding earlier onset and additional symptoms noted in the November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ.  As such, the May 2021 opinion is insufficient to decide the direct service connection issue.  See generally Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) ("The examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion"); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) ("Once [VA] undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim... [VA] must provide an adequate one").

The issue of secondary service connection has also been raised in this case.  The May 2021 clinician provided a negative secondary service connection causation opinion related to the back, with a rationale stating in part that "[l]umbar degenerative disc disease with status post lumbar laminectomy (also claimed as post laminectomy syndrome, chronic lumbar back pain, L5-S1 hemilaminectomy and microdiscectomy, lumbar spondylosis, lumbago, and herniated intervertebral disc lumbar[)] do not have causal relationship with the pathology of sleep apnea."  In review, the opinion indicated that appellant's back disability did not have a causal relationship with OSA. 

As to the issue of secondary service connection and the appellant's service-connected lumbar spine disability, the May 2021 opinion is found to be insufficient to decide this issue.  The opinion itself related to the issue of secondary service connection causation only.  The rationale did not clearly address secondary service connection aggravation.  The use of the phrase "causal relationship" does not clearly encompass aggravation and focused on causation.  See Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241, 251 (2021) (discussing secondary service connection opinions where "[t]he focus [was] on the underlying cause of the [claimed disability]" and stating that "[t]hese opinions provide no insight into the relevant inquiry, which is whether service-connected [disability] aggravated any functional impairment associated with the veteran's [claimed disability]").  Overall, the May 2021 VA opinion did not adequately address the issue of secondary service connection aggravation. See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018) ("We reiterate that aggravation of a condition by a service-connected disability is independent of direct causation.  The Board must ensure that medical examinations are adequate on that question").  As such, the May 2021 opinion is insufficient to decide the secondary service connection issue related to the appellant's service-connected lumbar spine disability.

In addition, no secondary service connection opinions were obtained in regard to other disabilities and issues when such was warranted.

As noted, the negative December 2023 TERA opinion stated in part "[r]eview of medical records show that the veteran has risk factors outside of military service such as excess weight/obesity, being male gender, Hypertension, Type II Diabetes and Allergic Rhinitis" and "furthermore medical records show that the veteran has several risk factors of developing OSA."  Accordingly, this opinion identified five present OSA risk factors: (1) excess weight/obesity; (2) being male gender; (3) hypertension; (4) Type II Diabetes; and (5) allergic rhinitis.

The appellant is service-connected for two of the three risk factor disabilities identified, hypertension and allergic rhinitis.  As such, this opinion reasonably raised the issue of whether service-connection for OSA is warranted secondary to hypertension and/or allergic rhinitis.

In addition, as to the identified risk factor of excess weight/obesity, the record reasonably raised the issue of secondary service connection for OSA with obesity as the intermediate step to a service-connected lumbar spine disability and/or an acquired psychiatric disability (specifically, the appellant is service-connected for major depressive disorder).  See Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241, 248 (2021) ("considerations that could give rise to a reasonably raised theory of secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step may include, but are not limited to, mobility limitations or reduced physical activity as a result of a service-connected physical disability (in particular, orthopedic conditions or chronically painful conditions); reduced physical activity or inability to follow a course of exercise or diet as a result of service-connected mental disability").

For reference, the appellant's weight was noted as 148 pounds in December 1995 (on his enlistment examination report); as 195 pounds in March 2016 (on his retirement examination report); as 224 pounds in August 2019 (in a federal treatment record; recall August 2019 was the date of the PTSD DBQ discussed above); and 217 pounds in August 2020 (documented on a sleep study report that included an impression of OSA).  

As background, a relevant precedential VA General Counsel opinion addressing secondary service connection and obesity is VAOPGCPREC 1-2017. This opinion is binding on the Board.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c) ("The Board shall be bound in its decisions by...the precedent opinions of the chief legal officer of the Department").

VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 held that "[o]besity may be an 'intermediate step' between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis."  The opinion addressed a hypothetical of "whether a veteran could establish entitlement to service connection for hypertension if a veteran's service-connected back disability causes obesity due to lack of exercise, which leads to hypertension."  The opinion stated regarding this hypothetical that:

adjudicators would have to resolve the following issues: (1) whether the service-connected back disability caused the veteran to become obese; (2) if so, whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing hypertension; and (3) whether the hypertension would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected [*39]  back disability. If these questions are answered in the affirmative, the hypertension may be service connected on a secondary basis.

The Court addressed VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 in Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020) and indicated that service connection may also be granted based on secondary service connection aggravation involving obesity as an intermediate step.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 307 (2020) ("to be clear: Despite [VAOPGCPREC 1-2017's] silence regarding aggravation, the Board, in accordance with § 3.310(b), must consider aggravation in this context when the theory is explicitly raised by the veteran or reasonably raised by the record").  The Court provided the framework for the issues to be resolved in this situation by substituting aggravation for causation in the hypothetical addressed by VAOPGCPREC 1-2017, specifically stating "(1) whether the service-connected back disability aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the aggravation of obesity as a result of service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing hypertension; and (3) whether the hypertension would have occurred but for obesity aggravated by the service-connected back disability."

In this case, relevant records to the obesity as an intermediate step issue included a June 2016 Mental Disorders DBQ.  This DBQ noted under the relevant mental health history section that "[t]he [V]eteran reports that most of his symptoms continue at this time.  He has suffered a recent 20-pound weight gain."  An August 2019 PTSD DBQ noted under the relevant mental health history section that "[h]e reports reduced interests in routine activities...a low energy level, an increased appetite with a 50-pound weight gain in the past (which he has not been able to lose)."  In a different part of the DBQ, the clinician (a psychologist) specifically noted increased appetite as a symptom attributable to the appellant's mental disorder.  These DBQs reasonably raised the issue of whether service-connection for OSA is warranted secondary to an acquired psychiatric disability (with obesity as an intermediate step).  The appellant also specifically raised the issue of whether sleep apnea was secondary to his acquired psychiatric disability on a December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, though his contention did not raise the obesity theory.

In addition, a January 2023 VA opinion addressed the separate disability of diabetes.  Part of the rationale stated that "[t]he contention is that due to the [service-connected lumbar spine disability] the [V]eteran was unable to exercise in which caused him to become obese which led to the development of DMII."  While strictly about diabetes, the same contention can reasonably apply to OSA, i.e., that due the lumbar spine disability the appellant was unable to exercise, which caused him to become obese, which led to the development of OSA.  See VA Treatment Record, May 2023 ("use to be a runner but after 2 back surgeries he cannot run").  As such this opinion is found to reasonably raise the issue of whether service-connection for OSA is warranted secondary to a lumbar spine disability (with obesity as an intermediate step).  While a negative May 2021 secondary service connection causation opinion addressed the lumbar spine disability, the obesity issue was not discussed or addressed. 

In review, the record reasonably raised the issue of whether service-connection for OSA is warranted secondary to hypertension, allergic rhinitis, an acquired psychiatric disability, and/or a lumbar spine disability.  The AOJ did not obtain opinions addressing these issues when it should have pursuant to VA's duty to assist.  In addition, the direct service connection obtained was insufficient to decide this issue for the reasons discussed and the AOJ accordingly should have obtained a new direct service connection opinion.  The failure to obtain these opinions represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand would be warranted to obtain these opinions.

Instead, reasonable doubt will be resolved in the appellant's favor, and it is found that there is currently sufficient evidence to determine that service connection is warranted for OSA.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); see also Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) ("it would not be permissible for VA to undertake...additional development if a purpose was to obtain evidence against an appellant's case").

In this regard, as noted, the negative December 2023 TERA opinion identified five present OSA risk factors: (1) excess weight/obesity; (2) being male gender; (3) hypertension; (4) Type II Diabetes; and (5) allergic rhinitis.  The appellant is service-connected for two of the three risk factor disabilities identified, hypertension and allergic rhinitis.  Regarding a third identified risk factor, excess weight/obesity, the evidence indicated that the appellant's acquired psychiatric disability had a symptom of overrating and that the appellant's ability to exercise in the form of running was reduced following surgery related to his lumbar spine disability.  Overeating and reduced exercise are commonly understood to potentially result in excess weight/obesity.  Putting it all together, the evidence at least suggested that the appellant's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability and lumbar spine disability caused the identified risk factor of excess weight/obesity.  As such, three of the five identified risk factors are, or relate to, service-connected disabilities.  

In review, after resolving reasonable doubt in the appellant's favor, the December 2023 opinion is found sufficient to find that the appellant's OSA was caused by his service-connected hypertension, allergic rhinitis, acquired psychiatric disability, and lumbar spine disability.  As such, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA were met and, to this extent, the appellant's claim is therefore granted.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Entitlement to Service Connection for Arthritis of the Left and Right Hands

Upon review, dismissal is warranted for the claims for entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the left and right hands.

Procedural History

The appellant filed an October 19, 2022, claim for entitlement to service connection for arthritis and referenced his hands.  

A February 2023 rating decision characterized, and deferred, claims of service connection for arthritis of the left and right hands.

A May 2023 rating decision denied these claims.  

The appellant submitted a May 2023 VA Form 20-0996 (Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review) in response to the May 2023 rating decision and the left- and right-hand claims.

A September 15, 2023, rating decision stated that "[a] duty to assist error has been identified during the higher-level review for" the left- and right-hand arthritis claims.  A related September 15, 2023, higher-level review return (VA Form 20-0999) further addressed these claims.

The appellant submitted the March 2024 NOD at issue, with the relevant date of decision for the left- and right-hand claims noted as May 2023.

An August 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for left- and right-hand arthritis (specifically, service connection was granted, with separate ratings assigned, for arthritis (characterized for some digits as degenerative arthritis and for some as osteoarthritis) of all 10 digits of the left and right hands).

An effective date was assigned of September 15, 2023.  This was noted to be "the day VA received your claim."  This appears to be factually inaccurate, with the referenced date of September 15, 2023, being the date of the higher-level review rating decision and higher-level review return (VA Form 20-0999) and not a date of claim.

Analysis 

As a general matter, the grant of a claim of service connection constitutes an award of full benefits sought on an appeal of the denial of a service connection claim.  See Seri v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 441, 447 (2007).  Where an appealed claim for service connection is granted during the pendency of the appeal, a second NOD must thereafter be timely filed to initiate appellate review of "downstream" issues such as the compensation level (i.e., disability rating) assigned for the disability or the effective date of service connection.  See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  Without an issue on appeal, the Board does not have jurisdiction. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104; see Barrera v. Gober, 122 F.3d 1030, 1032 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

Accordingly, the issues of entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the left and right hands are no longer before the Board and these appeals are thus dismissed.

A recent Court case, Johnson v. Collins __Vet. App. __ (2025), is specifically acknowledged.  In that case, the AOJ denied service connection for hypertension in a legacy rating decision and this denial was subsequently appealed to the Board.  While that appeal was pending, the AOJ granted service connection for hypertension in a later AMA rating decision based on application of a newly passed law (the PACT Act).  The Court stated that "[t]he RO's grants of service connection under the PACT Act did not resolve the pending Board appeal."

The current case is found to be distinguishable from Johnson.

In Johnson, the Court emphasized two issues that are not applicable to the current case.  First, it was emphasized that two distinct claim streams were involved in Johnson.  In this regard, it was stated that:

there are two distinct claim streams in Mr. Johnson's case.  A pre-PACT Act claim stream began in May 2016...in that claim stream the veteran appealed the RO's denials of service connection to the Board by filing an NOD in March 2018.  A separate PACT Act claim stream began in October 2022, when Mr. Johnson filed service-connection claims based on the liberalizing provision of the PACT Act...in March 2023 the RO, based on PACT Act provisions, granted service connection for the relevant disabilities.

In the current case, the situation is not the same because there is only one claim stream and not two as was emphasized in Johnson.  Both the May 2023 rating decision and the August 2024 rating decision stemmed from the same October 2022 claim.  

The August 2024 rating decision stated "[s]ervice connection...was denied in a prior rating decision dated February 15, 2023.... This decision was appealed within one year and the issue has been continuously pursued."  As outlined above, the referenced February 2023 rating decision actually deferred the relevant issues, and the later May 2023 rating decision denied the relevant issues.  In any event, despite this error, the August 2024 rating decision acknowledged that the issues had been continuously pursued and, in review of the procedural history above, it is clear that the May 2023 rating decision and the August 2024 rating decision stemmed from the same October 2022 claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c) (titled "Continuously pursued issues").  This distinguishes the facts of this case from Johnson.

Second, the Court in Johnson emphasized that the second claim stream that granted service connection did so based on the application of a liberalizing law (the PACT Act).  For example, the Court stated "Mr. Johnson's case...raised two separate theories of entitlement in separate claim streams.  And, significantly, one of those theories was based on the new PACT Act" and also that "the PACT Act clearly is a liberalizing law."  In this case, there is no indication that a liberalizing law was applied in the August 2024 rating decision that granted service connection.  In this regard, the rating decision noted that service connection for the various hand disabilities were granted as "directly related to military service" and did not reference a liberalizing law.

In review, while Johnson is specifically acknowledged, it is found to be distinguishable.  The Court in Johnson emphasized two issues that are not applicable in this case: (1) two different claim streams and (2) a liberalizing law ("As the RO is a lower tribunal, its March 2023 grant of service connection for the claimed disabilities, in a separate and distinct claim stream and based on the liberalizing PACT Act, did not resolve the pre-PACT Act appeal pending before the Board").  These two issues are not present in this case and thus it is distinguishable from Johnson.  Accordingly, dismissal of these claims is appropriate for the reasons explained above.

Also specifically acknowledged is the appellant's representative's April 2024 Appellant's Brief.  In regard to these claims, it was stated that "a higher-level review was initiated on May 30, 2023.  This higher-level review resulted in a duty to assist error...Based on the appellant's claims file, this HLR/DTA claim is still pending and should not have been on this appeal."

In general, concurrent election in the AMA system is prohibited.  In this regard, 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(1) provides three review options following an AOJ decision with respect to a claim.  A higher-level review is one of these options.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A) states "[o]nce a claimant takes an action set forth in paragraph (1), the claimant may not take another action set forth in that paragraph with respect to the same claim or same issue contained within the claim until...the...higher-level review...is adjudicated." See also C.F.R. § 3.2500(b) (titled "Concurrent election prohibited").

In this case, as outlined, following the May 2023 rating decision the appellant submitted a higher-level review request in May 2023.  A September 2023 rating decision identified a duty to assist error upon higher-level review.  Following this rating decision, the bilateral hand arthritis claims were "returned" to the AOJ for readjudication.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(g) ("If the higher-level adjudicator both identifies a duty to assist error that existed at the time of VA's decision on the claim under review and cannot grant the maximum benefit for the claim, the higher-level adjudicator must return the claim for correction of the error and readjudication. Upon receipt, the [AOJ] will expeditiously readjudicate the claim in accordance with 38 U.S.C. 5109B"); 38 U.S.C. § 5109B ("The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to provide for the expeditious treatment by the Veterans Benefits Administration of any claim that is returned by a higher-level adjudicator under section 5104B").

The September 2023 rating decision was the adjudication of the May 2023 higher-level review.  As such, applying 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(A), the appellant was not prohibited, after the September 2023 rating decision, from taking another action because the higher-level review was adjudicated at that time.

In review, when the appellant filed the March 2024 NOD as to the May 2023 rating decision, this did not represent improper concurrent election because the earlier May 2023 higher-level review had been adjudicated in the September 2023 rating decision.  In other words, the higher-level review was no longer pending.  The appellant is allowed to file more than one administrative review (here, a higher-level review and a NOD) to the same May 2023 rating decision.  See Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1, 4 (2023) ("We hold that subsection 5104C(a) plainly provides that a claimant may file more than one administrative review request within 1 year of an initial AOJ decision on a claim, provided that such an administrative review request is not pending concurrently with another administrative review request").  In sum, the March 2024 NOD is found to have been valid when it was received. 

It is noted that, if this conclusion is found to be procedurally or legally incorrect, the end result would be the same: dismissal of the claim (but for the different reason of an improper NOD based on prohibited concurrent election as opposed to the stated reason that the benefit sought on appeal of service connection has already been granted).

Finally, it is noted that, at the time this decision is being issued, it has not been one year since the August 2024 rating decision.  As such, the appellant has multiple review options still available in regard to the August 2024 rating decision, should he choose to request review of or appeal any downstream issues related to the grants of service connection for arthritis of the left and right hands in that decision (to include as to the assigned effective date of service connection or the initial ratings assigned).  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104C; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (both outlining the available review options within one year of an AOJ decision).

Entitlement to Service Connection for Chronic Pain Syndrome, Meralgia Paresthetica 

Upon review, dismissal is warranted for the claim for service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica.

Legal Criteria

"[NODs] shall be in writing [and] shall identify the specific determination with which the claimant disagrees."  38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(2)(A).  "A [NOD] must be properly completed on a form prescribed by the Secretary.  If the [AOJ] decision addressed several issues, the [NOD] must identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees."  38 C.F.R. 20.202(a).  

"The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific determination with which the claimant disagrees."  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d).  "The Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal, but the Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to identify the specific decision and issue or issues therein with which the claimant disagrees."  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

"[A] [NOD] shall be filed within one year from the date of the issuance of notice of the decision of the [AOJ]."  38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(A); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b) ("a claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed [NOD] with a decision by the [AOJ] within one year from the date that the agency mails the notice of the decision").

In Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) addressed 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b) in the context of a legacy case.  For purposes of this decision, it will be assumed (without deciding) that the analysis in Ferko may be extended to the AMA system applicable in this case.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)-(b), 19.2(a)-(c) (addressing the legacy and AMA systems and indicating that the AMA applies to claims in which VA issues a notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019); Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) (Pub. L. No. 115-55).

The Court stated in Ferko:

The one-year deadline in section 7105(b) to file an NOD in the legacy system is not a jurisdictional bar to Board review.  It is an important and mandatory claim-processing rule, but it does not deprive the Board of the authority to consider the merits of an appeal simply because the NOD is received late.  As a nonjurisdictional claim-processing rule, section 7105(b)'s one-year period is amenable to an appropriate exception.  Indeed, this is exactly what a current VA regulation allows, as our caselaw has long held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b) applies to NODs.  That regulation permits extensions to VA's internal deadlines for good cause...

VA need not accept an NOD filed outside that one-year period unless a claimant establishes an adequate excuse for the NOD's untimeliness.

The referenced regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b), states:

Extension of time limit.  Time limits within which claimants or beneficiaries are required to act to perfect a claim or challenge an adverse VA decision may be extended for good cause shown.  Where an extension is requested after expiration of a time limit, the action required of the claimant or beneficiary must be taken concurrent with or prior to the filing of a request for extension of the time limit, and good cause must be shown as to why the required action could not have been taken during the original time period and could not have been taken sooner than it was.

A similar regulation more specifically addresses NODs.  In this regard, 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c) states:

Extension of time of filing.  An extension of the period for filing a [NOD] or a request to modify a [NOD] may be granted for good cause.  A request for such an extension must be in writing and must be filed with the Board.  Whether good cause for an extension has been established will be determined by the Board.

The Court, in Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021), indicated that the Board may not dismiss an appeal for lack of jurisdiction when a claim-processing rule was not followed, but may dismiss such an appeal for other non-jurisdictional reasons if it explains its reasons for doing so.  See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 334 (2021) ("The Court thus remands for the Board to either hear Mr. Hall's appeal or to provide a rationale for declining to do so.  If it dismisses his claim, the Board should identify the governing law, any formal defects in the appeal, whether waiver or forfeiture is a relevant consideration, and any other relevant factors").

In Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37 (2009), the Court, in a legacy case, stated that "VA may waive any issue of timeliness in the filing of a Substantive Appeal, either explicitly or implicitly," with the filing at issue being noted as "not jurisdictional."  See also Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262, 268 (2024) ("Percy held that the deadline for filing a Substantive Appeal in then-section 7105(d)(3)-60 days after issuance of a Statement of the Case-was not a limitation on the Board's subject matter jurisdiction and, hence, was waivable by the Agency").  For purposes of this decision, it will be assumed (without deciding) that the analysis in Percy may be extended to the AMA system applicable in this case.

Analysis 

The appellant submitted three March 2024 NODs (VA Forms 10182) that initiated the current appeals.  On the relevant March 2024 NOD for this claim, the appellant listed an issue of chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica.  The appellant listed as a date of decision for this issue an October 1, 2023, rating decision.  There is, however, no October 1, 2023, rating decision of record at all, let alone one that addressed this issue.  Moreover, no document in the electronic claims file is dated October 1, 2023.

Earlier rating decisions, however, did address the issue of entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica.  A November 2016 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for this disability.  Most recently, a December 2019 rating decision stated, "[t]he claim for service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia par[e]sthetica remains denied because the evidence submitted is not new and relevant."  The appellant was notified of this rating decision by way of a December 2019 notification letter.  This letter was returned to VA as not deliverable in February 2020.  VA remailed the December 2019 notification to a different address in February 2020.  

Initially, this issue could be dismissed on the basis that the March 2024 NOD did not properly identify the specific decision and issue with which the claimant disagrees.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 7105(b)(2)(A), 7105(d); 38 C.F.R. 20.202(a).  In this regard, as noted, the March 2024 NOD listed as a date of decision for this issue October 1, 2023, and no rating decision on this date exists.

Given the earlier rating decisions discussed above that addressed this claim, however, the March 2024 NOD will instead be construed in a liberal manner as an attempted appeal of the earlier, and most recent, December 2019 rating decision that addressed this claim.  See 38 C.F.R. 20.202(a) ("The Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal"). 

Proceeding with the premise that the March 2024 NOD was attempting to appeal the earlier December 2019 rating decision, the March 2024 NOD is found to be untimely.  In this regard, the March 2024 NOD was untimely filed because it was received more than one year after the December 2019 rating decisions (i.e., it was not filed within one year from the date of the issuance of notice of the decision of the AOJ, even based on the remailing of notice in February 2020).  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b)(1)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).

In this case, the appellant did not request an extension of time limit in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b) or 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c).  In addition, the appellant did not provide any information or contention related to cause, let alone good cause, for the untimely filed NOD.

Moreover, the Board did not specifically advise the appellant that he filed a timely appeal as to this issue following receipt of the March 2024 NOD, nor did the Board (or VA generally) take any clear action to lead the appellant to believe that the claim at issue were properly on appeal such that the untimely filing of the NOD could be viewed as waived.

In this regard, following receipt of the March 2024 NOD, the Board sent the appellant three different March 2024 "Docket Letters."  The letters only informed the appellant that his appeal had been placed on the Board's docket, without any mention of any specific issues or clear indication that the multiple March 2024 NODs were timely as to any particular issue.  The Board (or VA generally) did not otherwise take any clear action to suggest to the appellant that the claim at issue in this case was timely filed.  Cf. Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37 (2009) (finding waiver of an untimely filed Substantive Appeal when VA treated the matter as if it was timely filed for more than five years, to include during that time period clear Board action suggesting to the appellant that the Substantive Appeal was timely: "the Board member who rendered the decision on appeal acknowledged that the matter was on appeal and took the appellant's testimony on that matter").  As such, VA is not found to have waived any claim-processing rules and, assuming (without deciding) it is applicable to this AMA case, Percy is found to be distinguishable from the current case.  

In sum, as to the claim of service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, the appellant did not follow a mandatory claim-processing rule, outlined in 38 U.S.C. § 7105(b), that requires a NOD to be filed within one year of the date of the issuance of notice of the decision.  In addition, an extension of time limit was not requested in regard to the filing of the NOD; good cause was not offered by the appellant, or shown by the record, for the untimely filed NOD; and VA did not take action to waive the applicable NOD timeliness requirements.  As such, the criteria for dismissal of the claim of service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, were met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.203.

In addition, it is noted that the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome, meralgia paresthetica, in an August 2024 rating decision.  

As such, for similar reasons as discussed above in relation to the bilateral hand claims, dismissal could also be warranted based on this subsequent grant of service connection. 

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Hoopengardner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.