Citation Nr: A25031333
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 220609-248090
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for common headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1974 to December 1977. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2022 rating decision. In May 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2022 decision. 

In the June 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 decision which was subject to HLR. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for common headaches is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his common headaches disability on the basis that they were shown as chronic in service, with subsequent manifestations of the same disorder at a later date. See July 14, 2022 Appellant's brief. The Veteran reported that his headaches began in 1965, prior to his entry to service. See March 2022 VA Headaches examination report. 

In the May 2022 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ has made several favorable findings: that the Veteran has a current common headaches disability; that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to his service; that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during his service; that the claimed disability pre-existed prior to military service and that the claimed issue was treated during military service. The Board is bound by these favorable findings unless rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran had a VA Headaches examination in March 2022. The examiner opined that the claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The rationale was: 

Migraines can be due to a variety of factors. The vast majority of migraines are idiopathic with completely unexplained causes. The condition is occasionally vascular in nature, hormonal, emotional, genetic, medication related, due to brain lesions/masses or many other causes. I see no supportive documentation in the e-file or the evidence specifically noted above to support such a connection. There is no evidence in the e-file to attribute the condition to any one particular cause nor is there documentation to show that the alleged aggravation was due to any one particular cause. Correlating it without further investigation and testing would be entirely speculative. Attributing aggravation, which is completely subjective in nature, to any one particular cause without proper testing would not be possible. Additionally, no sign of unnatural aggravation was found in record review.

This opinion is inadequate because the examiner relied on an absence of evidence, as opposed to affirmative evidence, to conclude that it was clear and unmistakable that the Veteran's pre-existing common headaches disability was not aggravated beyond its normal progression by service. See Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 239 (2012). 

To rebut the presumption of sound condition, VA must show by clear and unmistakable evidence both that the disease or injury existed prior to service and that the disease or injury was not aggravated by service. The claimant is not required to show that the disease or injury increased in severity during service before VA's duty under the second prong of this rebuttal standard attaches. See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F. 3d 1089 (Fed. Cir. 2004). "Clear and unmistakable evidence" is a more formidable evidentiary burden than the preponderance of the evidence (as likely as) standard. It is an "onerous" evidentiary standard, requiring that the preexistence of a condition and the non-aggravation result be "undebatable." See Cotant v. West, 17 Vet. App. 116, 131 (2003). An examiner must not rely on the insufficiency of the evidence to establish non-aggravation. Otherwise, the burden of proof is improperly placed upon the Veteran instead of VA. Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 235 (2012). VA must rely upon affirmative evidence that proves there was no aggravation. Id.

Furthermore, based upon the VA examiner's report that the question could not be answered "without further investigation and testing" a new examination is necessary.  

Once VA provides an examination, it must be adequate, or VA must notify the Veteran why one will not or cannot be provided. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). As the examiner's opinion is inadequate, the matter is remanded to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate medical opinion. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's common headaches disability claim. The examiner must review the claims file, and take a full medical history of the onset and course of the disability. The examiner must conduct all necessary testing, and report the results in detail. The examiner is asked to answer the following: 

(a.) Did the Veteran's common headaches disability, which existed prior to service, at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least in approximate balance, if not higher) increase in severity during service? The examiner must specifically address the July 7, 1977 complaint of chronic headaches, which was treated with aspirin.

(b.) If the headaches disability increased in severity, was the increase in severity clearly and unmistakably (undebatable) not aggravated by service? 

If the examiner concludes that an increase in disability was due to the natural progression of the disability (as opposed to temporary flare-up of symptoms) identify the affirmative evidence that supports that conclusion.

The examiner is advised that any opinion may not be based on the absence or insufficiency of evidence to establish non-aggravation.

2. If the examiner finds that it there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the common headaches disability was not aggravated by service, then the examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's common headaches disability at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least in approximate balance, if not higher) due to his service? 

The examiner should address the Veteran's assertions that his common headaches disability was shown as chronic during service. See July 7, 1977 complaint of chronic headache treated with aspirin. For a chronic disease to be shown during service or in a presumptive period means that it is "well diagnosed beyond question" or "beyond legitimate question." Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The examiner must provide a full rationale for any opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resort to mere speculation, the examiner should explain in full why this is the case and identify any additional facts or evidence (if any) that would allow for a more definitive opinion.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Susan E. Leary

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.