Citation Nr: A25031697
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453555
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2022, for the grant of a 100 percent evaluation for bipolar disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2022, for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) based on permanent and total disability status is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On February 10, 2022, VA received the Veteran's claim seeking to establish service connection for bipolar disorder, and the Veteran has continuously pursued the claim since then. 

2. An increase in the Veteran's bipolar disorder did not become factually ascertainable prior to November 30, 2022.

3. Prior to November 30, 2022, the Veteran was not permanently and totally disabled for purposes of basic eligibility to DEA benefits.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an earlier effective date than November 30, 2022, for the grant of a 100 precent evaluation for bipolar disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.155, 3.400(o), 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9432.

2. The criteria for an earlier effective date than November 30, 2022, for basic eligibility to DEA based on permanent and total disability status have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 3510; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1991 to November 1994.  

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2023 decision.  In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2022, for the grant of a 100 precent evaluation for bipolar disorder is denied. 

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the grant of the total schedular rating for his bipolar disorder back to the date of his original service connection claim. The Veteran asserts that he has continuously pursued a higher rating since the original service connection claim, and the evidence supports a 100 percent evaluation for the entire period.  See June 2024 argument.  

The Veteran's representative argued that the statements of the Veteran and his spouse, as well as the February 2022 VA examination report reveal a pattern of reckless and inappropriate behavior, and gross impairment in the Veteran's thought process, including weeklong periods of mania. 

In general, VA laws and regulations provide that the effective date of an award of increased evaluation shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of the application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(1).  The Board notes that the effective date of an award of increased compensation may, however, be established at the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if the application for an increased evaluation is received within one year from that date.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).  Determining an appropriate effective date for an increased rating involves an analysis of the evidence to determine (1) when a claim for an increased rating was received and, if possible (2) when the increase in disability actually occurred.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2); see Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 511 (1997). 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), an effective date can be preserved if the claim is continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the notice of a decision was issued.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (c).  If an AMA claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h).  Following notice of a decision on an initial claim or a supplemental claim, continuous pursuit can be established by filing a supplemental claim, requesting higher-level review, or appeal to the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 2.500 (c)(1). 

In the present case, VA received a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim seeking entitlement to service connection for bipolar disorder on February 10, 2022.  The AOJ granted the claim for service connection for bipolar disorder in an April 2022 rating decision, assigning a 70 percent rating, effective February 10, 2022.

On November 30, 2022, VA received an intent to file.  In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the assigned rating for bipolar disorder, which had been addressed in the April 2022 rating decision.  In March 2023, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision that continued the 70 percent rating.  

The Veteran submitted an HLR request in November 2023 seeking a higher rating for his service-connected bipolar disorder.  In a March 2024 HLR rating decision, the AOJ granted a higher, 100 percent rating for bipolar disorder from November 30, 2022.  This is the rating decision on appeal before the Board. 

As noted above, under the AMA, an effective date can be preserved if the claim is continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (c).  Here, the Veteran has continuously pursued the claims from February 10, 2022, the date he submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ, by submitting a supplemental claim, request for HLR, and a VA Form 10182 within the appropriate time periods.  

Thus, the Board will consider that the date of the claim is February 10, 2022, the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h). 

The Board must now determine if the increase in disability was factually ascertainable prior to November 30, 2022.  

The Veteran's bipolar disorder has been rated under Diagnostic Code 9432.  Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), a noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

In a February 2022 statement, the Veteran's spouse indicated that she has been married to the Veteran since 2004.  Although they divorced in 2013, they remarried in 2018.  The Veteran's spouse reported that he has an unstable work history, impulsive and reckless behavior, and makes poor choices.  These incidents included several extra-marital affairs, large and imprudent financial purchases, poorly thought out decisions, wandering off, being easily frustrated, and leaving his job(s).  However, the Veteran was not violent.  Although the Veteran's spouse did not indicate when these events occurred, she indicated that he recently made the impulsive decision to sell his car and requires help in everyday life due to wandering off.  

In support of his original claim, the Veteran submitted several statements from November 2022.  The Veteran indicated that for 40 years, he has been dealing with impairments in social and occupational functioning.  He indicated that this was shown by his multiple marriages, financial instability, and bankruptcies.  He also indicated that his ability to function in these areas have been strained due to an inability to handle stress; work with others; meet the demands of supervisors; inability to establish or maintain relationships; decreased tolerance; anger; compulsive routines; social isolation and withdrawal; poor self-esteem; long term depression; suicidal ideation; failure to complete tasks in timely manner; difficulty understanding tasks; inability to sit still or concentrate for long; distractibility; and mood variation between being completely manic to being unable to leave a room.  The Veteran indicated that his inability to handle stress caused him to fight with supervisors.  He also had days where he could not get out of bed.  

In a separate November 2022 statement, the Veteran endorsed similar symptoms, as well as anxiety; chronic sleep problems; danger of hurting self or others; difficulty making decisions; emotional numbing; inability to share feelings; guilt; hypervigilance or obsessively checking; inappropriate behavior; lack of emotion; lack of friends; little interest in activities or hobbies he once enjoyed; low motivation; negative thoughts about self, others, or the world; neglect of chores or tasks; poor judgment; sense of helplessness; sexual dysfunction; suicidal thoughts or feelings, or not caring if he lived or died; suspiciousness; medications for mental conditions; and violent outbursts.  

VA treatment records prior to November 30, 2022, showed that the Veteran was regularly seen for his bipolar disorder.  However, the records reveal that the disorder manifested in much less severe symptomatology than the lay statements indicated, with a higher level of social and occupational functioning.  

In March 2022 mental health note, the Veteran reported a crappy attitude, irritability, carelessness, no desire to do anything, and variable sleep.  His wife also reported symptoms of mania, with hyperactive talking, lack of sleep, and less effective medications.  However, the Veteran's spouse reported that their home life was generally good; he was working; and there were no safety concerns.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms improved when he interacted with others.  Mental status examination noted fair hygiene and grooming, cooperative attitude, great mood, full range of affect, linear and goal directed thought process, and fair insight/judgement.  There was no abnormality as to psychomotor activity, memory, speech, or orientation.  He denied suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, auditory hallucinations and visual hallucinations.  The clinician conducted a suicide risk assessment.  Based on clinical evaluation and risk factors, the Veteran was considered a low risk for suicidal or homicidal behavior.  

The May 2022 VA treatment records also noted stressors at work, being easily frustrated, tendency towards depression, reactivity and overeating.  However, he again reported a good home life, and being able to walk away when he feels frustration.  The Veteran was also noted to have akathisia, manifested by excessive tapping of his feet in the October 2022 VA treatment records.  He reported that work was going well, and he was living with his wife, children, and nephew. 

On November 17, 2022, the telephone note included a report from the Veteran regarding his symptoms.  At that time, the Veteran reported that he was having "vague suicidal" thoughts which had resolved with medication changes.  He specified that the medication changes caused him to have mood swings, melancholy, lack of interest in doing anything, feeling hopelessness, and thinking about how things might be if he wasn't around.  However, he denied suicidal plans or intent, hypomania or mania or other psychiatric symptoms at this time.  The Veteran indicated that these symptoms resolved with changes to the medication dosage. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2022.  The Veteran reported mania lasting up to a week and involving limited sleep and impulsivity.  His impulsivity manifested in spending excessive money, loudness, and loquaciousness.  The Veteran reported that he was married and worked in sales, with variability in social relationships, irritability with others, and loudness.  He indicated that he completed activities of daily living regularly.  

The VA examiner observed that the Veteran was adequately groomed, casually dressed, and alert and oriented.  The Veteran had congruent mood and affect; normal speech; goal-directed thought processes; and intact judgement and insight.  There was no evidence of psychosis, delusions or perceptual disturbance, suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation.  The VA examiner endorsed symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; impaired judgment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination.  The Veteran reported symptoms of mania and depression.  The examiner noted the November 2022 reports of vague suicidal thoughts.  The Veteran presently described his marriage as very good, and that he had close relationships with their two daughters. The Veteran also reported other social interaction, with weekly calls to his father, and being close with one of his neighbors.  He reported working in door to door sales for the last six months.  As to his recent work history, the Veteran indicated that he worked for several other employers.  Although he reported that he left these jobs of his own volition, he also reported that he is often an unproductive or unreliable employee during periods of depression.  The examiner endorsed symptoms of depressed mood; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; suicidal ideation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal of personal hygiene.  

The January 2023 examiner observed that the Veteran was adequately groomed, jovial, oriented and alert.  He had a euthymic mood; fluent speech; normal attention and concentration; logical, coherent and goal directed thought processes; and fair insight and judgment.  Thought content was devoid of delusional matter, obsessive patterns and paranoid thinking, with no apparent or perceptual abnormalities. Psychomotor activity was within normal limits, although there was consistent shaking of the right leg.  Overall, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Upon review, the Board does not find that the lay statements, medical evidence, or VA examinations supported the assignment of a total schedular rating for the Veteran's bipolar disorder prior to November 30, 2022.   

As noted above, a 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment.  For this level of impairment, the General Formula included symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

The VA treatment records, lay statements and VA examination show that the Veteran's bipolar disorder was manifested by symptoms more closely associated with a 70 percent rating.  The reported symptoms included suicidal ideation; long term or near continuous depression, obsessional rituals; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; impaired impulse control; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  He also reported symptoms associated with a less than 70 percent rating, including depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; impaired judgment; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The Veteran also had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating.  Of note, the Veteran and his spouse reported mania, impulsiveness, poor decision making and irregular speech.  Although these symptoms are not enumerated in the General Formula, these symptoms are most akin to symptoms associated with a less than total rating.  Notably, the Veteran's non-listed symptoms are akin to impaired impulse control, impaired judgement, impaired abstract thinking, intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  Further, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The Veteran did not report that these symptoms were not present daily but would fluctuate in occurrence and severity.  

Despite the argument of the Veteran's previous and current representative, the evidence also does not demonstrate that the Veteran had symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating prior to November 30, 2022.  The competent and probative treatment records indicated that the Veteran did not have gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.  The Board has considered that the AOJ granted the 100 percent disability rating based the January 2023 VA examination report, and some of the Veteran's clinical history that was considered by the examiner preceded the examination.  In this regard, the Board acknowledges that the January 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was intermittently unable to perform activities of daily living and had neglect of personal hygiene. These are factors contemplated by a 100 percent (total) rating.  Still, the Board finds that the evidence as a whole does not support finding that the duration, frequency and severity of the symptoms the Veteran experienced prior to November 30, 2022, warrant a total rating. The clinicians who regularly treated the Veteran noted that he consistently had fair hygiene and grooming, and treatment records showed that the Veteran was able to perform activities of daily living.  Also, the February 2022 VA examiner who interviewed the Veteran and reviewed the record, and was competent by way of education, training and expertise to assess his disability, opined that the Veteran did not have total social or occupational impairment.

In the submitted lay statements, the Veteran has reported a danger of hurting self or others, having violent outbursts, a sense of helplessness, suicidal thoughts or feelings, or not caring if he lived or die. The Board observes, however, that these symptoms were not shown in the contemporaneous VA treatment records which reflect that the Veteran was deemed to present a low risk of harm to himself and others.  The Veteran's recollection is also inconsistent with his own statements in the treatment records, and his wife's statements regarding the lack of potential violence or harm.  The Veteran regularly denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in existing treatment records, and during the VA examination.  He has reported no hospitalization or attempts.  The overall symptomatology was not similar to persistent danger of self-harm contemplated by the 100 percent criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017).  The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms, to include any suicidal ideation, has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  

More importantly, the Veteran's treatment records, the February 2022 VA examination report, and the lay statements did not reflect total occupational and social impairment prior to November 30, 2022.  The VA examiner opined that total social and occupational impairment was not shown.  While the Veteran has reported and demonstrated substantial negative symptoms associated with his bipolar disorder, he has consistently reported a stable, if not good, home life in VA treatment records.  He has also reported relationships with his daughters and nephew.  At the January 2023 VA examination, he indicated that his marriage was good, and he had close relationships with his daughters.  He also reported regular contact with his father and other social relationships outside his family.  The ability to have these relationships are evidence against there being total social impairment.  

Although there was undoubtedly some impairment of occupational functioning, there was not evidence of total occupational impairment.  The Board notes that the Veteran and his spouse both reported a work history where he had over 40 jobs since leaving service, and several jobs since 2016.  The Veteran also reported difficulty getting along with others, work stressors, inability to meet the demands of his supervisors, inconsistent work attendance, and failure to maintain work productivity.  He reported fights with supervisors, disturbed motivation, and inability to focus and make good decisions. However, the Veteran has been employed throughout the appeal period in question, and he left prior jobs due to his own volition; this is not evidence of total occupational impairment. Moreover, the VA examiner that evaluated him in February 2022 found his level of impairment did not reach total occupational impairment.

Overall, the evidence is not reflective of there being total occupational and social impairment prior to November 30, 2022.  Thus, it was not factually ascertainable that an increase in disability, such that a total schedular rating for bipolar disorder, was warranted prior to November 30, 2022.  

While the Veteran's prior representative argued that the Board should not consider the ameliorative effects of medication when evaluating bipolar disorder, the Board notes that the plain language of the criteria for a 10 percent rating under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders specifically contemplates the effects of medication.  Consequently, Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) does not apply, and the Board's analysis may include the ameliorative effects of medication.  See McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271-73 (2016).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that his condition has been severe for a long time.  Although the Veteran and his spouse are competent to report on the symptoms he was experiencing and had experienced, there are no medical records contemporaneously documenting the frequency, severity, and duration of his bipolar disorder or total occupational and social impairment prior to November 30, 2022.  

In sum, it is not factually ascertainable, based on all evidence of record, that an increase in his disability had occurred prior to the date currently assigned.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply in this case.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).  The effective date of November 30, 2022, is proper.  There is no legal basis for an earlier effective date for the current rating for bipolar disorder.  The appeal must be denied.

2. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 30, 2022, for basic eligibility to DEA based on permanent and total disability status is denied.

DEA benefits are payable to the child, spouse, or surviving spouse of a veteran if the following conditions are met: (1) the veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in-service; and (2) the veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the date of the veteran's death; or (4) the veteran died as a result of a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 3510; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807 (a), 21.3021. 

In the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was granted eligibility to DEA benefits from November 30, 2022, based on a finding that he had a total service-connected disability, permanent in nature, effective that date.  

Bases upon the Board's above findings, this effective date is the earliest possible date he could have established eligibility for DEA benefits on that basis.  Thus, the remaining question for consideration is whether there is another basis by which such eligibility could be established prior to November 30, 2022.  However, there is no other basis upon which any eligibility for DEA benefits could be established in this case prior to November 30, 2022.  Therefore, this is the earliest possible effective date for an award of DEA benefits.

The appeal for an effective date earlier than November 30, 2022, for basic eligibility to DEA is denied as a matter of law.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Vuong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.