Citation Nr: A25031380
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230823-418512
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation of 70 percent disabling, but no higher, for an unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability evaluation based upon individual unemployability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, symptoms associated with his unspecified depressive disorder more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Total occupational and social impairment has not been established.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the medical evidence has not revealed that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have rendered him incapable of securing or maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing entitlement to an evaluation of 70 percent disabling for an unspecified depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435 (2020).

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a total disability evaluation based upon individual unemployability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2020).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had honorable active-duty service with the United States Army from January 1992 to March 1992.

Pursuant to a March 2023 Rating Decision (RO), the Veteran was granted service connection for an unspecified depressive disorder (claimed as depression) and assigned an evaluation of 50 percent disabling, effective September 15, 2022.  His claim for a TDIU was denied. 

Later the same month, he filed VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review. 

Pursuant to a June 2023 Rating decision, the assigned evaluation of 50 percent disabling for the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder (claimed as depression) was continued.  His claim of entitlement to a TDIU was again, denied.  

In July 2023, the Veteran timely appealed the above referenced decision to the Board via VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Board of Veterans' Appeals. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings, Generally

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4 (2020).  The Board determines the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, and the assigned rating is based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairment of earning capacity in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10 (2020).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the assigned evaluation is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Although the recorded history of a particular disability should be reviewed in order to make an accurate assessment under the applicable criteria, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings.  Id.

The Court has held that staged ratings are appropriate for initial rating and increased rating claims when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When all the evidence is assembled, the Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence weighs pervasively against the claim, in which case, the claim is denied.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent disabling for an unspecified depressive disorder

The Veteran contends that his service-connected unspecified persistent depressive disorder warrants a higher evaluation. As discussed in more detail below, the evidence supports his claim.

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability has been evaluated as 50 percent disabling, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435 (2020).

Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; in difficulty establishing effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is evidence of total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or name. Id.

When determining the appropriate disability rating to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms toward a specific rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-24 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms. A veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

Preliminarily, the Board observes that the Veteran was granted service connection for an unspecified depressive disorder pursuant to a March 2023 Rating Decision and assigned an evaluation of 50 percent disabling, effective September 15, 2022.

The above referenced decision was based upon the evidence of record.  

In particular, service treatment records indicate that the Veteran received in-service treatment for bilateral foot, ankle, and heel pain.  Reportedly, he was involved in a slip and fall accident in September 1991. According to the Veteran, he fell backward while carrying a bag of concrete and landed on his back.  The bag of concrete landed on his stomach. Thereafter, he endured residual back pain and shortness of breath.  Other complaints of symptoms included progressive foot, ankle, and heel pain associated with marching, running, and performing other physical activities while wearing boots. 

Review of military personnel records include a Department of Army Memorandum, dated July 1992, which notes that the Veteran was involuntarily separated due to failure to meet medical fitness standards.

Post-service treatment records document complaints of anxiety, depression, and difficulty sleeping due to events which occurred in service.

In September 2022, the Veteran filed VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.  Therein, he indicated that he last worked full time with the Department of Motor Vehicles in March 2022. He described his duties as a fuel tax agent as "office work." Since that time, he has been unable to work due to his service-connected bilateral foot, ankle, and depressive conditions. According to the Veteran, he suffers constant pain and difficulty sitting, standing, or walking for prolonged periods due to his foot and ankle conditions, despite use of a cane. As a result, he failed to perform his assigned duties within applicable timelines which caused him to become the target of workplace harassment. The Veteran contends that his mobility challenges increase his depressive symptoms.

On examination in January 2023, current diagnoses included PTSD, and unspecified depressive disorder. The examiner documented significant overlap between symptoms associated with each diagnosis. Identified symptoms included a depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, a flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and neglect of personal appearance or hygiene. The Veteran's noted symptomology was associated with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

During the clinical interview, the Veteran denied seeking mental health treatment in-service. Post-service, he endorsed receipt of mental health treatment, to include use of prescription psychotropic medications.  The Veteran found his participation in psychotherapy unproductive. He denied having bouts with suicidal or homicidal ideations, auditory or visual hallucinations, or mania. According to the Veteran, he experienced increasing depression and hopelessness due to worsening mobility challenges associated with his service-connected bilateral foot and ankle conditions. Due to pain, use of a cane is required to aid with ambulation. 

During active service, the Veteran was treated for problems with bilateral foot, ankle and heel pain. With treatment he was granted a limited duty profile.  In retaliation, the Veteran states that he was verbally and physically assaulted by his sergeant. At times, he was required to perform restricted activities in the presence of other soldiers.  Fear of further attacks caused hypervigilance and impaired sleep. Since separation, the Veteran suffers bouts with reexperiencing, hypervigilance, and fear.  Loud noise is also triggering. 

Following a review of the record, the examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability or greater) that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder is etiologically related to active service, to include as due to his service-connected bilateral ankle synovitis with Achilles tendinitis and bilateral foot plantar fasciitis with related chronic pain and impaired mobility. In support of the stated conclusion, the examiner acknowledged review of lay reporting regarding a traumatic fall in service with post-injury loss of mobility and related mental distress.

To date, multiple lay statements have been associated with the record.  

In a February 2023 lay statement, the Veteran reported being targeted by his drill sergeant during active service. Despite a limited duty profile, he was subjected to physical punishment that included demands to perform restricted activities, including push-ups, overnight fire watch assignments (upwards of 4 hours at a time), prolonged standing, marching, and running in boots.  As a result, the Veteran experienced severe pain and sought treatment at the hospital. Thereafter, he was referred for medical separation. Post service, the Veteran reports worsening physical limitations and mental distress due his loss of mobility.

Other lay statements from the Veteran's wife and parents note personal knowledge of his declining mobility, and mental health struggles to include loss of interest, worsening depression, impaired sleep, panic attacks, social isolation, suspiciousness, trouble functioning in crowds, and periodic neglect of personal hygiene. 

After careful review of the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence supports the assignment of an evaluation of 70 percent disabling for the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder throughout the appeal period.  

As noted above, an evaluation of 70 percent disabling is assignable where the medical evidence suggests symptoms associated with occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas. Of note, the medical and lay evidence documents psychiatric limitations to include anxiety, depression affecting the ability to function; social isolation, hypervigilance, neglect of personal hygiene, and impaired relationship functioning. The identified impairments were due in part, to worsening physical limitations related to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral lower extremity disabilities.

Conversely, a higher evaluation of 100 percent disabling has not been established as the medical evidence does not suggest the level of impairment nor symptoms amounting to total occupational and social impairment. In reaching the stated conclusion, the Board has fully considered the medical evidence and lay statements of record. 

While complaints of worsening psychiatric symptoms were documented, symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); or disorientation to time or place have not been shown. Accordingly, a higher evaluation of 100 percent disabling has not been established.

To summarize, the Board finds that a rating of 70 percent disabling is warranted for an unspecified depressive disorder throughout the appeal period.

Conversely, a higher evaluation of 100 percent disabling is not warranted for the same period. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application and the Veteran's claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

2. Entitlement to a total disability evaluation based upon individual unemployability

The Veteran contends that he is unable to work due to his service-connected psychiatric and bilateral foot conditions.  After a thorough review of the evidence, the Board concludes that the evidence weighs pervasively against his claim.

Entitlement to a TDIU requires the presence of impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16 (2020). In reaching such a determination, the central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." See Hatlestead v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19 (2020).

Where the schedular rating is less than total, a total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, or if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

Review of the record indicates that the Veteran has been granted service connection for the following conditions; an unspecified depressive disorder associated with bilateral plantar fasciitis (previously rated as plantar fasciitis, right and left foot), originally evaluated as 50 percent disabling from September 15, 2022 (now increased to 70 percent); right ankle synovitis with achilles tendinitis, evaluated as 10 percent disabling from March 13, 1992, 20 percent disabling from July 6, 1999; left ankle, synovitis with achilles tendinitis, evaluated as 10 percent disabling from March 13, 1992, and 20 percent disabling from July 6, 1999; right foot, plantar fasciitis, evaluated as 10 percent disabling from September 28, 2007 to September 27, 2021; and bilateral plantar fasciitis (previously rated as plantar fasciitis, right and left foot), evaluated as 10 percent disabling from September 28, 2007, and 10 percent disabling from September 27, 2021. 

The combined schedular evaluation for the Veteran's service-connected disabilities reached 70 percent disabling as of September 15, 2022. 

While the Board notes that the schedular requirements for a TDIU were established as of September 15, 2022, the record is silent for any evidence that the Veteran has been rendered incapable of a "substantially gainful occupation" due to his service-connected disabilities. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).  

In this case, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability in September 2022. Therein, he indicated that he last worked full-time with the Department of Motor Vehicles in March 2022. Specifically, he reported working as a fuel tax agent performing duties described as "office work." 

To date, multiple VA examinations have been conducted. Regarding the Veteran's unspecified persistent depressive disorder, a January 2023 VA examiner associated his current symptomology with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The same month, VA examinations of the Veteran's bilateral feet and ankles related his chronic pain and weakness with functional limitations to include difficulty with walking, standing, and lifting. Moderate to severe flare-ups of pain recured 3-5 days per week. After onset, symptoms persist from 24-48 hours.  The examiner determined that the Veteran's physical activity was severely limited due to his bilateral feet and ankle abnormalities; however, the ability to perform sedentary work remained intact.

In making all determinations, the Board has fully considered the evidence of record, to include lay statements from the Veteran and his family regarding the current severity of his service-connected disabilities. The Board also notes the Veteran's disagreement with the VA examiner's conclusion that he remains capable of sedentary forms of employment.

Generally, lay persons can attest to factual matters for which they have first-hand knowledge. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). While the Veteran is competent to report on his symptoms and their severity, he is not deemed competent to render a medical opinion in the absence of the appropriate expertise. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-470 (1994). While the Veteran's complaints of persistent limitations due to his service-connected disabilities are accorded some probative value, the Board ultimately places more weight on the VA examiners' opinions regarding whether the Veteran is unemployable due solely to service-connected conditions.

In this case, the VA examiners conducted a physical examination, reviewed the evidence of record and the Veteran's lay assertions regarding his occupational limitations. Thereafter, it was concluded that the Veteran's conditions would not impair his ability to perform sedentary roles which required limited physical activity, to include walking or standing.

While the Board does not doubt that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities cause some difficulty, unemployability due to these disabilities, alone, has not been shown. Accordingly, as the evidence weighs pervasively against his claim, the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b) regarding reasonable doubt are not applicable. The claim of entitlement to TDIU benefits must be denied.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Whitaker, Nakiya E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.