Citation Nr: A25031045
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-461670
DATE: April 3, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for OSA is REMANDED.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces from November 2012 until March 2016.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 RO decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS FOR REMAND

I.

OSA

The Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA which he contends is secondary to his service-connected persistent complex bereavement disorder with insomnia disorder.  In the alternative, the record shows that the Veteran had service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations, specifically Afghanistan, and was subjected to toxic exposures. 

On August 10, 2022, the President of the United States signed the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  As part of implementing the PACT Act, the VA released sub-regulatory guidance for the agency to follow.  Sub-regulatory guidance is a method by which agencies may issue interpretive rules and policy statements, which are not subject to the same rulemaking process as the Code of Federal Regulations.  

Much like the M21-1 and other Veterans Benefits Administration-specific guidelines, the sub-regulatory guidance is not binding on the Board.  However, the Board is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons and bases.  Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257 (2018); see also Nat'l Org. of Veterans' Advocates, Inc. v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 981 F.3d 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2020).  

As such, if the sub-regulatory guidance includes a relevant provision, the Board is required to discuss it.  If the Board determines that the provision does not apply in a particular fact-specific situation, then the Board must explain why the provision is does not apply in that situation.

Applying the sub-regulatory guidance to the facts of this case, the Board finds that a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) opinion needs to be obtained under the PACT ACT.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).  The Board cannot adjudicate the claim without a TERA opinion since the record shows TERA, presumptive service connection cannot be granted, there is evidence a current disability, and the claim cannot be granted based on the current evidence of record.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101(38), 1168(a), 1710(e)(1).  As such, the claim is remanded for a TERA medical opinion to consider whether OSA is related to any toxic exposures.

During the pendency of the appeal, the law of secondary service connection changed materially.   The regulations adopted after, and because of, Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc), provide that service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  And that secondary service connection may be granted for aggravation of a disease or injury by a service-connected disability.  Id. § 3.310(b).  

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) had recent occasion to consider matters relevant to the instant case and their holding illuminates the Board's way (and the RO's on remand). 

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held that: 

§ 1110 [of Title 38 of the United States Code] plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause[ ] of a present-day disability.  This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability.  Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause.  Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality.  

Id. at 1364 (alterations added).  

The Federal Circuit concluded the causation standard "proximately due to" under section 3.310(b) of the regulations is inconsistent with section 1110 of the statute and, therefore "unlawful."  Consequently, for "aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities" it is enough to show that "but-for" the service-connected disability the incremental increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury would not have occurred.  Id. at 1364-66.

Here, the record contains two etiological opinions.  In June 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination and his diagnosis of OSA was confirmed.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that his OSA was proximately due to, or the result of, his service connected persistent complex bereavement disorder.  The examiner reasoned that the two disorders were not medical related, and that OSA was a separate entity entirely from persistent complex bereavement disorder and unrelated to it.  The examiner added that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship, citing to a medical article which discussed OSA being caused by a pharyngeal narrowing and closure during sleep.  

Later in June 2024, a different VA examiner similarly opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA was proximately due to, or the result of, the Veteran's service-connected persistent bereavement disorder.  The examiner reasoned that the conditions of OSA and persistent complex bereavement disorder were not medically related, and OSA was a separate entity entirely.  The examiner noted that OSA was an obstructive problem causing difficulty in breathing continuously, and that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a casual relationship.  

After careful review, the Board concludes that the June 2024 VA opinions in the record did not address the correct legal standards and the holding in Spicer.  61 F.4th at 1364-66.  The June 2024 VA opinions used the proximate cause standard from the previously controlling regulation, now struck down by the Spicer court.  Accordingly, the Board finds these opinions inadequate because they are premised upon a standard which has departed the firmament; that is to say, it is no longer good law.  

Additionally, both June 2024 VA examiners rendered opinions which considered the Veteran's service-connected disability to be persistent bereavement disorder only, although he is service-connected for persistent bereavement disorder with insomnia disorder.  As the Veteran is seeking service connection for a sleep disorder, the Boards concludes that the opinions are independently inadequate as they did not consider the underlying, service-connected, insomnia disorder.  Thus, the Board concludes that no significant probative weight cannot be assigned to either of the June 2024 VA opinions.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (holding that once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought).

And, so, the claim is remanded for a new VA medical opinion in accord with the holding in Spicer,  as well as one that fully considers the Veteran's service-connected disability.  Id.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Another VA examination should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA is related to TERA during the Veteran's active military service, to include his service in Afghanistan. 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner is asked to consider and discuss the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA. 

(b.) Whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include persistent bereavement disorder with insomnia disorder, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a "but-for" cause (caused an increase in the severity of, or an inability to treat) of the Veteran's OSA disorder. 

That is, would the Veteran's OSA have been less severe "but for" the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the condition resulted in the inability to treat the OSA disability.  Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364-66.

The clinician is advised there is no temporal requirement to secondary service connection.  In other words, the mere fact that one disorder was diagnosed before the other cannot be the sole reason for a negative opinion.  

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.  

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.