Citation Nr: A25031678
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-458240
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

For the entire period on appeal, entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for migraines is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

1. The Veteran's migraines caused characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average at least once a month over the last several months and did not cause very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. For the entire period on appeal, the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for migraines have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2003 to July 2007. 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2024 higher-level review rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In this case, one year from the date the AOJ mailed the notice of decision on appeal has not elapsed. Nonetheless, it is undisputed that the Veteran wishes to receive a decision in this matter as soon as possible in light of his October 2024 request, submitted through his attorney, which "asks the Board to promulgate a decision on the evidence of record without further delay." See October 2024 Third Party Correspondence. 

His VA Form 10182 is not ambiguous as to what docket he selected. Additionally, the record to date does not reflect any intention to switch dockets.  In weighing the benefits and risks of further delaying the case to afford the Veteran notice of the opportunity to switch dockets, the Board concludes that in light of the Veteran's October 2024 request for the Board to adjudicate this case without further delay, it is not in the Veteran's best interest to further delay this matter.

Increased Ratings

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value. According to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review is whether the factors are in an "approximate balance." Lynch held that the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance, i.e., nearly equal and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise. Id.

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In this case, the Veteran is competent to testify on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). He is also competent to report symptoms of his migraines. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994). The Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms and their effects on employment or daily activities.

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where service connection has already been established, and increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of the disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). However, in Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999), it was held that evidence to be considered in the appeal of an initial assignment of a disability rating was not limited to that reflecting the then current severity of the disorder. The Court also discussed the concept of the "staging" of ratings, finding that, in cases where an initially assigned disability evaluation has been disagreed with, it was possible for a veteran to be awarded separate percentage evaluations for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period. See also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2008). 

The Board notes that migraine headaches are rated pursuant to the criteria for General Rating Formula. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100: a noncompensable rating is assigned for less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is assigned where headaches present with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months. A 30 percent rating is assigned where headaches present with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months. A 50 percent rating is assigned where headaches present with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The Court has held that Diagnostic Code 8100 contains successive and conjunctive rating criteria, so all criteria of the lower level must be satisfied, in addition to the criteria for the next higher level, to warrant the higher rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018).

Notably, "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria." Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). As Diagnostic Code 8100 does not contemplate the effects of medication in alleviating the frequency and duration of the Veteran's headaches, the Board is precluded from considering the relief afforded by the Veteran's medication, if any, in evaluating the severity of his disability and has not done so herein.

Neither VA nor the Court has defined the terms used in Diagnostic Code 8100. Concerning the 50 percent criteria, the Court previously found that "productive of severe economic inadaptability" means that the headaches "produce or [are] capable of producing" severe economic inadaptability. Concerning "inadaptability," the Court found that "nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work" for the 50 percent rating level. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 444-46 (2004).

In Johnson, the Court found that a 50 percent rating requires all of the following criteria: "very frequent" headaches, that are "completely" prostrating, with "prolonged" attacks, that are "productive of severe economic inadaptability." 30 Vet. App. at 252-53. The Court further found that "completely" prostrating subsumes the lower level of "characteristically" prostrating attacks in the 10 and 30 percent ratings, and the higher frequency requirement of "very frequent" necessarily means greater than once a month as in the 30 percent level. Id.

In Johnson, the Court declined to adopt definitions but pointed to non-medical dictionary definitions from Webster's Third New International Dictionary of The English Language Unabridged (1966). The Court noted that "characteristic" was defined as "a trait, quality, or property or a group of them distinguishing an individual, group, or type"; and "prostrating" was defined as "lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low." Id. at 252. The term "completely" is defined as "to complete degree: entirely" and, therefore, "completely prostrating" under Diagnostic Code 8100 must render the Veteran "entirely powerless." Id. at 253. Finally, "prolong" is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Id.

Similar to these non-medical definitions, the Board observes that a medical dictionary defines prostration as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1554 (31st ed. 2007). The medical dictionary also defines migraines as "an often familial symptom complex of periodic attacks of vascular headache, usually temporal and unilateral in onset, commonly associated with irritability, nausea, vomiting, constipation or diarrhea, and often photophobia." Id. at 1183. Some types of migraine may involve visual disturbances or blurring, vertigo or dizziness, and incoordination. Id. at 1183-84. Thus, a characteristic migraine attack may include these types of symptoms.

In general, where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, a higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7. However, this rule does not apply to ratings for certain disabilities, including migraines or analogous headaches evaluated under DC 8100.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252. The rating criteria in DC 8100 are successive, meaning that criteria for the lower rating must be met before a higher disability rating may be awarded. Id. at 247, 251-54. Because the criteria are successive, 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 is inapplicable, meaning that a higher rating cannot be granted based on a finding that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating. Id. at 253-54. However, any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of the disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. Id. at 254; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Factual Background

In August 2020, the Veteran noted that he experienced migraines one to three times per week. See August 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ at 15.

During a May 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his migraines had gotten worse. See July 2021 C&P Exam at 3. He reported that he experienced migraine attacks once per week, which requires him to turn lights off and he reported taking over-the-counter Tylenol three times per week and having caffeine daily to try to treat his migraines. Id. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced headache pain on both sides of the head. Id. at 4. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran had the following non-headache related symptoms: sensitivity to light, changes in vision (such as scotoma, flashes of light, tunnel vision), and changes in mood. Id. at 5. The examiner noted that the pain typically lasted approximately one to two hours. Id. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not experience prostrating attacks of headache pain, very prostrating or prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, or functional impact as a result of his migraines. Id. at 6-7.

In the November 2021 higher-level review informal conference, the Veteran stated that he gets migraines at least once per week (sometimes more), which require him to turn off all the lights and put his head down. See November 2021 HLR - Informal Conference at 1. Additionally, the Veteran noted that if he is home he lays down and sometimes he has to return to is home if he experiences a severe migraine. Id. 

On the March 2022 Supplemental Claim application, the Veteran reported that he was requesting an increased rating due to frequent prostrating migraines that occur weekly and last several days. See March 2022 VA Form 20-0995 at 3.

During the October 2022 VA examination, the Veteran described his headaches as affecting both sides of the head, associated with light sensitivity, visual and mood changes, typically lasting less than one day. See October 2022 C&P Exam at 3. The examiner noted that the Veteran takes Tylenol (1000mg) for his migraines and notes the following symptoms: pain on both sides of the head; sensitivity to light; changes in vision (such as scotoma, flashes of light, tunnel vision); and mood changes. Id. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches typically lasted less than 1 day, caused pain on both sides of the head, and caused prostrating attacks with less frequent attacks which were not productive of severe economic inadaptability. Id. at 4. The examiner noted that there were no other pertinent findings and the condition caused functional impact as the Veteran "must remain in a dark environment during severe migraine headache flares and he is unable to perform all activities during this time." Id. at 4-5.

In October 2023 the Veteran submitted a lay statement regarding his migraine symptoms. The Veteran reported that he had experienced about 3 to four headaches per week, lasting about four to eight hours. See October 2023 Correspondence. The Veteran added that the pain typically occurred between the eyebrows or temples. Id. He reported that he experienced frequent migraines, which can last from eight hours to three days, are triggered or aggravated by bright lights, loud noises, and his service-connected tinnitus. Id. Additionally, the Veteran reported that he experienced throbbing and pulsating head pain during a migraine, which worsened with physical activity and caused him to lay down in a dark room. Id. The Veteran reported that sometimes he was unable to concentrate to drive during his migraines and on occasion, his wife has to pick him up from work due to his migraine symptoms. Id. The Veteran noted that he is employed as a teacher and sometimes had to avoid computer screens, modify lighting, and put on videos for his students during his migraines. Id. At work, the Veteran noted that he has gotten permission to leave the classroom about once or twice a week during when he experiences migraines. Id. The Veteran stated that he has to call off of work when he wakes up with a migraine. Id.  additionally, the Veteran noted that he drinks caffeine and takes Tylenol to help with the migraine pain, although they do not completely rid him of the pain. Id. Lastly, the Veteran noted that he had "lightheadedness during headaches and dizziness during migraines" and has experienced nausea and every couple of months has vomited due to his migraines. Id. 

During a November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran described his current symptoms as pulsating head pain, sensitivity to light/sound, and blurred vision. See November C&P Exam at 2. The Veteran reported that he treats his migraines with Tylenol and caffeine. Id. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced pain on both sides of the head, which typically lasts less than one day; nausea; sensitivity to light; sensitivity to sound; and changes in vision (such as scotoma, flashes of light, tunnel vision). Id. at 2-3. Further, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not experience prostrating attacks, completely prostrating attacks and prolonged attacks, or functional impact as a result of his migraines. Id. at 4-5.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that these examinations are adequate for adjudication purposes and affords them great probative value. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. At 304 (2008) ("It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes probative value to a medical opinion."). As discussed below, the Board has afforded the Veteran the 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating, prior to November 14, 2023,  and a rating in excess of 10 percent thereafter for his service-connected migraines. See generally July 2024 VA Form 10182. 

The September 2021 AOJ rating decision granted service connection for the Veteran's migraines and assigned a noncompensable rating, effective August 23, 2020, under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100

The June 2024 higher-level review rating decision assigned a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected migraines effective November 14, 2023, under DC 8100. Id.  

The Board herein finds the Veteran's migraines warrant a 30 percent rating for the entire period on appeal. The Veteran has consistently reported headaches at least once a month over the last several months, headache symptoms and pain that would require him to turn off the lights, lay down and take over-the-counter medication. The Board finds such symptoms reflective of prostrating attacks. As such, the Veteran's overall disability picture more closely approximates with a 30 percent disability rating. 

An evaluation greater than 30 percent is not warranted as there is no medical or lay evidence that the Veteran's headaches were "completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability." Giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, he may satisfy the "very frequent" attacks require by experiencing more than one headache attack per month. However, the 50 percent disability rating requires more than "very frequent" headache attack/episodes. 

Additionally, there is no evidence in the record of any hospitalization, emergency room visits, or urgent care visits for management of the headaches. However, the June 2021 VA examination notes that the Veteran takes over the counter Tylenol to get some relief. This suggests that the Veteran's headaches do not render him completely powerless. Further, the Veteran has indicated that he is a schoolteacher and is able to modify the lighting or take breaks in a dark, quiet room as needed. Thus, the probative evidence suggests that the Veteran's headaches are not of such severity that employment is inadaptable. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the evidence of record persuasively favors a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher for the entire period on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lewis, Aliece M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.