Citation Nr: A25031024
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-410344
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to July 22, 2021, for service connection of absence seizures with psychomotor epilepsy and cataplexy (seizures) is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder from April 28, 2006, to November 5, 2021, is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The day of receipt of the Veteran's claim for service connection of seizures was July 22, 2021, and his entitlement arose before that date. 

2. From April 28, 2006, to November 5, 2021, the manifestations of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder most closely approximately occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity but without deficiencies in most areas.

3. Prior to November 5, 2021, the Veteran did not meet the schedular requirements for TDIU, and there is not sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that he was unemployable due to service-connected disabilities at that time.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to July 22, 2021, for service connection of seizures have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102. 3.156, 3.160, 3.400, 3.2500, 19.9 (2017), 20.904.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for acquired psychiatric disorder from April 28, 2006, to November 5, 2021, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.1, 4.126, 4.130, 4.2, Diagnostic Code 9411.

3. The criteria for entitlement to TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 U.S.C. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1970 to November 1974. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2023 higher level review decision and a June 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, in relation to the seizures claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. For the acquired psychiatric disorder and TDIU claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2022 AOJ decision that was later subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Earlier Effective Dates

In general, the effective date for an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the day of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. 

Claims encompass all issues explicitly raised by a Veteran or reasonably raised by the evidence of record. See, e.g., Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021). The Board has a duty to liberally construe a veteran's submissions and the other evidence of record to determine whether an issue is reasonably raised. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F. 3d 1355, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, issues do not need to be addressed if they are neither specifically raised by the veteran nor reasonably raised by the evidence of record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 (2017).

For legacy appeals, a previously adjudicated claim may be reopened for readjudication on the merits when the veteran submits new and material evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156. The effective date for a claim that has been reopened after a final disallowance is the date of receipt of the new claim to reopen or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.160(e), 3.400(q)-(r). A legacy claim becomes final if the veteran does not file a timely Notice of Disagreement or a timely Substantive Appeal in response to a Statement of the Case, and a Board decision is final on the day it is issued. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.160(d)(1). 

Claims filed under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system can be "continuously pursued" by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when notice of the decision was issued. If one of these options is selected, the claim is continuously pursued, and the claim will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the chain of continuously pursued claims. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c), and (h)(1).

1. Effective date for seizures

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date of April 28, 2006, for service connection of seizures.  After review of the evidence, the Board finds an earlier effective date is not warranted. 

By way of history, the Veteran first filed a claim for seizures in June 2005. This claim was ultimately denied in an October 2009 Board decision. The Veteran did not appeal this decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). Therefore, the October 2009 Board decision became final. 

In February 2010, the Veteran filed a request to reopen the decision on seizures. This was ultimately denied in a November 2011 rating decision based on a lack of new and material evidence. The Veteran filed a May 2012 Notice of Disagreement related to portions of this decision, but he did not contest the denial of service connection for seizures. The May 2012 Notice of Disagreement was then withdrawn in October 2012. Therefore, the November 2011 rating decision became final regarding that claim. 

In October 2012, the Veteran filed a request to reopen an earlier claim for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). This claim did not allege seizures. However, a September 2018 Board decision found that a claim for seizures as secondary to service-connected PTSD was reasonably raised by the record. The Board referred this issue back to the AOJ for appropriate action and adjudication in the first instance. See 38 C.F.R. § 19.9(b) (2017) (now renumbered as 38 C.F.R. § 20.904(b)). 

Finally, on July 22, 2021, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for seizure disorder, noting that the AOJ had not made a decision regarding seizures since the issue was referred by the Board. This supplemental claim led to the June 2023 rating decision now on appeal, which granted service connection for seizures effective July 22, 2021. 

After review of the evidence, the Board finds that July 22, 2021, was the day that the Board received the Veteran's claim for seizures. The Veteran's previous claims in June 2005 and February 2010, resulted in final disallowances under the legacy system. Accordingly, the effective date could not be earlier than the date of receipt of the new claim seeking to reopen them. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.160(e), 3.400(q)(2).

The Board has considered the representative's argument that the seizure claim has been "continuously pursued" since April 2006. However, there has not been continuous pursuit of a claim for seizures. Continuous pursuit only applies to claims filed under the modernized review system, while the October 2009 Board decision and November 2011 AOJ decision are both finally adjudicated decisions under the legacy system. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 3.160(d)(1). 

The Board has also considered the representative's argument that the AOJ failed to adjudicate service connection of seizures in response to the September 2018 Board decision's referral. However, unlike a remand in which the Board provides orders and directives to the AOJ, a referral is issued when the Board lacks jurisdiction over an issue, and it does not compel action by the AOJ. Compare 38 C.F.R. § 19.9(b) (2017) with §§ 19.9(a) and (c) (2017); see also Young v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 201, 203-04 (2012); c.f. Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998). It is at the AOJ's discretion what constitutes "appropriate action" in response to a referral, including no action. The referral itself did not create a claim or serve to preserve an effective date. 

Finally, the Board has considered whether a claim for service connection of seizures was reasonably raised by the Veteran's October 2012 supplemental claim and subsequent proceedings such that this constitutes an unadjudicated claim. Notably, by referring the issue in September 2018, the Board conceded that it lacked jurisdiction over any claim for service connection of seizures at that time. Accordingly, the Board was unable to adjudicate the issue, including an inability to make binding favorable findings. 

VA must adjudicate all claims reasonably raised by a liberal reading of all evidence and pleading in a claims file, while a veteran must identify the benefit sought by describing the nature of the claimed disability. See, e.g., Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 232, 256 (2007). A veteran's intent in filing a claim is paramount to construing the breadth of the claim, particularly in relation to unsophisticated pro se claims. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). When determining the scope of a claim, the Board considers the veteran's description of the claim, the symptoms they describe, and the information submitted or obtained in support of the claim. See Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79, 86-87 (2009). At the same time, a veteran's claim must provide information, at least at a high level of generality, of the condition for which benefits are sought. Sellers v. Wilkie, 965 F.3d 1328, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Murphy v. Wilkie, 983 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2020) (noting VA need not "attempt to read the mind" of the veteran). 

Here, the Veteran was not acting pro se. He was represented at all relevant times, including attorney representation since October 2013. The Veteran had previously filed and fully adjudicated claims for both PTSD and seizures to final decisions, demonstrating an understanding that these conditions would be addressed separately. See Murphy v. Wilkie, 983 F.3d 1313, 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2020). In relation to the August 2013 rating decision claim, he only sought service connection for PTSD. There were no statements suggesting a claim for seizures in his October 2012 supplemental claim, October 2013 Notice of Disagreement, September 2015 informal Decision Review Officer (DRO) conference, October 2015 Form 9, or the accompanying legal arguments. 

No liberal interpretation of these filings would lead an adjudicator to believe that the claim for PTSD included a claim for secondary service connection of seizures. Therefore, the Board must look to the evidence of record to see if seizures were raised by the record as part of his claim for service connection of PTSD. In that regard, the medical evidence shows that the Veteran was treated for episodes described as both dissociative-like and seizure-like, for which he received varying diagnoses. Some evidence described seizures as a potential complication of PTSD, including VA treatment records in May 2011 and September 2013. However, medical evidence of a potential link between a service-connected disability and a non-service-connected disability does not, by itself, constitute an informal claim or show an intent to apply for benefits. See, e.g., Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1990); Ellington v. Nicholson, 22 Vet. App. 141, 146 (2007). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that a claim for service connection of seizures was not reasonably raised at that time because there was no indication of an intent to file such a claim in relation to the October 2012 claim and subsequent proceedings. 

The Board notes that, to the extent that the Veteran's PTSD directly resulted in brief periods of altered mental status or dissociative-like events, this symptom has been considered in assessing his acquired psychiatric disorder rating. For these reasons, the Board finds that the date of claim is July 22, 2021. 

Next, the Board considers the date entitlement arose. In this case, the evidence indicates an onset of seizures around or before the year 2000. Thus, the later July 22, 2021, date of claim is the correct effective date. Therefore, an earlier effective date for service connection of seizures is denied. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degree of disability specified is considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. 

2. Increased rating for acquired psychiatric disorder

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder for the period from April 28, 2006, until November 5, 2021. 

After review of the evidence, the Board finds an increased rating is not warranted. 

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder has been rated at 50 percent under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411. He has been granted a 100 percent rating effective November 5, 2021. 

The General Formula provides a 50 percent rating for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned where the evidence shows occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideations; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including in work or work like settings); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 100 percent rating is assigned where the evidence shows total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The evaluation is based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). Further, when evaluating the level of disability arising from a mental disorder, the VA considers the extent of social impairment but will not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b). It is necessary to evaluate a disability from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2.

Turning to the medical records, the VA treatment records show intermittent treatment for psychiatric conditions between 2002 and 2010. This primarily focused on depression, anger, and adjusting to medical conditions including seizures. He returned to treatment in July 2012, he reported PTSD symptoms, and he was observed to have mild, brief dissociation-like episodes lasting from a few seconds up to five minutes during periods of high emotion. He started new psychotropic medications and attended a PTSD group resulting in improved emotional control and dissociative episodes. His mood was reportedly good without ongoing anger issues, although he had only partial relief of his sleep difficulties, thrashing in bed, and nightmares. He became able to generally avoid the dissociative-type episodes when upset. For example, he became tearful but had normal psychomotor movements when discussing the loss of a close family relative in May 2016. 

Beginning in mid-2016, there was another large gap in mental health treatment. He resumed treatment in January 2019 with complaints of anger, anxiety, and depression. During mental health intake, he was observed to have an "almost-dissociative" event with lethargy and slowed speech. He semi-regularly attended therapy for the remainder of the evidence window, with his most recent visit via telephone in October 2021.

Turning to his private treatment records, these showed a diagnosis of adjustment disorder associated with his new onset of seizures in the early 2000s. These records do not include any relevant psychiatric treatment during the period on appeal. Private neurology records from 2013 describe no further seizure events, improved irritability, less agitation, and less impulsivity while attending group therapy, individual therapy, and taking psychotropic medications. 

The Veteran was afforded an April 2013 VA examination. At that time, he reported anger and frustration regarding VA treatment, impaired sleep due to nightmares, thrashing in his sleep, and labile emotions. On objective exam, he presented with poor grooming and hygiene, dysphoric and anxious mood, and tearful affect. He was cooperative and friendly with good eye contact, clear speech, no suicidal ideation, no psychotic thoughts or hallucinations, and no gross cognitive impairment. The examiner suggested that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although he was generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

The Veteran was afforded a February 2020 VA examination. On objective exam, the Veteran was noted to have an anxious-depressed mood with stable, congruent affect. The exam was otherwise unremarkable including full orientation, normal and appropriate hygiene and grooming, normal speech, intact language, normal sleep, unremarkable appetite, normal eye contact, intact insight and judgment, generally average fund of knowledge, no gross memory or cognitive deficits, coherent thought processes, no delusions, no psychotic sequelae, and no suicidal ideation. 

The February 2020 VA examiner reported that the Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; difficulty understanding complex commands; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; impaired impulse control; special disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. They suggested that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking, and/or mood. They suggested that the Veteran had persistent severe difficulties relating to peers, supervisors, and the public due to fatigue, depression, and anxiety. They reported persistent difficulties maintaining sustained attention and concentration throughout an eight-hour workday and a 40-hour workweek. They reported moderate to severe persistent difficulties maintaining stamina. 

The Board notes that the February 2020 opinion showed substantial discrepancies between the examiner's observations, reported symptoms, and conclusions. The examiner endorsed a high number of serious symptoms, yet the accompanying behavioral observations were normal aside from an anxious-depressed mood. They also reported a dramatic increase in symptoms and decline in function since the April 2013 VA examination, yet the accompanying exam was objectively improved, and no corresponding decline was shown in the treating records. Finally, it appeared to be disproportionate to the severity of symptoms reported to the Veteran's treating providers. For these reasons, this opinion had minimal probative value. 

An April 2020 VA addendum medical opinion was received. After review of the treatment history and lay statements, this examiner noted that the February 2020 VA opinion appeared to show over-endorsing of symptoms in light of the conflicting, relatively benign accompanying exam. This examiner indicated that the Veteran at least as likely as not had PTSD symptoms including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. They noted that the Veteran's symptoms likely overlap with situational depression and anxiety for which he was receiving treatment, but his PTSD symptoms were never severe enough to interfere with his employment history. Overall, they felt the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although he generally functioned satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. 

Finally, the Veteran was finally a VA examination in November 2021, performed by the same examiner who completed the February 2020 assessment. The examiner suggested that the Veteran now had total occupational and social impairment. The Veteran ultimately received a 100 percent rating based on this assessment, effective on the date of exam. 

Turning to the Veteran's submissions in support of his claim, he submitted a September 2013 statement signed by multiple VA clinicians describing the Veteran's symptoms as resulting in "marked limitations." They noted one of his more problematic symptoms as dissociative, seizure-like episodes occurring when overwhelmed by thoughts of military service or experiencing rage. These episodes were noted to be less frequent now, managed by medication and therapy. They also noted mood symptoms of dysthymic mood, irritability, cognitive distortions, and anhedonia. This report has been considered probative as to the Veteran's difficulties managing emotions and dissociative-like episodes, but the Board notes they also indicated that these were less frequent and managed by medication and therapy. To the extent these clinicians reported "marked impairments," this was too vague to meaningfully inform the appropriate rating. 

The Veteran also submitted a February 2020 vocational consultant statement. However, this expert did not report any observations of the Veteran's function beyond repeating the Veteran's lay statements. This evidence had minimal probative value in assessing the appropriate rating under the General Formula.  

Overall, while the Veteran has some observable psychiatric symptoms, the Board does not consider them to be similar in severity to the issues listed in the General Formula for either a 70 or 100 percent rating. While a 70 percent rating represents substantial psychological symptoms impacting almost all areas of function, the Veteran's symptoms are less severe, primarily limited to mood deficits and irritability and brief dissociated-type events during periods of extreme emotions. Furthermore, the VA treatment records reflect that his condition is generally responsive to treatment. Notably, the ameliorative effects of medication are a factor considered under the General Formula. There are no psychotic symptoms or suicidal ideation, and he has no history of requiring inpatient psychiatric treatment. 

Next, while the rating criteria include specific examples of symptoms that may warrant a given rating, these examples are not meant to be exhaustive. The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific evaluation. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). However, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). As such, the Board has also considered the extent to which there are other indications of occupational and social impairment. 

Considering occupational impairment, the Veteran had retired from the civil service many years before the period at issue. There is conflicting evidence of his work history during the period on appeal. There is evidence that he worked as a self-employed janitor and security guard until sometime between 2009 and 2019. Regardless of the specifics, it is uncontested that he worked during part of the period on review. He typically presents to appointments with an appropriate appearance, but showed deficits in hygiene at his April 2013 VA examination. His dissociative-like events are brief and associated with high emotions not typically present in most workplaces, but these could reasonably arise with high stress or customer service work. There are no indications of other cognitive deficits in the treating records, although at times he reported subjective difficulties with sustained concentration. Overall, this suggests occupational impairment consistent with reduced reliability and productivity. 

Considering social impairment, the Veteran reported issues such as anger, irritability, social isolation, and difficulty dealing with authority. He has no significant criminal history. He had been able to attend appointments and seek physical and mental health treatment independently. He reported social isolation, but the medical records suggest that this was largely situational due to moving to a new area and dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. He gets along with his family and has a long marriage. Before moving, he was active in his church. He traveled to family reunions in Indiana and Chicago in 2019, reportedly enjoying himself at both events and reconnecting with family. He denied suicidal ideation. He consistently shows cooperative and friendly behavior to clinicians, normal speech, and no delusions or paranoia on examinations.

Overall, the Board determines that, on a holistic basis during the period on appeal, the evidence most closely approximates the nature, frequency, and severity of a 50 percent rating under the General Formula. Symptoms contemplated by the 30 and 50 percent ratings are most prevalent and frequent in the record, including depressed or anxious moods, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood. His dissociative-type events have been considered comparable to panic attacks occurring more than once a week, as they arise in similar circumstances with analogous limiting effects.  

However, the Veteran's symptoms prior to November 5, 2021, have not been of comparable severity to the examples which would support a 70 or 100 percent rating. For example, he has not had suicidal ideations, obsessional rituals, illogical speech, spatial disorientation, unprovoked violence, or an inability to maintain relationships. He maintains a strong relationship with his family and wife of many decades. His dissociative-type events are brief, arise in limited circumstances, and could be controlled with treatment. His course of treatment has been routine, conservative, and generally effective when sustained. He has never required inpatient psychiatric care. 

In considering this appeal, the Board acknowledges the lay statements describing the Veteran's symptoms from the Veteran, his wife, and a friend in 2006. Lay persons are competent to report symptoms. However, competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility, and laypersons do not have the personal knowledge necessary to apply a specific level of disability for service-connected disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2. Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) ("although interest may affect the credibility of testimony, it does not affect competency to testify"). 

Here, the Veteran and his wife's statements have been inconsistent with the other evidence of record, particularly the Veteran's reports to treating providers. For example, in February 2020, they reported "near total social isolation" and primarily isolating at home since 2010. However, the Veteran showed no difficulty attending medical appointments during that decade. He had traveled multiple times to large family events the preceding summer. They reported ongoing issues with irritability and anger. However, while he did report anger to treating providers, he was consistently able to regulate his emotions and maintain good impulse control. There are also significant inconsistencies in the Veteran's reported work history. When considered in the context of the evidence as a whole, the lay statements are less probative than the contemporaneous statements in the medical record. 

The Veteran's friend's statement from August 2006 was reasonably consistent with the record in that it noted impatience and anger. This statement has some probative value, but it was too vague to greatly inform this decision. 

On the other hand, the Board affords significant probative weight to the April 2013 and April 2020 VA examiner opinions, which were provided by qualified medical professionals after review of the claims file and application of the facts to current medical knowledge. These assessments were supported by persuasive rationales, and they were consistent with the treating medical evidence. 

The Board has considered the representative's arguments that the AOJ improperly sought negative evidence when it requested the April 2020 supplemental medical opinion. As discussed above, the February 2020 VA examination included significant discrepancies rendering it inadequate. Furthermore, in seeking the supplemental opinion, the AOJ used neutral language that did not seek or lead the clinician towards a specific outcome. The Board finds the AOJ's request was appropriate. 

Accordingly, the criteria for entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 50 percent, for acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met during the period on appeal. 

Because the evidence weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

TDIU

Total disability exists when there is any impairment sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340(a)(1). A total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, based on "individual unemployability." This occurs when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities. 

The Board must consider if the Veteran can obtain employment more than marginal income, outside of a protected environment, as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce to be the poverty threshold for one person. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019). For these purposes, "employment in a protected environment" means a lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market. LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 123-24 (2024).

In assessing unemployability, the Board considers the veteran's service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment, and all other factors having a bearing on the issue must be addressed. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b); Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019). Moreover, the Board must evaluate whether there are circumstances in the Veteran's case, apart from any non-service-connected conditions and advancing age, which would justify TDIU. 38 C.F. R. §§ 3.341(a), 4.19; see Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993); Hodges v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 375 (1993). 

Generally, TDIU is awarded on a schedular basis, which requires that, if there is only one service-connected disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more. If there is more than one disability, there must be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). For these purposes, the term "one disability" includes disabilities resulting from a common etiology or single accident. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. These requirements are referred to as the "schedular requirements." 

Where the schedular requirements are not met, the Board may not award TDIU in the first instance. However, TDIU may be granted on an extraschedular basis after referral to the Director of Compensation and Pension Service (Director). 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b). Referral to the Director is appropriate where there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable because of service-connected disabilities. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

3. Entitlement to TDIU 

The Veteran seeks a rating of TDIU since April 28, 2006. 

After a review of the evidence, the Board finds that a TDIU rating is not warranted.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran was granted total rating effective November 5, 2021, on a schedular basis. Therefore, the Board need only consider TDIU prior to that date. 

Next, the Veteran did not meet the schedular requirements at any point between April 28, 2006, and November 5, 2021. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). During that period, the Veteran had a 60 percent combined rating. His service-connected disabilities were acquired psychiatric disorder (50 percent), tinnitus (10 percent), and bilateral hearing loss (noncompensable). Accordingly, the Veteran did not have one disability rated at 60 percent, nor did he have multiple disabilities with a combined rating of at least 70 percent. 

The representative contends that the Veteran's disabilities resulted from a common etiology of "his combat experience in Vietnam." However, the Veteran has not reported, and the record does not show, that he engaged in combat with the enemy. His PTSD is related to racially motivated assaults as well as witnessing a traumatic injury to a fellow sailor. His tinnitus was awarded based on noise exposure/sound trauma while working as an aviation maintenance worker in close proximity to Navy aircraft. The Board finds these disabilities do not result from a common etiology or single accident. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

Moreover, the Board finds that referral to the Director for extraschedular consideration is not warranted as there is not sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility of unemployability before November 5, 2021. 

As an initial hurdle, the evidence is inconsistent as to when or if the Veteran stopped working. For example, Social Security earnings records show his earnings were last above the poverty threshold in 2007 and 2008. A January 2020 Vocational Consultant report says the Veteran was self-employed until 2009. However, his August 2012 VA Form 21-8940 said he was still doing self-employed janitorial and security work with earnings above the poverty threshold in the preceding 12 months. In October 2012, he reported to the Social Security Administration that he was still working on a parttime basis. In February 2013, he reported that he stopped that work in December 2012, but this was due to losing his contract to another company, not due to his service-connected disabilities. VA treatment records as recently as January 2019 suggested that he was still self-employed and working parttime in his security/janitorial business. Regardless of the specific stop date, it is clear that the Veteran has performed at least some significant work activity during the period he alleged unemployability. There is no indication that this work was within a protected environment.  

Next, the Board considered the restrictions from his service-connected disabilities. Here, the Veteran's tinnitus and noncompensable hearing loss would reasonably limit his ability to work in some limited, niche occupations requiring fine hearing or constant communication. However, these disabilities are minimally restricting and would not greatly impact his ability to obtain and maintain employment. 

Considering the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board finds persuasive the April 2013 and April 2020 VA examiner opinions indicating the Veteran would have occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, but generally functions satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The Veteran's mood deficits, anger, and difficulty handling strong emotions would limit him from performing stressful, high-pressure, or emotionally charged work. This likely eliminates performing skilled work, but he does not have cognitive or other deficits to prevent semi-skilled and unskilled tasks. Additionally, without treatment, uncontrolled strong emotional triggers can lead to brief dissociative- or seizure-like events, and these reasonably interfere with his ability to perform many work tasks requiring intense stress or hazardous activities.

However, the Veteran is at least capable of performing routine, unskilled tasks without high-stress scenarios and with limited social interactions. Furthermore, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not restrict his ability to perform typical physical occupational tasks such as lifting, standing, walking, performing postural maneuvers, using his hands, or reaching. 

Overall, there is not sufficient probative evidence to support a reasonable possibility of finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone prevented him from obtaining or maintaining employment during the relevant period. Therefore, the Board declines to remand the issue of entitlement to extraschedular TDIU for further consideration. 

Because TDIU may not be awarded on a schedular basis, and because referral to the Director for extraschedular consideration is not warranted, the claim is denied.

In making this finding, the Board has considered the January 2020 private vocational consultant's opinion that the Veteran is unable to perform any substantially gainful activity, including unskilled sedentary employment, since at least March 2010. This opinion was based primarily on the Veteran's self-reported abilities, which the consultant found credible. However, as addressed above, the Board has found the lay statements were of limited probative value. Furthermore, the consultant does not address substantial conflicts in the evidence, particularly the inconsistencies regarding the Veteran's self-employment. Accordingly, the January 2020 private vocational consultant opinion was not probative. The April 2013 and April 2020 VA examinations, in conjunction with the VA treating records, are more persuasive.  

The Board has also considered the July 2013 assessment by doctors for the Social Security Administration state agency. These doctors indicated that, considering all of the Veteran's medical conditions, he should never climb ladders, ropes, or scaffolds or have exposure to hazardous machinery, heights, etc. as occupational tasks. Regarding mental health impairments, he remained capable of completing simple, routine tasks and could relate to others with limited public contact. Notably, the Social Security Administration disability determinations are not binding on VA because these programs are distinct programs with different regulatory and evidentiary standards. However, the doctors' medical opinions associated with the July 2013 disability determination are generally consistent with the evidence before the Board. As such, they have some limited probative value. 

Because the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim for TDIU, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

?

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Heger