Citation Nr: A25031762
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240812-463827
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The severance of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome was proper; the appeal is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The grant of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome in a January 2024 rating decision was clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for severance of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1990 to November 1992. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Severance of service connection 

The Veteran contends that the severance of service connection for his chronic fatigue syndrome was improper. By way of background, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome in a January 2024 rating decision, based on the findings of a November 2023 VA examination. The next month, in a February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to sever service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, concluding that the Veteran's initial grant of service connection was based on an insufficient VA examination and that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome in accordance with VA regulations.

Generally, to prevail on a claim of service connection on the merits, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) medical evidence or other competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Previously granted benefits will be severed only where evidence establishes that the award of service connection was clear and unmistakable error (CUE), with the burden of proof being on the Government. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

When severance is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of benefits was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. Id.

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, supra. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, supra.

The initial question for the Board is whether the AOJ followed the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) for severing service connection. The Board finds that it did. The AOJ issued the proposed severance in the February 2024 rating decision. The Veteran was sent a notification at his latest address of record in the same month, informing him of this contemplated action and furnishing detailed reasons therefore. The Veteran was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that benefits should be maintained. The notice letter also informed the Veteran that he had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such a request for a hearing was received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). The Veteran did not request a hearing.

The AOJ then issued the March 2024 rating decision, which severed service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, effective June 1, 2024. Notification of this rating decision, plus his appeal rights, was sent to the Veteran in the same month. The Board finds that this effective date was proper as it was greater than the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date the February 2024 notice expired. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

The remaining question before the Board is whether the grant of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome was CUE.

For VA purposes, a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome requires: (1) new onset of debilitating fatigue severe enough to reduce daily activity to less than 50 percent of the usual level for at least six months; (2) the exclusion, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, of all other clinical conditions that may produce similar symptoms; and (3) six or more of the following: (i) acute onset of the condition; (ii) low grade fever; (iii) nonexudative pharyngitis; (iv) palpable or tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes; (v) generalized muscle aches or weakness; (vi) fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise; (vii) headaches (of a type, severity or pattern that is different from headaches in a pre-morbid state); (viii) migratory joint pains; (ix) neuropsychologic symptoms; (x) sleep disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.88(a).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023 in connection with his claim for service connection. At that time, he reported experiencing fatigue, a sore throat and night sweats, which he treated with Vitamin D. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic fatigue syndrome, noting that other clinical conditions that may have produced similar symptoms had been excluded by history, physical examination and/or laboratory tests. However, she also noted that the Veteran's debilitating fatigue had not reduced his daily activity level to less than 50 percent of pre-illness level. Further, in Section III - Findings, Signs, and Symptoms, the examiner indicated the Veteran had only the following three findings, signs, and symptoms attributable to CFS: nonexudative pharyngitis; fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise; and night sweats. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's chronic fatigue syndrome was presumptively due to his exposure to toxins while serving in Southwest Asia. 

In finding that there was CUE in the grant of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, the Board recognizes that this is not a claim of service connection to be evaluated as to whether the claim should be granted based upon a finding that the evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced; nor denied because persuasive evidence would be against the claim. The standard to be employed is whether there is "clear and unmistakable evidence" of an error.

The Board finds there was clear and unmistakable evidence of an error.

Service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome was granted in the January 2024 rating decision based on the November 2023 VA examination. However, at that time and since, there is no other diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome anywhere in the record, other than in the November 2023 VA examination report. However, and fatal to the claim, the November 2023 VA examiner did not correctly apply the requirements for diagnosing chronic fatigue syndrome under 38 C.F.R. § 4.88(a)(2), as that examination found no debilitating fatigue that reduced daily activity levels to less than 50 percent of pre-illness level, and only found three of the symptoms listed in 38 C.F.R. § 4.88(a). 

In order to be formally diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome, in addition to excluding other causes, both debilitating fatigue that reduced daily activity levels to less than 50 percent of pre-illness level, and at least six of the listed symptoms, must be present. Here, they were not. In short, the Board finds there was obvious CUE in the grant of service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome. At the time the Veteran was granted service connection, the AOJ did not properly apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.88(a). This error is undebatable as it is not a disagreement of how the facts were applied and this error manifestly changed the outcome of the decision: had the AOJ not relied on the insufficient November 2023 examination which erroneously diagnosed chronic fatigue syndrome, the Veteran would not have been granted service connection for such a condition. 

In so finding, the Board acknowledges that in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome, and the Board is usually bound by such a favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). However, it is only bound by favorable findings absent CUE. For the reasons set forth herein, the Board finds that the Veteran did not actually have a legally sufficient diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome at any time during the appeal period. As such, the evidence of record clearly and unmistakably rebuts the favorable finding in the March 2024 rating decision. Accordingly, the Board is not bound by the AOJ's concession of a diagnosed disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801.

For these reasons, the Board finds the severance was proper. The claim is denied.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeremy J. Olsen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.