Citation Nr: A25031131
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-437499
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been submitted, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity (RUE) radiculopathy as secondary to a cervical condition is warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy as secondary to a cervical condition is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Evidence received after the November 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for RUE radiculopathy as secondary to a cervical condition is new and relevant to the claim for service connection for RUE radiculopathy.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that RUE radiculopathy began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy as secondary to a cervical condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1986 to July 1990, from January 1991 to February 1991, and during May 1992.

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for service connection for a cervical condition and service connection for a right arm condition as secondary to the cervical condition. The last final decision prior to the filing of the supplemental claim was a November 2023 rating decision in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for a cervical condition and entitlement to service connection for a right arm condition as secondary to the cervical condition. 

In April 2024, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal and denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for a cervical condition and entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy (claimed as a right arm condition) as secondary to the cervical condition and found that evidence submitted did not constitute new and relevant evidence to warrant readjudicating the claims.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran applied for service connection for RUE radiculopathy as secondary to a cervical condition. However, the AOJ denied service connection for a cervical condition in the appealed rating decision, and the Veteran did not pursue that matter in the VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board is bound by the finding that service connection is not in effect for a cervical condition and may only consider the claim for RUE radiculopathy on a direct service connection basis.

While the Board notes that this appeal arises from a rating decision issued in the past year, the Veteran's representative, in a May 2024 brief presentation, clearly indicated that the appeal was ready for review by the Board, noting that the Veteran had no additional argument to offer on the issues. The Board views this brief as a waiver of the Veteran's right to switch dockets in the remainder of the one-year period and will proceed with a decision in this case.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

New and relevant evidence.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), there are no limitations on a claimant's ability to file supplemental claims, as long as new and relevant evidence is provided or identified with each supplemental claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c), 3.2501. New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim. Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. 

As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim, "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard. The credibility of the evidence is presumed. See Justus v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 510, 513 (1992).

Along with the December 2023 supplemental claim, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from his primary care physician U.S., who opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's chronic cervical spine issues are a result of injuries sustained while in active service. The provider noted that the Veteran had a compression neck injury and a blow to the neck in separate incidents while in an M113 and suffered a severe motorcycle accident with head, neck, and back injuries. The provider noted that this information is available to him via the Veteran's neurosurgery records, the Veteran's official statements, and a copy of the initial medical evaluation after the Veteran's motorcycle accident from November 1989. Dr. U.S., however, did not indicate that the Veteran's entire claims file had been reviewed. 

As noted above, in the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that the evidence added to the Veteran's claims file after the November 2023 rating decision did not constitute relevant evidence. However, the AOJ made favorable findings that (1) the Veteran's RUE radiculopathy is secondary to the primary non-service-connected cervical condition, and (2) the Veteran has been diagnosed with RUE radiculopathy in the September 2023 VA examination. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

The Board finds that the December 2023 private medical opinion is relevant to the Veteran's claim as it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue - a nexus to service relating to the Veteran's cervical condition and RUE radiculopathy. Therefore, additional evidence submitted since the November 2023 rating decision constitutes new and relevant evidence sufficient to permit readjudicating the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy, and readjudication of this claim is warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy.

As noted above, the Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy. Based on the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that this claim should be denied.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran has a current disability and a nexus opinion, and therefore, two of the three elements for direct service connection are met. However, the Veteran does not meet the element for an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury. 

The Veteran submitted private treatment records in August 2015. In these records is a medical opinion from provider H.A., which provides that the Veteran has a very complex cervical spine history, and he underwent two surgeries on his spine in October 2010 and October 2012. The provider found that the Veteran suffered some degree of permanent neurologic injury as well as developed complex regional pain syndrome, particularly in the upper right extremity. The provider opined that some of the Veteran's condition is clearly consistent with his prior military service, and at least in some capacity related to that but the exact apportionment is very difficult to determine. The provider found that the Veteran had substantial injuries to his spine, much more than he would expect for the average person at his age and unfortunately there are likely to be lasting sequelae as a result of that. 

Another medical opinion in the August 2015 treatment records is from a healthcare provider, M.T., which provides that the Veteran has cervical spinal stenosis with neuropathic loss in his right arm and the Veteran's military service has contributed to his cervical spinal stenosis. 

In June 2023 and July 2023, the Veteran provided statements noting his injuries in service that may have contributed to his cervical condition and RUE radiculopathy. The Veteran noted that in 1987 he was riding in a M113 armored personnel carrier when he was thrown from the bench seat and struck his head on the roof of the vehicle that caused him an unrelenting headache. The Veteran described another incident from 1989 when he was driving a M113 when he was struck in the top of his head with a barrel of a machine gun that further intensified the continuous headaches. The Veteran further described an incident from 1989 when he experienced a motor vehicle accident (MVA) and was thrown off a motorcycle and stuck his knee and landed on his head, neck, and shoulders. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023 and was rendered the diagnoses of degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome, spinal fusion, and cervical radiculopathy. The Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms was in 1986 in Germany in the back of a M113, where he was injured and struck his head and injured his neck. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's cervical condition is at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness based on the Veteran's statements of his in-service injuries. The examiner found that based on a review of records, including the entire virtual claims file, the Veteran suffered in-service injury that later resulted in need for surgical intervention with continued debility and negative sequela through present.

In October 2023, VA requested an addendum to this opinion and noted that the medical opinion and rationale are not supported by the evidence of record. The request for clarification noted that the Veteran had a MVA in 1989 and injured his knee but there is no evidence of a neck injury or complaints of neck pain at that time, there was no injury to the neck in service and the rationale is not supported by the evidence of record. 

In response to this addendum request, the examiner clarified that his initial opinion was in error and noted that the Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms was from a M113 accident in 1986 and there was no mention of the 1989 MVA. The examiner opined that while the described injury in the M113 could result in chronic neck pain, the lack of documentation of reported neck pain for some 20 plus years from point of injury to initial documentation of complaint makes this an unlikely etiology for the Veteran's current neck pain, and a post service injury/etiology is much more likely. The examiner opined that the claimed neck condition (degenerative arthritis, spinal fusion and cervical radiculopathy) was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the injuries sustained in the back of a M113 in 1986.

In reviewing the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs), the Board finds no evidence of a 1986 M113 accident. There is evidence of the November 1989 MVA, but the treatment notes only refer to a knee injury and no complaints or treatments of neck pain or RUE radiculopathy are noted. Moreover, the Veteran's 1990 separation examination only notes left knee injury from the MVA in November 1989. Therefore, the Board notes that the Veteran's RUE radiculopathy is not directly related to the Veteran's service.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board finds the October 2023 VA addendum highly probative in formulating the medical opinion, as the VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records as contained in the claims file, examined the Veteran, and relied on his own expertise, knowledge, and training. In addition, the examiner supported his opinion with a clear and thorough rationale. Finally, the opinion provided is consistent with the STRs and other treatment records, which show no evidence of the reported M113 injury in 1986 that caused the Veteran's neck pain or RUE radiculopathy and show evidence of a November 1989 MVA but no complaints or treatments for neck pain or RUE radiculopathy related to that. 

In contrast, the Board find that the private medical opinions from providers H.A., and M.T., from August 2015 and provider U.S., from December 2023 hold less probative weight. It does not appear from the record that any of these treatment providers reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, although limited medical records were cited by Dr. U.S. in his December 2023 statement. As these treatment providers evidently did not have access to a full medical history, their opinions hold less probative weight than the VA examiner's opinion.

The Board is cognizant of the Veteran's statement that his RUE radiculopathy is due to his injury in service. Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011), as to the specific issue in this case, the etiology of RUE radiculopathy, falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). In this regard, determining the diagnosis and etiology of the condition requires medical training and credentials. Thus, the Veteran's opinion as to the cause of his claimed disability does not constitute competent evidence. 

Accordingly, there is no evidence that the Veteran's RUE radiculopathy is related to an in-service injury, event or disease. Without an in-service injury, event, or disease, service connection is not warranted. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, the evidence of record is persuasively against the claim for entitlement to service connection for RUE radiculopathy. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Khan, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.