Citation Nr: A25031836
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-459888
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include anxiety, depression, and/or adjustment disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served honorably in the United States Army from September 2018 to August 2020.

Procedural History

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for anxiety, depression, a back disability, and a right knee disability.  The appellant's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), was received by VA in July 2024.  The appellant elected the Board's Direct Review docket. 

Applicable Evidentiary Window

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Recharacterization of Issues on Appeal 

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held that the scope of a claim for service connection for a disability includes any disability that reasonably may be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).  In accordance with Clemons, the issue on appeal has been expanded to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, as reflected on the title page of this decision.

Appellant's Contentions

The appellant contends that he currently suffers from anxiety, depression, back, and knee disabilities as a direct result of his military service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, September 6, 2023.  The appellant has not provided or identified any private treatment records related to his disability claims. 

An appellant's claims must be remanded to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including when the AOJ fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records, relevant federal or private treatment records; fails to obtain a VA examination; or provides an inadequate VA examination or opinion.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).  Here, remand is required to obtain VA examinations.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, mixed mood disorder and/or adjustment disorder.  

The appellant seeks entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression caused by exposure to a hostile work environment while on active duty.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, September 6, 2023.  A review of the appellant's military records indicates that at various times he was diagnosed with depression, adjustment disorder, mixed mood disorder, and had a hospitalization for a suicide attempt.  See Military Personnel Record, July20, 2020 (noting a diagnosis of adjustment disorder); Report of Medical History, June 30, 2020 (noting a history of mixed mood disorder and past suicide attempt); Report of Medical History, September 9, 2019 (noting that the appellant sees a therapist and "had depression"). 

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, when entitlement or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record. 

38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a) states that "[e]xamples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, death of an immediate family member, etc."  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a)'s list of permissible "good causes" is not exhaustive.  In this case, after reviewing the evidence of record, the appellant has presented sufficient "good cause" such as to require a remand so that the VA examinations may be rescheduled.

The appellant was scheduled for VA examinations for depression and anxiety in January 2024.  The appellant failed to appear.  See VA Examination Scheduling Memoranda, January 8, 2024.  

On his July 2024 NOD, the appellant indicated that he was not provided with notice of the scheduled VA mental health examinations.  See NOD, July 29, 2024 ("I wasn't informed of my appointment").  There is no indication in the appellant's file that he was notified of the scheduled examinations.  VA is generally entitled to the presumption of regularity that VA employees properly discharged their official duty to notify a veteran of a VA examination.  See Kyhn v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 228, 232-33 (2011), vacated and remanded on other grounds by Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  However, in this case, it is not clear that the AOJ followed the established procedures which would entitle it to such a presumption.   The appellant's file contains numerous attempts by VA between September 2023 and January 2024 to schedule the appellant for an examination.  See generally Examination Inquiry September 13, 2023, Examination Status Notification, December 14, 2023 (noting the examination request was cancelled by MAS), Exam Scheduling Request, December 14, 2023.  There is no letter or other confirmatory documentation showing that the appellant was notified of the date and time of his VA examinations.  

Accordingly, good cause has been presented for the appellant's failure to appear at the VA examination.  Remand for a new VA examination is required.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability

The appellant claims that he sustained back and right knee injuries during his time in service and seeks service connection for the pain and functional impairment he currently experiences.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, September 6, 2023.   Specifically, the appellant states that he injured his back when he "passed out during a ruck march tossing and falling down a hill"; and that his right knee pain was caused by ruck marching.  Id.

The appellant has not been afforded a VA examination for either his claimed back or right knee disability.  The evidence of record is sufficient to trigger the VA's duty to provide the appellant with an adequate VA examination for both of these claimed disabilities.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Under McLendon, an examination is required only when (1) there is evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence establishing an "in-service event, injury or disease" or that a disease manifested either in accordance with presumptive service connection regulations or as a result of a service-connected disability, (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to the in-service event or service-connected disability, and (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case.  The threshold for determining a possibility of a nexus to service is a low one.  Id. at 83.

With respect to the first McLendon factor, evidence of a current disability, the appellant is competent to report his symptoms of back and knee pain.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 at 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  With respect to the second McLendon factor, evidence establishing an "in-service event, injury or disease", the appellant states that he injured his back and knee due to rucks and associated falls during service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, September 6, 2023.  Regarding the third and fourth McLendon factors, there is an indication that the claimed conditions could be related to service, but there is insufficient evidence of record by which the Board can make a decision.  

As the McLendon factors are met, the claims must be remanded for a VA examination and medical opinion before the Board can appropriately adjudicate the issue on the merits.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed acquired psychiatric, back, and right knee disabilities.  The clinicians must review the claims file and a complete copy of this remand in conjunction with rendering any opinion.  This review should be noted in the examination report.  The clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Please state any psychiatric diagnoses,

(b.) Please state any diagnoses associated with the appellant's back,

(c.) Please state any diagnoses associated with the appellant's right knee.

For each diagnosed disability, the clinician is requested to state whether it is likely (an approximate balance of negative and positive evidence) that the condition had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to the appellant's service. 

In providing the requested opinion, consider the appellant's description of his in-service symptoms as well as his post-service symptoms.    

The clinicians are advised that the appellant is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered.  If a clinician rejects the appellant's reports, the clinician must provide a reason for doing so.  The Board does not make any credibility determinations at this time with respect to the appellant's lay statements.

Following direction from the?United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review for service connection claims is whether the factors of the case are in an "approximate balance."? Lynch?held that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance - i.e., nearly equal - and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise.? See Id.?

The mere absence of evidence of contemporaneous treatment in the service treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the sole basis for an unfavorable opinion.  However, it is permissible to consider this as one factor in the determination regarding the origins of the claimed disability, providing there is also sufficient explanation as to why it is reasonable to have expectation of treatment in the circumstance presented.  

All opinions must be supported by a clear rationale.  The clinician is asked to explain in detail the underlying reasoning for his or her opinion, to include citing to relevant evidence, supporting factual data, prior medical opinions, and medical literature, as appropriate.

If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the clinician must explain why a more definitive response is not possible or feasible. In other words, merely saying he or she cannot respond will not suffice.

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the claims.

 

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jennifer Sullivan-Brief, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.