Citation Nr: A25031296
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240603-445928
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

The appeal for claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is dismissed.

The appeal for claim of entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is dismissed.

The appeal for claim of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is dismissed.

The appeal for claim of entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is dismissed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In correspondence received December 10, 2024, the Veteran's attorney notified VA that he wished to withdraw his appeal regarding the claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.

2. In correspondence received December 10, 2024, the Veteran's attorney notified VA that he wished to withdraw his appeal regarding the claim of entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.

3. In correspondence received December 10, 2024, the Veteran's attorney notified VA that he wished to withdraw his appeal regarding the claim of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.

4. In correspondence received December 10, 2024, the Veteran's attorney notified VA that he wished to withdraw his appeal regarding the claim of entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran for the claim of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran for the claim of entitlement to service connection for service connection for left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran for the claim of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran for the claim of entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1976 to March 1978.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In a June 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182), the Veteran timely appealed the May 2024 rating decision to the Board and requested a Hearing Review. 

In correspondence received on December 10, 2024, the Veteran's attorney notified VA that he wished to withdraw his appeal. 

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the December 10, 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's attorney also stated that he wished to "change review options to a Supplemental Claim for these conditions." The Board notes that the Veteran and his attorney may file a Supplemental Claim to the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) and submit or identify new and relevant evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, AOJ will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Withdrawal of pending appeals

The Board may dismiss any appeal which does not allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal and may be made by the appellant or the authorized representative. 38 C.F.R. § 19.55(a).

For written withdrawals of an appeal, the regulation applicable to withdrawals is controlling. See Hembree v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 1, 8 (2020) (written withdrawals need only comply with 38 C.F.R. § 20.204(b), renumbered as 38 C.F.R. § 19.55(b)). It requires, among other things, that the withdrawal be in writing, by the Veteran or his or her representative, and include the file number and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn. The Court summarized: "When the Board must analyze whether a written withdrawal is effective, its chief questions are whether the written withdrawal falls under § 20.204(b), renumbered as 38 C.F.R. § 19.55(b), and, if so, whether it complies with that regulation's requirements. If the answer to both questions is yes, then that is generally the end of the matter." Hembree, 33 Vet. App. at 7. 

In this case, the record includes a statement received by VA in December 2024 that was signed by the Veteran's attorney. It included the name of the Veteran and claim number. It stated that the Veteran wished to withdraw his claims for service connection for service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, and right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy.  

With this background, the Board finds the statement received in December 2024 satisfied the written withdrawal requirements outlined in the applicable regulation. It contains the necessary information and is clear that a withdrawal is requested for the issues of entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, and right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy on appeal. Therefore, the Veteran has withdrawn his appeal for entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, and right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy on appeal. There remains no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration with regard to these claims. Accordingly, the claims for entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, anterior tibial (deep peroneal) nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, and right upper extremity, median nerve, idiopathic peripheral neuropathy on appeal is dismissed.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kovacs, Mayer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.