Citation Nr: A25031873
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 241011-483936
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a mouth, bone, and gum disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from April 1967 to March 1970.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for mouth, bone, and gum disorder most recently addressed in a July 2019 rating decision. In July 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the October 11, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on February 5, 2025. The Veteran's representative requested the record be closed at the time of the hearing and asked to proceed with adjudication of the Veteran's claim.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or the Veteran's representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a mouth, bone, and gum disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Mouth, bone, and gum disorder

The Veteran asserts that his mouth, bone, and gum disorder either began in service or was caused by military environmental exposure, including his verified exposure to herbicide agents. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in disability compensation (service connection) claims, VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. The threshold for finding a link between current disability and service, for the purpose of determining whether an examination is warranted is low. Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006).

In the July 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity during his service in Vietnam from November 1967 to May 1968.

The Veteran's file contains medical records that indicate a diagnosis of dental decay and a history of bruxism as well as ongoing treatment for these conditions. However, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with his claim for a mouth, bone, and gum disorder. VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining a medical examination or opinion in certain circumstances. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

Considering the Veteran's contentions that his mouth, bone, and gum disorder is the result of in-service events, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain a VA examination to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current mouth, bone, and gum disorder. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). Here, a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran a VA examination and to obtain an etiology opinion.

The PACT Act provides that a TERA medical examination/opinion is required in cases of toxic-exposed Veterans where there is a claim for a disability that is not clearly due to an etiology not associated with toxic exposure, and the claim cannot otherwise be granted based on the current evidence of record. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(38); 1168, 1710(e)(1). A Veteran can establish participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, through records showing participation in a TERA, where VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim or file has a claim attribute for toxic exposure, where a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure, where medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as VHA exposure screening, or based on any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures.

Here, the VA has conceded exposure to herbicide agents for the Veteran's service in Vietnam, and thus a TERA is established. Accordingly, the Board finds that remand for a TERA-specific examination is required to satisfy a statutory or regulatory duty under the PACT Act.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any mouth, bone, and gum disorder. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's mouth, bone, and gum disorder had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay statements.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

Additionally, if direct service connection is not found, provide the Veteran an examination addressing the Veteran's presumed environmental toxin exposures with a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's mouth, bone, and gum disorder. The examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed mouth, bone, and gum disorder is due to presumed in-service toxic exposure. 

Under the PACT Act, as stated above, the Veteran has established a TERA, and the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service and conduct a synergistic and combined effect analysis of all toxic exposure risk activities that may provide a basis to service connect the claimed disability.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.