Citation Nr: A25031019
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-440508
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety condition, and depression, is remanded.   

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 2003 to August 2007. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for anxiety, PTSD, and depression, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that the Veteran is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, anxiety condition, and depression.

As a preliminary matter, the Veteran applied for service connection for PTSD, depression, anxiety condition, alcohol abuse, and sleep disturbances. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. Consequently, the Veteran was denied service connection for PTSD, anxiety condition, and depression in the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. 

When a veteran makes a claim, they are seeking service connection for symptoms, regardless of how those symptoms are labeled. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). Accordingly, the Board finds it appropriate to recharacterize the Veteran's claim as one for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include PTSD, anxiety condition, and depression. As such, this decision subsumes the three separate issues of service connection for PTSD, anxiety condition, and depression into a single issue of service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for PTSD due to experiences in service related to feared hostile military or terrorist activity. See October 2023 VA 21-526EZ. 

In a December 2023 correspondence, the Veteran stated that during service, due to his mental state, he started grinding his teeth so much that his enamel on his teeth wore down, and he was given a night guard during service. The Veteran explained that he experiences symptoms of PTSD daily, such as over-reacting very emotionally to conversations or movies about service, sitting against the wall and insisting on being able to see the main entrance when he goes out, inability to be around fireworks, difficulty around large crowds and in enclosed spaces, loss of self-confidence, and the inability to make and maintain close relationships. The Veteran also described his increased use of alcohol to cope with his mental state.

The Veteran additionally contends that he has been suffering from anxiety since separation from service. The Veteran asserts that he has consulted several doctors due to feeling pressure in his chest, and the providers have indicated that the cause is anxiety. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Finally, the Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for depression secondary to erectile dysfunction (ED) or secondary to his knee and back pain. He asserts that he developed depression after his service and began to drink on a daily basis. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ and January 2024 Statement in Support of Claim. 

In a December 2023 correspondence, the Veteran also attested to the many mental health stressors that he experienced and continued to experience after service. He described the feeling of guilt hanging over him for the lives that were taken during his service and the long-term effects of his mental health on his interpersonal relationships. The Veteran described an increase intake of alcohol, his tendency to isolate from people, his marriage having been on the brink of divorce several times, and not being able to have a close friend since separation from service. See December 2023 Correspondence. 

There is no VA examination of record for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric condition. A medical examination or medical opinion is necessary in a claim for service connection when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-86 (2006).  See also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i).

The McLendon elements are satisfied with regard to the claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition. Regarding the first element, the Veteran's lay statements show that he has experienced persistent and recurrent symptoms of PTSD, anxiety, and depression since service. Also, the Veteran's private medical record from February 2024 shows that the Veteran has been treated for anxiety. Regarding the second element, the Veteran stated that he started having PTSD symptoms during service such as grinding his teeth and withdrawing from relationships and that he has been suffering from anxiety and depression since separation from service. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ and December 2023 correspondence. The Veteran has also submitted a statement that he believes his experiences during service led to his increased drinking, and development of PTSD, depression, and anxiety, of which the symptoms have only worsened over time. See December 2023 Correspondence. Regarding the third and fourth elements, there is an indication that the Veteran's anxiety diagnosis could be related to service, but there is insufficient evidence of record by which the Board can make a decision.  

It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not obtain a VA examination and medical opinion where the McLendon elements are satisfied.  Remand is required.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depression. The record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for review in connection with the examination, and all indicated tests and studies should be undertaken. Following a review of the record, the examiner should address the below inquiries: 

(a.) Identify all current mental health conditions.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's mental health condition had its onset in, or is due to his military service? Complete this question for each of the diagnosed conditions. 

Discuss the Veteran's lay statements in his October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ and December 2023 Correspondence. 

A detailed rationale for the medical opinion must be provided.

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Clark, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.