Citation Nr: A25031957
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-457716
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to headaches and mental health condition(s), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served active duty from June 1985 until February 2005.

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2022 decision.  The Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

This matter is now before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 higher level review decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In July 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ unless rebutted by evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  With respect to the Veteran's claim of entitlement for OSA, the RO made favorable findings that: (1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA; (2) the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia; (3) the Veteran was exposed to fine particulate matter during military service; (4) the claimed primary disabilities are service connected.  The Veteran is service connected for cluster migraines/tension headaches and unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder; and (5) the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) to include secondary to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his OSA related to his military service.  See December 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  The Veteran also claim his OSA is caused by his service-connected migraines, and he wants an aggravation opinion regarding his service-connected mental health disability.  See February 2023 HLR Informal Hearing.

The VA has a duty to assist veterans and must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(1).  The medical examination or opinion must also be adequate.  A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311. 

Here, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023 and the examiner provided four medical opinions.  The VA examiner opined the following: (1) the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure; (2) the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service connected migraines; (3) the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his military service; and (4) the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his unspecified trauma and stress related disorder.

For the examiner's first opinion, the rationale provided was lack of conclusive evidence that sleep apnea is caused by toxic exposure risk activities.  He explained sleep apnea occurs when throat muscles intermittently relax and block airway during sleep.  He noted while some veterans speculate Gulf War service may be linked to OSA, this has yet to be proven.  The VA's medical examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's OSA and toxic exposure risk activities is adequate and probative as the examiner provided a complete rationale, reviewed the evidence, and the opinion was based on clear supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304.

Regarding the examiner's second opinion, the rationale stated OSA and cluster migraines or tension headaches are not medically related and medical literature fails to demonstrate a causal connection.  In addition, the Veteran reported using the CPAP has improved his headaches and oxygen may help treat cluster headaches.  Therefore, it is likely the Veteran's service-connected headaches were being aggravated by his OSA and not the other way around.  The Board finds that this medical examination and opinion are adequate and probative because they are based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Id. 

Regarding his third and fourth opinion, the examiner noted there was lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus and without chronicity during service, a post-service event or illness is considered more likely the etiology.  The examiner also noted OSA, and unspecified trauma and stressor disorder are not medically related. Finally, he stated the Veteran's mental health condition could not aggravate the Veteran's OSA because the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA first.  The Board finds these medical opinions are inadequate and less probative as the examiner did not provide a full rationale taking into consideration any of the Veteran's lay statements.  In addition, the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's mental health conditions aggravated his OSA. The VA medical opinion only denied the aggravation based solely on the date of diagnosis for each disability and that is not an adequate nor a complete rationale.  

Based on the July 2023 direct service opinion and the secondary opinion for OSA and mental health, the Board finds it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to rely on them in rendering the claim.  Therefore, a remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination and obtain a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's OSA.  The examiner should provide the requested opinions:

1. Is the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not caused by his military service?

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. Is the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  Please state upon what facts and medical principles you base this opinion.  A full rationale should be provided. The examiner is advised that aggravation is different from causation in that it did not cause the disability but rather caused an increase in severity. 

The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinions.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bond, Tyana N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.