Citation Nr: A25031288
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452371
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of service-connection for left hip condition with pain is remanded.

The issue of service-connection for right hip condition with pain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2015 to October 2023.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 rating decision issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the June 27, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service-connection for a bilateral hip condition with pain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). Under the modernized review system, the Board has jurisdictional authority to remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional regulatory or statutory duty to assist error if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. The issue of service-connection for left hip condition with pain

2. The issue of service-connection for right hip condition with pain

The Veteran contends that her claimed bilateral hip condition was incurred while on active duty.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that the issues on appeal must be remanded to ensure that the Veteran is accorded full compliance with the statutory duty to assist. 

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no findings, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions. Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023. The examiner did not find a current diagnosis of a bilateral hip condition; however, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements that she experienced bilateral hip pain since 2016, and the condition has been treated with physical therapy and Ibuprofen. The examiner's failure to address the Veteran's lay statements renders the opinion inadequate. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-60 (2020).

Additionally, pain alone that amounts to a functional impairment could establish a current disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-68 (Fed. Cir. 2018). The VA examiner also failed to address whether the Veteran's reported bilateral hip pain causes functional impairment in earning capacity as required by Saunders. 

In conclusion, the Board finds remand is necessary in order to obtain an addendum opinion addressing these deficiencies.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral hip condition with pain. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand, should be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  

After review of the claims file, the examiner must address the following:

Identify any bilateral hip condition currently present, and had its clinical onset during service, or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service.

If no such disability or disorder is identified, the examiner must also opine whether the Veteran's subjective reports of bilateral hip pain result in functional impairment that affects her earning capacity. If so, her reports of bilateral hip pain should be considered a disability for the purposes of this opinion.

The examiner must address the Veteran's reports of bilateral hip pain that began in 2016 after rucking, that the condition has been treated with physical therapy and Ibuprofen, that she currently experiences bilateral pain, tightness, and grinding in the hips, and that she is unable to walk long distances.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that her reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. However, if there is a medical reason to doubt its veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's statements or recollection are inconsistent with the evidence of record, medical principles relating to the onset and progress of the disease, the specific findings in the record, and / or your professional judgment.

A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bellack, D., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.