Citation Nr: A25031921
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-432440
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II (diabetes) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1987 to February 1990.

On an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review in March 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held the Board should not adjudicate an appeal until the time for the appellant to switch Board dockets has ended. This period ends either one year from the date the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever date is later. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). Here, the Board may proceed with adjudication because the period for the Veteran to request to switch dockets has passed.

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diabetes is due to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), as PTSD caused the Veteran to lose motivation to exercise and the Veteran tended to eat higher calorie food for comfort, causing weight gain and resulting in diabetes. See November 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

Secondary service connection is warranted for disability, which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected. When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Any increase in severity of a non-service-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice connected disease or injury will be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 01-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017) (hereinafter VAOPGCPREC 01-2017), VA's General Counsel acknowledged that the cause of obesity is multifactorial and "based on various external and internal factors and processes." The General Counsel held that obesity may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability where a claimant establishes that the obesity was caused by a service-connected disability and caused his or her current disability. Where obesity is asserted to be an intermediate step, the evidence must show that the service-connected disability "caused the veteran to become obese," that the obesity caused by the service-connected disability "was a substantial factor in causing" the current disability, and that the current disability "would not have occurred but for" the obesity caused by the service-connected disability. 

In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 350 (2020), the Court further held that the Board needs to consider the obesity-intermediate step theory predicated on 3.310 (aggravation) also where appropriate. In particular, the Court held that proper interpretation of VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 01-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability (caused a veteran to become obese/aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether the (obesity/aggravation of obesity) as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (obesity caused/obesity aggravated) by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.

A December 2021 VA opinion notes that the "condition is at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition" as "PTSD can cause fatigue [and] changes in eating habits due to anxiety leading to weight gain[.] [W]eight gain can cause diabetes mellitus, therefore PTSD can lead to diabetes mellitus [due] to fatigue[,] affecting energy [and] working out due to lack of sleep and change in eating habits."

A February 2022 VA addendum opinion noted that "[d]ue to diabetes mellitus being present prior to PTSD the diabetes mellitus is not due to PTSD as there is no evidence that supports the claim."

A March 2023 VA examination report reaffirmed the finding of diabetes, giving a slightly later diagnosis date (2008).

A March 2023 VA opinion noted that "[t]he Veteran[']s current claim of Type II DM . . . . is less likely than not caused by the SC PTSD, since there is NO MEDICAL CONNECTION of the two." The opinion provides this rationale for both aggravation of a nonservice connected condition by a service-connected condition and for secondary service connection directly. A further question asked "WHETHER THE VETERAN'S POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER CAUSED THE VETERAN TO BECOME OBESE[:]"  "Answer Question . . . NO!  PTSD does NOT medically cause obesity." Rationale was "[o]besity is caused from excess calories and decreased burning of calories, [and] is frequently hereditary." 

An additional July 2023 VA opinion notes:

The Veterans current claim of Type II DM (with DPN and ED) is less likely than not caused by the SC PTSD, since there is no medical connection of the two. There is no supportive evidence that connects the two in the medical literature, and this is common medical knowledge.

. . . There is absolutely no medical connection of Type II DM and PTSD, or its treatment. There is no supportive evidence that connects the two in the medical literature, and this is common medical knowledge.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for diabetes is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained multiple VA opinions; however, these medical opinions did not provide fully adequate rationale. 

No opinion directly answered the Walsh formulated questions, and the negative opinions contain clear errors. 

Firstly, the initial negative February 2022 opinion notes that "diabetes mellitus being present prior to PTSD" meant the PTSD could not cause diabetes. While PTSD was not service connected until March 2016, diabetes was found sometime between 2006 and 2008, and a June 2016 PTSD VA examination report noted both PTSD and alcohol abuse, with overlapping and positively correlated symptoms, and that the Veteran had excessive alcohol use starting 10 years prior. Further, the examiner noted "[t]here is a positive correlation between PTSD and the use of mood-altering substances, such as alcohol. [The] Veteran's use of alcohol has increased over the years, as his untreated symptoms became more manifest." In other words, PTSD and alcohol abuse disorder very well could have existed as early as 2006. 

Secondly, the March and July 2023 VA opinions provided unambiguous negative opinions regarding PTSD and diabetes. However, the rationale of the March 2023 VA opinion attributed obesity to excessive calorie intake and decreased burning of calories. This is also what the Veteran contends - that he had excessive calorie intake and decreased burning of calories - but that this was due to self-medicating with food and rest to decrease the intensity of his PTSD symptoms. The March 2023 VA opinion was not responsive to this contention. 

Finally, the opinions are not in accordance with legal precedent, as the Court has stated that mental disorders can cause obesity which in turn can cause diabetes through factors such as the side effects of medication(s) and "reduced physical activity or inability to follow a course of exercise or diet as a result of service-connected mental disability[.]" Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241, 248 (2021) (addressing a theory of service-connected major depressive disorder (among other service-connected disabilities) causing sleep apnea with obesity as an intermediate step).

Given the above, an additional VA opinion is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's diabetes is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) due to, or aggravated by, service-connected PTSD and alcohol abuse disorder or any resulting obesity as an intermediate step?

In answering the above questions, the examiner must address whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese the Veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity resulting from the service-connected PTSD was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected PTSD. 

The examiner is informed that the Veteran contends diabetes was diagnosed sometime between 2006 to 2008 and a June 2016 VA PTSD examination report indicated that symptoms of alcohol abuse and PTSD may have manifested as early as 2006.

The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's contention that he had excessive calorie intake and decreased burning of calories due to self-medicating with food and rest to decrease the intensity of his PTSD symptoms.

A full rationale must be provided.

 

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Yoffe, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.