Citation Nr: A25031546
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230917-377056
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellar tendon impingement syndrome (right knee disability) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease (lumbar spine disability) is denied.

An initial rating in excess of 30 percent, but no higher, for essential tremors, right upper extremity is granted; subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for essential tremors, left upper extremity is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (adjustment disorder) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder disorder is remanded.

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's right knee disability is productive of painful motion, but not flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, extension limited to 10 degrees or more, instability, effusion, ankylosis, or other symptoms or functional impairment warranting a higher rating.

2. The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is productive of painful motion, but not forward flexion to 60 degrees or less, combined range of motion to 120 degrees or less, muscle spasm or guarding resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, or other functional impairment or objective neurologic abnormality warranting a higher rating or separate ratings.

3. The Veteran's right and left upper extremity tremors result in moderate paralysis of the radial nerve.

4. The Veteran's adjustment disorder is productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DCs 5237, 5242.

3. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent, but no higher, for essential tremors, right upper extremity have been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124, 4.124a, DC 8514.

4. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for essential tremors, left upper extremity have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124, 4.124a, DC 8514.

5. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, DC 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2015 to January 2021.

In a May 2023 rating decision, service connection was granted, and initial ratings noted above were assigned, for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, adjustment disorder, and right and left upper extremity tremors.  Therein, service connection for hearing loss was also denied.  In a September 2023 rating decision service connection was granted, and an initial rating noted above was assigned, for the Veteran's right knee disability.  Therein, service connection for headaches and a right shoulder disorder was also denied.  Later in September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 to initiate an appeal to the Board's Direct Review Docket.  Thus, the Board will review the evidence of record for each claim at the time the rating decision in which the claim was decided was issued.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301.

Increased Ratings

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.? The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations.?38?U.S.C. §?1155.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. ?38?C.F.R. §?4.1.????? 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.? Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. ?38?C.F.R. §?4.7.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b);?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3.????? 

For musculoskeletal disabilities, such as those to the knees and lumbar spine, there are additional criteria.  Functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective enervation, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.? Weakness is as important as limitation of motion; a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.? 38?C.F.R. §§?4.10, 4.40, 4.45.????? 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that VA must analyze the evidence of pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination and determine the level of associated functional loss under?38?C.F.R. §?4.40, which requires VA to regard as "seriously disabled" any part of the musculoskeletal system that becomes painful on use.????? 

In?Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?32 (2011), the Court held that, although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system."?  Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." ?Id., quoting?38?C.F.R. §?4.40.????? 

With respect to joints, in particular, the?factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes.? Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity, or atrophy of disuse. ?38?C.F.R. §?4.45.????? 

Furthermore, the intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or?particular pathology?as productive of disability.? Thus,?actually painful, unstable, or?malaligned?joints, due to healed injury, are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.? The joints should be tested for pain on?both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.59.????? 

In?Burton v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?1, 5 (2011), the Court found that, when?38?C.F.R. §?4.59 is raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record, even in non-arthritis context, the Board should address its applicability.????? 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability

The Veteran claims that his 10 percent rating for his right knee disability does not reflect the severity of his symptoms.  Specifically, the Veteran states that it affects his everyday life.

Relevant to this case, ratings for the knee are available under DC 5260 based on limitation of flexion, with a 30 percent rating assigned where flexion is limited to 15 degrees, a 20 percent rating assigned where flexion is limited to 30 degrees, a 10 percent rating assigned where flexion is limited to 45 degrees, and a noncompensable rating assigned where flexion is limited to 60 degrees.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, DC 5260.?? 

Under DC 5261 based on limitation of extension, a noncompensable rating assigned where extension is limited to 5 degrees. 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, DC 5261.

The increased rating period on appeal begins with the effective date of service connection, February 1, 2022, and ends with the issuance of the September 2023 rating decision.  

The Veteran injured his right knee during service in 2017, but there are not records from the years just prior to separation from service which might indicate functional impairment in the right knee during the increased rating period on appeal.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his knees in November 2022.  The Veteran reported stiffness, pain, and loss of range of motion as well as pain with prolonged standing and walking, squatting, kneeling, and climbing.  The right knee would also occasionally swell with overuse.  No flare-ups were noted.  Active and passive range of motion for the right knee was from 0 degrees to 100 degrees.  Range of motion in the left knee was also less than normal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 (calling for comparison for range of motion only where the opposite joint is undamaged).  There was pain beginning at 75 degrees of flexion in the right knee.  Right knee pain was noted in both active and passive motion.  There was no further reduction in range of motion with repetitive motion testing or expected with repeated use over time.  Functional impairment was noted as interference with sitting and standing, disturbance of locomotion (noted as pain with prolonged walking), and less movement than normal.

The Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination is adequate to rate the claim, as the examination contains all necessary testing, including active and passive range of motion and testing for pain in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017); Correia v. Mcdonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). 

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the right knee is not warranted.  The Veteran's range of motion is from 0 degrees to 100 degrees which is not sufficient to warrant a compensable rating based on reduction in flexion or extension under DCs 5260 or 5261.  However, the Veteran did experience painful motion and pain with use, such as pain with prolonged standing, sitting, walking as well as bending, squatting, and climbing.  This warrants a 10 percent rating, but no higher.  See Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).  While the Veteran did report having right knee instability in the early years of his active-duty service, there has been none indicated in the record in recent years.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran does not currently experience right knee instability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257; see also VA Examination Report dated in November 2022.  Further, there are no additional symptoms which are not already contemplated by the rating assigned.  While the Veteran has stated that the disability affects his daily life, the Veteran did not give details indicating impairment not already reflected in the evidence of record, and the Board, as discussed above, has rated the right knee based on the more detailed descriptions of functional limitations in the record.

Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability

The Veteran claims that his current lumbar spine rating does not adequately reflect the severity of his symptoms.  Specifically, the Veteran stated that his lumbar spine disability affects his daily lifestyle.

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is rated according to 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.? The formula provides for: a 100 percent rating for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine; a 50?percent rating for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine; a 40 percent rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; a 20 percent rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis or abnormal kyphosis; and a 10 percent rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion for the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of height.? Id.

The increased rating period on appeal begins with the effective date of service connection, November 30, 2022, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his spine in November 2022.  The Veteran noted having pain and stiffness in his back.  No flare-ups were noted.  Range of motion was to 75 degrees in forward flexion, 15 degrees in extension, 25 degrees in right lateral flexion, 20 degrees in left lateral flexion, and 30 degrees in right and left lateral flexion.  Pain in active motion only was noted in forward flexion and extension at the end point of range of motion.  Pain did not result in functional loss.  Passive range of motion testing was not performed because it may cause further injury.  There was no further reduction in range of motion upon repetitive motion testing or expected with repeated use over time.  The Veteran did have muscle spasms across the lumbar region due to strain, but they did not result in abnormal gait or spinal contour.  The Veteran's disability was said to interfere with sitting and standing, disturb locomotion, and result in less movement than normal.  Specifically, the Veteran had pain with prolonged standing and walking and with bending and lifting.  The Veteran reported having an occasional tingling in the lower extremities when he sat for too long, but muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, and sensation were normal in the lower extremities, and the examiner found there were no objective signs or symptoms of radiculopathy.  No further symptoms were noted.

Per an January 2023 imaging report, the Veteran noted pain with prolonged sitting and standing.  Imaging showed that there was a subtle physiologic wedge deformity at the lower thoracic levels, but no acute compression fracture or displacement in the thoracic spine.  There was mild disc space narrowing at the lumbosacral junction, but no disproportionate disc space narrowing.  There was some minor marginal spurring, but no other abnormalities were noted.

The Board finds that the November 2022 VA examination is adequate to rate the claim, as the examination contains all necessary testing, including active range of motion and testing for pain in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  See Sharp, supra; Correia, supra.  Although passive range of motion was not tested, the examiner found that this testing could not be performed because it could result in further injury.  Given this notation, the Board finds that the examination is adequate, and a remand to obtain further information would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(d).

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the lumbar spine disability is not warranted.  The Veteran's range of motion in forward flexion is to 75 degrees which is greater than 60 degrees, and total range of motion in the lumbar spine is 195 degrees which is greater than 120 degrees which is required for a higher rating.  The Veteran did have muscle spasms, but they did not result in abnormal gait or spinal contour.  No ankylosis, or its functional equivalent, have been noted.  Some disc space narrowing was noted in the imaging of record; however, this is contemplated by the 10 percent rating assigned.  The Veteran has report difficulty with prolonged standing and walking as well as pain with lifting and bending.  However, this functional impairment is contemplated by the rating assigned.  See Southall-Norman v. McDonald, supra.  While the Veteran has stated that the disability affects his daily life, the Veteran did not give further specifics, and the Board has rated the disability based on the more detailed descriptions of functional impairment noted in the evidence of record.

The Board does note that the Veteran has reported a tingling sensation in his lower extremities after sitting for prolonged periods.  See 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (1) (directing VA to separately rate objective neurological abnormalities that result from spine disorders).  However, upon testing, no objective neurological abnormalities were noted at the November 2022 VA examination, such as muscle weakness or reduced reflexes or sensation, and the examiner did not diagnose radiculopathy or other neurological abnormality.  Therefore, separate ratings for lower extremity radiculopathy or nerve impairment are not warranted at this time.

Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and a rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra.

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for essential tremors, right upper extremity

4. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for essential tremors, left upper extremity

The Veteran claims that his ratings for his upper extremity tremors do not reflect the severity of his symptoms.  Specifically, the Veteran states that his tremors have an extreme effect on his daily lifestyle.

The Veteran's right and left upper extremity tremors are rated under DC 8514, which provides for ratings of the radial nerve group.? Thus, relevant to this case, mild incomplete paralysis is rated 20 percent in either extremity; moderate incomplete paralysis is rated 30 percent in the dominant extremity and 20 percent in the nondominant extremity; severe incomplete paralysis is rated 50 percent in the dominant extremity and 40 percent in the nondominant extremity; and complete paralysis is rated 70 percent in the dominant extremity and 60 percent in the nondominant extremity.  Complete paralysis is defined as: drop of hand and fingers, wrist and fingers perpetually flexed, the thumb adducted falling within the line of the outer border of the index finger; cannot extend hand at wrist, extend proximal phalanges of fingers, extend thumb, or make lateral movement of wrist; supination of hand, extension and flexion of elbow weakened, the loss of synergic motion of extensors impairs the hand grip seriously; total paralysis of the triceps occurs only as the greatest rarity.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, DC 8514.? 

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.? Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."? 38?C.F.R. §?4.6.?The Rating Schedule does not?define "mild," "moderate," or "severe;" however, according to MERRIAM WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "mild" means "gentle in nature or behavior, not being or involving what is extreme, not severe." "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect. "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree.? 

The increased rating period on appeal begins with the effective date of service connection, February 1, 2022, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.  

Per April and May 2021 STRs, in the later part of his active-duty service, the Veteran had tremors in each hand and fingers which were intermittent, but worse with activity.  The tremors caused difficulties with eating, drinking, and writing.  He was treated with medication, but symptoms did not improve.  The Veteran also stated that he had some difficulty with pouring, speaking, and working.  There has been no indication, however, that the Veteran was unable to complete these tasks.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his tremors in November 2022.  The Veteran is right-handed.  It was noted that the Veteran had significant tremors for someone his age, causing his writing to be very messy.  Muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal throughout the upper extremities.  Functional limitation was noted as difficulty with manual dexterity, such as handling small objects like a screwdriver.  The Veteran also had difficulty eating and drinking without making a mess. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's right and left upper extremity tremors are moderate in nature because they are of limited scope and affect.  Testing has shown that the Veteran has normal strength and reflexes in the upper extremities, including in the hands and fingers.  However, his tremors affect his fine motor skills, particularly when eating and drinking, at times making a mess of himself.  The Veteran also had difficulty with other fine motor tasks, like writing legibly.  The tremors cause difficulties with these activities.  However, more significant symptoms, such as loss of grip strength or reports of dropping items have not been noted in the record.  There was also no indication that the Veteran is unable or needs assistance with feeding himself, cooking, or dressing.  While the Veteran has stated that the disability has extreme effects on his daily life, the Veteran did not give further specifics beyond the functional impairment noted in the evidence of record and discussed above.  

In summary, because the Veteran is right hand dominant, a 30 percent rating is granted for right upper extremity tremors due to moderate incomplete paralysis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8514 (providing for a 30 percent rating for moderate incomplete paralysis in the dominant extremity, but only a 20 percent rating for moderate incomplete paralysis in the nondominant extremity).  However, as the evidence of record otherwise persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, ratings in excess of 30 percent for right upper extremity tremors and 20 percent for left upper extremity tremors are denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra.  

5. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder 

The Veteran claims that his current 30 percent rating for his adjustment disorder does not reflect the severity of his symptoms.  Specifically, he states that his adjustment disorder has caused "hard effects" in his life.

The regulations for rating mental disorders are found in 38?C.F.R. §§?4.125-4.130. The Board notes that the Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under DC 9440 which is rated according to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.???? 

Under DC 9440, a 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).???? 

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped, speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.???? 

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.???? 

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, or for the veteran's own occupation or name.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.???? 

The rating of psychiatric disabilities is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a rating under the rating criteria.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.130; Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).? The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.? Mauerhan v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436 (2002).? In the context of determining whether a higher rating is warranted, the analysis requires considering not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas.? The rating criteria requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas. 38?C.F.R. §?4.130, DC 9440.

Further, when rating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission and must also assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.126(a).???? 

The increased rating period on appeal begins with the effective date of service connection, February 1, 2022, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.

In preparing for separation, in a December 2021 Report of Medical History, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping, waking up 4 times per night.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his adjustment disorder in October 2022.  The Veteran noted getting along well with his spouse to whom he had been married for several years.  They socialized with both of their families.  The Veteran had been working a job for 10 months.  He thought he was doing well at work, but the job left him with little time to socialize.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had feelings of detachment from others, depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  The Veteran was polite, cooperative, and open.  His mood, affect, and speech were within normal limits.  He denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.

The Board finds that the Veteran's adjustment disorder is productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  The Veteran's symptoms have been noted as depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss, all of which are listed in the 30 percent criteria.  The examiner did note that the Veteran had feelings of detachment from others and disturbances of motivation and mood, which are listed in or similar to those symptoms listed in the 50 percent criteria.  However, most of the symptoms which the Veteran exhibited are listed in the 30 percent criteria, indicating that the Veteran's adjustment disorder does not more nearly approximate the nature and severity of a disability which would warrant a 50 percent rating.  Further, symptoms listed in the criteria for higher ratings, such as suicidal ideation, near-continuous panic or depression, or short- and long-term memory loss, are not present.  Additionally, it is noted that when assessing the diagnostic criteria for PTSD, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had irritable behavior and angry outbursts, the Board notes that such findings were not recorded on examination. No impaired judgment was noted. Rather, the Veteran reported doing well at his job and having a good relationship with his spouse and socializing with family. His affect and mood were within normal limits.  As indicated by the October 2022 examiner, this indicates that, despite his adjustment disorder, the Veteran is able to be productive both in work and in social situations most of the time.  Thus, his adjustment disorder is productive of no more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  While the Veteran has stated that the disability resulted in "hard effects" on his life, the Veteran did not give further specifics.  Thus, the Board has rated the claim based on specific reports of functional limitation noted in the record.  Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and a rating in excess of 30 percent for adjustment disorder is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for headaches 

Based on the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, a remand is necessary to obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's headaches.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran in his October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ stated his believe that his headaches are related to airborne operations and heavy artillery fire.  At a November 2022 Headaches Examination, the Veteran stated that he hit his head several times and believes he lost consciousness once during service, after which his headaches began.  In May 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Examination in which he reported being in a roll-over accident after which he experienced head pain and hitting his head to the ground during jumps.  At a September 2023 VA examination, the Veteran stated that his headaches had onset 4 years prior.

While many STRs note that the Veteran denied headaches or did not have frequent headaches, a November 2020 STR notes follow up headaches. Further, STRs show that the Veteran consistently denied prior concussions or TBIs during service.

In September 2023, the examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches have a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis. However, whether his headaches have a pathophysiology which is at least partially known was not addressed.  Thus, a remand is warranted to address this inquiry.  See Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383 (2018).

As to direct service connection, the examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches were less likely than not related to service because, even though the Veteran received ongoing treatment for his tremors, he consistently denied having headaches.  Further, the November 2020 STR noting follow up headaches would not indicate a headache disorder as no further mention of headaches were noted.  While the examiner adequately addressed the November 2020 STR, he did not address the Veteran's statements that his headache symptoms, which typically last only 45 minutes to an hour at a time, are of the type that would typically be reported by a patient and notated in STRs.  Thus, the Board will ask that an examiner address this point on remand.

In a September 2023 medical opinion, the examiner also opined that the Veteran's headaches were less likely than not related to a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  In support of the opinion, the examiner stated that some typical causes of headaches are stress, eye strain and temporomandibular joint disorders.  Headaches from toxic exposures would cease with the end of the exposure.  This portion of the September 2023 medical opinion adequately addresses the Veteran's TERA participation.

Thus, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's headaches.  Specifically, an opinion is needed as to whether the Veteran's headaches have pathophysiology that is at least partially known and whether his headaches are directly related to service.

2. Service connection for a right shoulder disorder 

Based on the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, a remand is necessary to obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's right shoulder disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran is claiming that his right shoulder disorder is related to airborne operations during service.  An April 2018 STR notes the Veteran's report of right shoulder pain radiating to his trapezius.  The Veteran had pain with adduction greater than 60 degrees and with rotation.  Imaging showed no recent fracture or dislocation, though sclerotic focus was seen within the middle third of the clavicle.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his right shoulder in November 2022.  A diagnosis of rotator cuff tendonitis was noted.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's right shoulder disorder was less likely than not related to service because there was a lack of substantiating evidence to support a nexus between the current diagnosis and any diagnosed chronic right shoulder pathology noted during service.  Further, the Veteran did not note a shoulder disorder upon separation.

The Board finds that the November 2022 medical opinion is inadequate.  Specifically, the examiner did not explain why the Veteran's current right shoulder disorder is not related to his in-service right shoulder injury noted in the April 2018 STR.  Rather, the examiner provided a conclusory statement, adding only that a shoulder disorder was not noted or reported on separation.  Thus, the Board will remand the claim to obtain a new medical opinion.

3. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss 

The Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain the results of audiometric testing conducted during service.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c).

The Veteran's hearing was tested throughout service.  STRs show that the Veteran had hearing tests in January 2017, February 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2020, March 2021, and April 2021.  While it appears that all STRs other than hearing test results have been obtained, only audiometric test results from March 2021 and April 2021 are of record.  Although the Veteran has not been shown to have a hearing loss disability as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 upon examination in January 2023, the Board must also consider whether the Veteran had a hearing loss disability just prior to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  Because, if granted, service connection could be effective from the day after separation from service, a remand is necessary to ensure all audiometric test results conducted during service have been obtained.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain all audiometric test results conducted during service, including those conducted in January 2017, February 2018, January 2019, March 2019, and May 2020.  Make as many attempts as necessary to obtain these records, unless the records no longer exist or further attempts would be futile.  If unable to obtain these records, provide the Veteran notice consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. After completing the above, obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's headaches.  Specifically, the examiner should opine as to:

(A) Whether the Veteran's headaches are of a partially or fully understood pathophysiology.

(B) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's headaches are related to service, or onset within a year after separation from service.  In doing so, the examiner should consider whether the Veteran's headache symptoms (head pain for 45 minutes to an hour and light sensitivity) are of those which would typically be reported by a patient and recorded.  The examiner should also consider the Veteran's reports of hitting his head after jumps and injury in a motor vehicle accident.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered that explains why the disorder is or is not related to service.

3. After completing directive 1 above, obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's right shoulder disorder.  Specifically, the examiner should opine as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right shoulder disorder is related to service.  The examiner should discuss the April 2018 STR which notes the Veteran's report of right shoulder pain radiating to his trapezius; pain with adduction greater than 60 degrees and with rotation; and imaging showing no recent fracture or dislocation, though sclerotic focus was seen within the middle third of the clavicle.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered that explains why the disorder is or is not related to service.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. George

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.