Citation Nr: A25031534
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240706-453780
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from August 2014 to August 2018, to include service in Djibouti and Bahrain. His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal and the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in July 2024, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional error. The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

The record reflects that the Veteran was scheduled for examinations in connection with his claims, but that he failed report.

Although the record shows that the AOJ wrote the Veteran and indicated that a private medical facility would advise him of the date, time, and place of his examinations, it is not clear from the record what the private medical facility did to inform the Veteran of those examinations, or to work with him to reschedule the examinations if he was unable to attend on the date that was originally scheduled. Without documentation of the efforts made to contact and work with the Veteran, the Board cannot conclude that the AOJ satisfied its duty to assist him in developing the facts pertinent to his claims. As such, a remand is required.

The Veteran is hereby advised that the examinations in question were scheduled to assist VA in properly adjudicating his claims, and that his failure to report for future examinations may result in his claims being disallowed. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has indicated that "[t]he duty to assist is not always a one-way street." Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). If a veteran desires help with his claim, he must cooperate with VA's efforts to assist him, to include reporting for scheduled examinations. Id.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange to have the Veteran rescheduled for the prior examinations pertaining to hearing loss, and disabilities of the shoulders, back, and knees. Efforts to contact him for purposes of arranging and/or notifying him of the date, time, and location of the examinations should be fully documented in the record. 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Joseph T. Leonard, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.