Citation Nr: A25031977
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 220912-275237
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was not the product of clear and unmistakable error (CUE).

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is denied.

Entitlement to an initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis is granted.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran filed her original service connection claim for seborrheic dermatitis (which she characterized as a skin condition) in statements on a VA Form 21 526EZ, "Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits," dated on May 3, 2018, and date-stamped as received electronically that same day by VA.

2.  VA skin diseases Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) on September 5, 2018, showed that the Veteran's seborrheic dermatitis was related to active service and that she treated it with topical corticosteroids for 6 weeks or more but not constantly in the previous 12 months; this finding supports the assignment of an initial zero percent (non-compensable) rating for the service-connected seborrheic dermatitis under either the former or revised rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities.

3.  In a rating decision dated on September 6, 2018, and issued to the Veteran and her former service representative on September 10, 2018, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted service connection for seborrheic dermatitis and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018; this decision was not appealed and became final.

4.  The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0966, "Intent To File A Claim For Compensation And/Or Pension Or Survivors Pension And/Or DIC," dated on August 17, 2021, which VA acknowledged in a letter sent to her and her agent that same day.

5.  The Veteran, through her agent, filed a claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision in statements on a VA Form 20 0996, "Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review," dated on August 23, 2021, and date-stamped as received electronically by VA that same day.

6.  The Veteran, through her agent, filed her original claims of service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and for costochondritis in statements on a VA Form 21 526EZ, "Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits," dated on August 23, 2021, and date-stamped as received electronically by VA that same day.

7.  In the currently appealed AMA rating decision dated on October 28, 2021, and issued to the Veteran and her agent on November 1, 2021, the AOJ denied, in pertinent part, the Veteran's claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision, and granted the claims of service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, assigning a 30 percent rating effective August 17, 2021, and for costochondritis, assigning a zero percent rating effective August 17, 2021. 

8.  The Veteran disagreed with the October 2021 AMA rating decision with respect to the denial of her claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision and requested higher initial ratings for her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and for her service-connected costochondritis and an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for the initial zero percent rating for service-connected costochondritis in statements on a VA Form 10182, "Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice Of Disagreement)," dated on September 12, 2022, and date-stamped as received electronically that same day by VA.

9.  Statements concerning the Veteran's entitlement to an initial compensable rating for service-connected seborrheic dermatitis on the basis of CUE reflect disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the evidence in the September 6, 2018, rating decision.

10.  The Veteran's service-connected costochondritis is manifested by, at worst, occasional weakness, occasional fatigue, and occasional uncertainty of movement of the left Muscle Group XXI muscles, 4/5 muscle strength on bilateral shoulder abduction, and tenderness to palpation in the left costochondral junctions under and around the left breast.

11.  Because the Veteran reported experiencing occasional pain as a result of her service-connected costochondritis and taking pain medication and muscle relaxers which relieved this pain on VA muscle injuries DBQ dated on September 1, 2021, an opinion concerning the ameliorative effects of medication would not impact the analysis of her entitlement to an initial compensable rating for costochondritis.

12.  The Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is manifested by, at worst, complaints of self-isolation and feeling more withdrawn, anxiety, depression, and a reported history of infrequent panic attacks with symptoms of a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks which occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.

13.  The record evidence shows that August 17, 2021, is the appropriate effective date for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis because that is the date that VA received the Veteran's intent to file.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was not the product of CUE.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5109A, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105.

2.  The criteria for an initial rating greater than 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440.  

3.  The criteria for an initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.45, 4.59, 4.73, DC 5321.

4.  The criteria for an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active U.S. Air Force service from May 1993 to May 2000.  She also had additional unverified service.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2021 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board only may consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2021 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claims listed above, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, then she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20 0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes here that, in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23 1798 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently held that, when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant Diagnostic Code (DC) does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of each musculoskeletal disability (here, costochondritis) in order to comply with the Court's decision in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  Here, DC 5321 for evaluating costochondritis does not reference medication use.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  As discussed in more detail below, the Veteran reported experiencing occasional pain as a result of her service-connected costochondritis and taking pain medication and muscle relaxers which relieved this pain on VA muscle injuries DBQ dated on September 1, 2021.  This DBQ found that occasional weakness, occasional fatigue, and occasional uncertainty of movement of the left Muscle Group XXI muscles, 4/5 muscle strength on bilateral shoulder abduction, and tenderness to palpation in the left costochondral junctions under and around the left breast was attributable to the service-connected costochondritis.  Taken together, this DBQ persuasively suggests to the Board that the baseline severity of the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis is no more than mild.  It also suggests either that the Veteran did not take medication to treat her service-connected costochondritis symptoms prior to reporting for examination or that the symptoms of her service-connected costochondritis noted on examination were not severe enough to warrant medication.  Thus, the Board concludes that an opinion concerning the ameliorative effects of medication would not impact the analysis of the Veteran's entitlement to an initial compensable rating for costochondritis and a remand of the higher initial rating claim for costochondritis is not required.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994) (holding that remands which would only result in unnecessarily imposing additional burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the claimant are to be avoided).

Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the issues on appeal should be characterized as stated above.  Neither the Veteran nor her representative has raised any other issues nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, to include entitlement to an additional disability rating, an extraschedular rating for a service-connected disability, service connection for another disability as secondary to a service-connected disability, or to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU).  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 370 (2017) (confirming that Board not required to address issues unless specifically raised by claimant or reasonably raised by record evidence).

1. The September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was not the product of CUE

The Board is not persuaded that the September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was the product of CUE.  The Veteran and her agent essentially contend that the AOJ committed CUE in the September 2018 rating decision by not assigning an initial 40 percent rating for service-connected seborrheic dermatitis under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities.  The Board notes initially that, because the AOJ subsequently recharacterized this disability as seborrheic capitis, it will refer to this service-connected disability as seborrheic capitis for the remainder of this decision.  The Veteran and her agent essentially contend that the AOJ misapplied 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.118 and misinterpreted the record evidence in assigning an initial zero percent rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision.  They finally contend that, but for AOJ error in the September 2018 rating decision, the Veteran is entitled to an initial 40 percent rating for her service-connected seborrheic capitis under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities.

The Board finds, however, that the AOJ properly considered the relevant evidence (VA examination in September 2018) and governing law and regulations when it granted service connection for seborrheic capitis and assigned an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, in the September 2018 rating decision.  The arguments presented by the Veteran and her agent essentially disagree with how the AOJ weighed the record evidence in the September 6, 2018, rating decision which can never rise to the level of a valid CUE claim.

The Veteran filed her original service connection claim for seborrheic capitis (which she characterized as a skin condition) in statements on a VA Form 21 526EZ, "Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits," dated on May 3, 2018, and date-stamped as received electronically that same day by VA.

In a rating decision dated on September 6, 2018, and issued to the Veteran and her former service representative on September 10, 2018, the AOJ granted service connection for seborrheic capitis (which it characterized as seborrheic dermatitis) and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018.  The AOJ stated that May 3, 2018, was the appropriate effective date for this award because that was the date that VA received the Veteran's claim.  The AOJ essentially concluded that an initial zero percent (non-compensable) rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis was warranted based on VA examination findings showing characteristic lesions affecting less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of the body and less than 5 percent of the entire body and no more than topical therapy required for treatment over the previous 12 month period.  This decision was not appealed and became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.1103.  The Veteran also did not submit any relevant evidence or argument within 1 year of the September 2018 rating decision which would render it non-final for VA adjudication purposes.  See Buie v Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 251-52 (2011).

The Veteran, through her agent, filed a claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision in statements on a VA Form 20 0996, "Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review," dated on August 23, 2021, and date-stamped as received electronically by VA that same day.  The agent essentially contended in a statement attached to the VA Form 20 0996 that, under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities effective prior to August 13, 2018, the Veteran is entitled to an initial 40 percent rating for her service-connected seborrheic capitis (which the agent characterized as seborrheic dermatitis).  The agent pointed to findings obtained on VA examination in September 2018 which showed that the Veteran used "Corticosteroids, Betamethasone lotion and Ketoconazole shampoo that were topical and the duration of medication in the past 12 months were [sic] 6 weeks or more, but not constant for both medications."  (Emphasis in original.)  The agent argued that, under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities effective prior to August 13, 2018, "a rating of 40% is assigned for systemic therapy including corticosteroids that are topical, constant or near-constant over the past 12 months."  (Emphasis in original.)  The agent also essentially argued that the AOJ committed an error of law in not applying the former and revised rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities when it assigned an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision.

In the currently appealed AMA rating decision dated on October 28, 2021, and issued to the Veteran and her agent on November 1, 2021, the AOJ denied, in pertinent part, the Veteran's claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision.  The AOJ stated that the assignment of an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision was not CUE "because the decision was properly based on the available evidence of record at the time and the rules then in effect."  The AOJ also stated:

There is no evaluation of 40 percent for dermatitis under either the old or new criteria under 38 CFR 4.118.  In addition, the term systemic therapy that is contained in the general rating formula for the skin and in certain additional diagnostic codes (DCs) under 38 CFR 4.118 refers to treatment that is administered through any route (orally, injection, suppository, intranasally) other than the skin.  Medications that are applied topically (directly to the skin), including topical corticosteroids or immunosuppressives, are not considered systemic for Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) purposes.

The changes to 38 CFR 4.118 effective on August 13, 2018, preclude any consideration of topical therapy, irrespective of the extent of application to the body, as systemic therapy.  For claims filed prior to August 13, 2018, where the skin condition is evaluated under the historical 38 CFR 4.118, medications that are applied topically (directly to the skin), including topical corticosteroids or immunosuppressives, are generally not considered systemic for VA purposes.  Under the historical rating criteria, a topical corticosteroid may only be considered systemic therapy where it is administered on such a large scale over the body that it affects the body as a whole.  The evidence of record does not suggest that the Veteran's seborrheic capitus was/is treated so extensively with a topical corticosteroid that it may be consistent with systemic therapy.

The Veteran disagreed, in pertinent part, with the October 2021 AMA rating decision with respect to the denial of her claim of CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision in statements on a VA Form 10182, "Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice Of Disagreement)," dated on September 12, 2022, and date-stamped as received electronically that same day by VA.

The Board notes that previous determinations, which are final and binding, including decisions of service connection, degree of disability and other issues, will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE.  38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).  To establish a valid CUE claim, a Veteran must show that either the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were not before the adjudicator or that the statutory or regulatory provisions extant at the time were applied incorrectly.  Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310 (1992).  The Court has stressed consistently the rigorous nature of the concept of CUE.  CUE is an administrative failure to apply the correct statutory and regulatory provisions to the correct and relevant facts; it is not mere misinterpretation of facts.  Oppenheimer v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 370, 372 (1991).  Clear and unmistakable errors are errors that are undebatable so that it can be said that reasonable minds could conclude only that the original decision was fatally flawed at the time it was made.  Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-4.  It must be remembered that CUE is a very specific and rare kind of error.  Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43 (1993).  

The Court has propounded a three-prong test to determine whether CUE is present in a prior determination: (1) either the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were not before the adjudicator (i.e., more than a simple disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated) or the statutory or regulatory provisions extant at that time were incorrectly applied; (2) the error must be "undebatable" and of the sort "which, had it not been made, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made"; and (3) a determination that there was CUE must be based on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question.  Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994), quoting Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992) (en banc).  A determination that there was CUE must be based on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question and not on subsequent determinations of record.  Damrel, 6 Vet. App. at 245.  A mere difference of opinion in the outcome of the adjudication or a disagreement as to how facts were weighed and evaluated does not provide a basis upon which to find that VA committed administrative error during the adjudication process.  Luallen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 92, 96 (1995).  Even where the premise of error is accepted, if it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued, the error complained of cannot be CUE.  Allegations that previous adjudications had weighed and evaluated the evidence improperly also can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE.  Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43 44.

The Board again notes that CUE is a very specific and rare kind of error and a mere difference of opinion in the outcome of the adjudication or a disagreement as to how facts were weighed and evaluated does not provide a basis upon which to find that VA committed administrative error during the adjudication process.  Id.; see also Luallen, 8 Vet. App. at 96.  In challenging the award of service connection and an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision, the Veteran and her agent contend that the AOJ committed CUE in this rating decision by misapplying the extant law and regulations.  They specifically contend that the AOJ misapplied 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.118 and misinterpreted the extant record evidence in assigning an initial zero percent rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision.  They finally contend that, but for AOJ error in the September 2018 rating decision, the Veteran is entitled to an initial 40 percent rating for her service-connected seborrheic capitis under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities.  None of these arguments rise to the level of a valid CUE claim.

With respect to the argument that the AOJ committed CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision by misinterpreting the record evidence and misapplying the extant law at that time, the Board notes initially that this argument merely reflects disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the evidence in that rating decision.  Such argument never rises to the level of a valid CUE claim.  The Veteran, through her agent, specifically argued in the August 2021 CUE motion (submitted as part of a VA Form 20 0996) that the AOJ committed CUE in the September 6, 2018, rating decision by misapplying the former 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7806, in that decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7806 (effective prior to August 13, 2018).  As noted above, the agent contended that the AOJ failed to apply the former DC 7806 which permitted the assignment of an initial 40 percent rating based on findings in the September 2018 VA examination showing that the service-connected seborrheic capitis required the use of topical corticosteroids for 6 weeks or more in a 12 month period.  

This argument, however, reflects mere disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the record evidence (here, the September 2018 VA examination) in the September 2018 rating decision which can never be a valid CUE claim.  In other words, it is not CUE for the AOJ to weigh the evidence in a rating decision concerning the appropriate disability rating for a service-connected disability.  This argument also misreads or misunderstands both the General Rating Formula For Skin Disabilities in effect prior to the regulatory amendments effective on August 13, 2018, and the findings obtained on VA examination on September 5, 2018.  The AOJ specifically noted in the currently appealed AMA rating decision issued in November 2021 that a 40 percent rating was not permitted under either the former or revised DC 7806 because no such rating was available under this DC.  And, contrary to the assertions made by the Veteran's agent in the CUE motion, the use of topical corticosteroids for 6 weeks or more but not constantly in a 12 month period to treat service-connected seborrheic capitis affecting less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of the body and less than 5 percent of the total body area supports assigning an initial zero percent rating under the former DC 7806.  Id.  

The Board acknowledges here that the Federal Circuit has held that "use of a topical corticosteroid could be considered either systemic therapy or topical therapy based on the factual circumstances of each case."  See Johnson v. Shulkin, 862 F.3d 1351, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2017) (Johnson II), rev'g sub nom. Johnson v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 497 (2016) (Johnson I).  The Court also has held that a proper analysis of whether the use of a topical corticosteroid to treat a service-connected skin disability is either systemic therapy or topical therapy includes the method by which the topical treatment works and whether it affects the body as a whole to treat the affected area.  See Burton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 286, 291-94 (2018).  The Burton Court provided a non-exhaustive list of circumstances by which topical corticosteroids could be considered systemic therapy, to include scale of application, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics of the medication, and the medication's side effects.  Id.  Here, the Veteran's agent essentially argues in the August 2021 CUE motion that the use of a topical corticosteroid alone merits an initial compensable rating for a service-connected skin disability without analyzing the specific factual circumstances, the method by which the topical treatment works, and/or whether it affects the body as a whole to treat the affected area.  This argument again reflects a disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the evidence in the September 2018 rating decision and does not rise to the level of a valid CUE claim.

The AOJ also correctly applied the extant law and regulations when it assigned an initial zero percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision challenged in this CUE appeal.  The AOJ concluded in the September 2018 rating decision that an initial zero percent rating was appropriate based on the findings obtained at the VA examination dated that same month which showed only that characteristic lesions affecting less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of the body and less than 5 percent of the total body area and a topical corticosteroid was required for treatment of 6 weeks or more but not constantly in a 12 month period for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis.  In other words, in evaluating the appropriate disability rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision, the AOJ analyzed the specific factual circumstances of the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis, the method by which the topical treatment worked to treat this disability, and considered whether the topical treatment affected the Veteran's body as a whole to treat the affected area.  Thus, the Board finds that, in the September 2018 rating decision, the AOJ considered the applicability of both the former and revised regulatory criteria for evaluating skin disabilities and the interpretation of those criteria found in Johnson and Burton concerning what constitutes systemic therapy versus topical therapy in assigning appropriate disability ratings for service-connected skin disabilities.  The AOJ also appropriately concluded in the September 2018 rating decision that the Veteran's use of a topical corticosteroid for 6 weeks or more but not constantly in a 12 month period to treat her service-connected seborrheic capitis which affected less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of her body and less than 5 percent of her total body area constituted only topical therapy (and not systemic therapy) for purposes of assigning an initial zero percent rating.  The Board also finds that any argument to the contrary reflects a disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the record evidence in the September 2018 rating decision and is not a valid CUE claim.

The September 2018 rating decision findings concerning the appropriate initial rating for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis also are in accord with the AOJ's findings in the currently appealed AMA rating decision issued in November 2021 concerning the Veteran's claim of CUE in September 2018 rating decision.  The AOJ specifically found in the November 2021 AMA rating decision that, under the former DC 7806, "medications that are applied topically (directly to the skin), including topical corticosteroids or immunosuppressives, are generally not considered systemic for VA purposes."  The AOJ also found in the November 2021 AMA rating decision that, under the former DC 7806, "a topical corticosteroid may only be considered systemic therapy where it is administered on such a large scale over the body that it affects the body as a whole.  The evidence of record does not suggest that the Veteran's seborrheic capitus was/is treated so extensively with a topical corticosteroid that it may be consistent with systemic therapy."  These findings reflect appropriate consideration by the AOJ of the applicability of both the former and revised regulatory criteria for evaluating skin disabilities and the interpretation of those criteria found in Johnson and Burton concerning what constitutes systemic therapy versus topical therapy in assigning appropriate disability ratings for service-connected skin disabilities.  Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the AOJ properly applied the extant law and regulations to the extant record evidence in the September 2018 rating decision.

With respect to the argument that, but for AOJ error in the September 2018 rating decision, the Veteran is entitled to an initial 40 percent rating for her service-connected seborrheic capitis under the former rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities, the Board again notes that this argument reflects disagreement with how the AOJ weighed the evidence in that prior final rating decision.  The AOJ considered the record evidence as a whole at the time of the September 2018 rating decision challenged in this appeal and concluded that an initial zero percent rating was appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis.  As the AOJ concluded in the currently appealed AMA rating decision issued in November 2021, "The evidence of record does not suggest that the Veteran's seborrheic capitus was/is treated so extensively with a topical corticosteroid that it may be consistent with systemic therapy."  This conclusion in the currently appealed AMA rating decision issued in November 2021 is in accord with the AOJ's prior finding that an initial zero percent rating was the appropriate rating for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis in the September 2018 rating decision.  And, as noted elsewhere, the AOJ's original determination that an initial zero percent rating was the appropriate disability rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis was supported by the extant record evidence at the time of the September 2018 rating decision.

Having reviewed the Veteran's arguments concerning an allegation of CUE in the September 2018 rating decision, the Board finds that these arguments do not rise to the level of a valid CUE claim.  They essentially dispute how the AOJ weighed the record evidence at the time of the September 2018 rating decision and never rise to the level of a valid CUE claim.

Even assuming for the sake of argument only that there was error in the September 6, 2018, rating decision, because it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued, the error complained of cannot be CUE.  Again, the AOJ granted service connection for seborrheic capitis (which it characterized as seborrheic dermatitis) and assigned an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, in the September 6, 2018 rating decision.  The AOJ considered the available service treatment records and VA outpatient treatment records and examination reports which demonstrated that the Veteran experienced seborrheic capitis (characterized as seborrheic dermatitis) which was related to active service.  The evidence reviewed in this rating decision included a VA skin diseases DBQ dated on September 5, 2018, which showed that the Veteran treated her seborrheic capitis (characterized as seborrheic dermatitis) with topical corticosteroids for 6 weeks or more but not constantly in the previous 12 months and it affected less than 5 percent of the total body area and less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of the body.  As noted elsewhere, the AOJ concluded that an initial zero percent rating was appropriate for the service-connected seborrheic capitis under either the former or revised rating criteria for evaluating skin disabilities because the record evidence showed that her use of topical corticosteroids for 6 weeks or more but not constantly in a 12 month period to treat a skin condition which affected less than 5 percent of the total body area and less than 5 percent of the exposed areas of the body did not constitute systemic therapy.  In other words, the record evidence demonstrates what the AOJ previously concluded in the September 2018 rating decision, i.e., that the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis merited an initial zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018.  Thus, it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued under the interpretation advanced by the Veteran and her agent in her CUE motion.  Because it is not absolutely clear to the Board that a different result would have ensued if the AOJ had weighed the record evidence under the theory advanced by the Veteran in this appeal, any alleged error made by the AOJ in the September 6, 2018, rating decision in not assigning an initial compensable rating for the service-connected seborrheic capitis is not CUE.  And, as noted above, the AOJ's conclusions in the September 6, 2018, rating decision with respect to the assignment of an initial zero percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected seborrheic capitis were fully supported by the available evidence at the time of that decision.

The record evidence does not support finding that the September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was the product of CUE.  The Veteran and her agent otherwise have not identified or submitted any evidence demonstrating that the September 6, 2018, rating decision was the product of CUE.  The evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  In summary, the Board finds that the September 6, 2018, rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a zero percent rating effective May 3, 2018, for seborrheic dermatitis, was not the product of CUE.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood 

The Board next is not persuaded that the evidence supports granting the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The Veteran essentially contends that her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is more disabling than currently and initially evaluated.  The evidence of record shows instead that her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is manifested by, at worst, complaints of self-isolation and feeling more withdrawn, anxiety, depression, and a reported history of infrequent panic attacks with symptoms of a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks which occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  Taken together, these findings support the 30 percent rating currently and initially assigned for the service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood under DC 9440 throughout the appeal period (i.e., since she filed her service connection claim for this disability).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.  

The post-service evidence also does not support assigning an initial rating greater than 30 percent for service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  It shows instead that this disability is manifested by, at worst, complaints of self-isolation and feeling more withdrawn, anxiety, depression, and a reported history of infrequent panic attacks with symptoms of a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks which occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood (as seen on VA examination in September 2021).  For example, on VA outpatient mental health treatment in April 2021, the Veteran's complaints included "noticeable" depression and anxiety, irritability towards others at work, and difficulty sleeping.  She had been taking Lorazepam for 2 weeks.  She reported feeling stressed and anxious while deployed to Saudi Arabia.  She also reported flashbacks, recurrent nightmares, avoidance, and feeling easily startled.  She had been employed since 2012 and currently was employed.  She reported a poor sleep pattern with only 5 hours of sleep per night.  She had a good appetite.  Mental status examination of the Veteran showed good hygiene, a mildly depressed mood, full orientation, no perceptual distortions, logical thought processes, and fair judgment and insight.  The impressions included major depression.

On VA mental disorders DBQ in September 2021, the Veteran's complaints included increased social isolation and withdrawal from others, including her husband.  The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's electronic claims file, including service treatment records and post-service VA treatment records.  She was employed at the time of the examination and she had an associates degree and "also obtained certifications."  She reported a history of infrequent panic attacks (2 in the previous year).  She had been prescribed Lorazepam and Duloxetine through a private physician and gabapentin through VA.  She also received biweekly counseling through VA.  She denied any history of or current suicidal or homicidal ideation or hallucinations.  Her symptoms were a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks which occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  Mental status examination of the Veteran showed full orientation, "a somewhat depressed mood and constricted affect," no motor or speech issues, neatly groomed, and appropriate hygiene.  She also reported "significant anxiety symptoms" following a self-evaluation of anxiety symptoms.  The VA examiner stated, "Veteran's anxiety and depression are subsumed under the diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood and are felt to be secondary to her efforts to cope with Fibromyalgia and chronic pain."  The diagnosis was adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.

The evidence of record shows that her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is manifested by, at worst, complaints of self-isolation and feeling more withdrawn, anxiety, depression, and a reported history of infrequent panic attacks with symptoms of a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks which occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  Taken together, the record evidence as whole supports the 30 percent rating currently and initially assigned for the service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood under DC 9440 throughout the appeal period (i.e., since she filed her service connection claim for this disability).  Id.  There also is no indication that the Veteran experienced symptoms of similar frequency, severity, and duration as is required for an initial rating greater than 30 percent under DC 9440.  Id.; see also Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's symptoms included disturbances of motivation and mood which is one of the symptoms listed in the 50 percent rating criteria under the General Rating Formula.  The presence of this solitary symptom is outweighed by the remaining medical evidence which demonstrates that the symptomatology attributable to her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood more nearly approximates the criteria for an initial 30 percent rating under DC 9440 throughout the appeal period.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.  The Veteran has been married to her husband throughout the appeal period.  She also has been employed throughout the appeal period even though she reported that her job duties changed several weeks prior to the September 2021 VA mental disorders DBQ.  The VA examiner stated that the significant anxiety and depression which the Veteran reported on a self-evaluation conducted as part of this VA examination were "felt to be secondary to her efforts to cope with Fibromyalgia and chronic pain."  And the Veteran currently is in receipt of a maximum 40 percent rating for her service-connected fibromyalgia.  The Board notes here that compensating her twice for the same symptoms of anxiety and depression attributable to her service-connected fibromyalgia is prohibited because it would be impermissible pyramiding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see also Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261 62 (1994).  The Veteran and her agent otherwise have not identified or submitted any evidence demonstrating her entitlement to an initial rating greater than 30 percent for her service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  The evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.  In summary, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial rating greater than 30 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have not been met.

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for costochondritis

The Board next is persuaded that the evidence supports assigning an initial 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis.  The Veteran and her agent essentially contend that her service-connected costochondritis is more disabling than currently and initially evaluated because it results in ongoing muscle pain.  

The record evidence shows that the service-connected costochondritis is manifested by, at worst, occasional weakness, occasional fatigue, and occasional uncertainty of movement of the left Muscle Group XXI muscles, 4/5 muscle strength on bilateral shoulder abduction, and tenderness to palpation in the left costochondral junctions under and around the left breast.  These findings support assigning an initial 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis under DC 5321 throughout the appeal period (i.e., since she filed her service connection claim).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  As noted in the Introduction, a remand is not required to obtain an opinion concerning the ameliorative effects of medication because such would not impact the analysis of the Veteran's entitlement to an initial compensable rating for costochondritis.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23 1798 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025).  

The post-service evidence also supports assigning an initial 10 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis.  For example, on VA muscle injuries DBQ in September 2021, the Veteran's complaints included pain to the left chest and breastbone area which "radiates and intensifies with movement" and worsened with coughing.  The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's electronic claims file, including service treatment records and post-service VA treatment records.  The Veteran reported an in-service history of multiple episodes of costochondritis and a history of "severe pain" which worsened "with movement and certain positions."  She also reported experiencing "acute episodes which put[] her down for days and sometimes mild episodes.  Vet states the pain quality varies [with] each episode."  She reported further that she experienced "rapid []onset of pain and swelling to [the] left side of [the] chest and breast area.  In addition, she experiences pain if touched in that area.  Reports 10 episodes yearly."  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's reported muscle injury affected muscle substance and function because the muscles swell and harden abnormally in contraction.  The Veteran had occasional muscle weakness, occasional fatigue and pain, and occasional uncertainty of movement in the left Muscle Group XXI muscles.  Physical examination showed 5/5 muscle strength throughout except for 4/5 muscle strength on bilateral shoulder abduction, no muscle atrophy, and tenderness to palpation to the left costochondral junctions under and around the left breast.  A chest x-ray was reviewed and was within normal limits.  The Veteran stated that she was unable to work due to her reported pain.  "She has to take pain medication and muscle relaxers for relief.  She report[s] having to lay down with minimal movement.  Coughing and breathing intensifies pain."  The diagnosis was left costochondritis.

The Board does not doubt that the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis is painful when it occurs.  The Veteran reported experiencing episodes of pain which she attributed to her service-connected costochondritis up to 10 times a year and also reported that these symptoms waxed and waned.  Consistent with her lay assertions, the record evidence supports assigning an initial 10 percent rating for her service-connected costochondritis under DC 5321 throughout the appeal period (i.e., since she filed her service connection claim).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  In other words, the record evidence as a whole supports finding that she experiences at least moderate muscle injury in Muscle Group XXI muscles on the left side as a result of her service-connected costochondritis as is required for a minimum compensable 10 percent rating under DC 5321.  Id.  VA examination in September 2021 documented her reports that the service-connected costochondritis resulted in pain to the left chest and breastbone area which "radiates and intensifies with movement" and worsened with coughing.  She also reported that her pain waxed and waned and the quality of the pain (i.e., whether it was mild, moderate, or severe) "varies [with] each episode."  She reported further that she experienced both "acute episodes" of pain which debilitated her for several days and "mild episodes."  

As noted above, in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23 1798 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025), the Court recently held that, when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant DC does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of each musculoskeletal disability (here, costochondritis) in order to comply with the Court's decision in Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 56.  As also noted above, DC 5321 does not reference medication use.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  The Veteran reported experiencing occasional pain as a result of her service-connected costochondritis and taking pain medication and muscle relaxers which relieved this pain on VA examination in September 2021.  This DBQ found that occasional weakness, fatigue, and uncertainty of movement of the left Muscle Group XXI muscles, 4/5 muscle strength on bilateral shoulder abduction, and tenderness to palpation in the left costochondral junctions under and around the left breast were attributable to the service-connected costochondritis.  Taken together, the findings obtained on this DBQ persuasively suggests that the baseline severity of the Veteran's service-connected costochondritis is no more than mild.  It also suggests that either that the Veteran did not take medication to treat her service-connected costochondritis symptoms prior to reporting for examination or the symptoms of her service-connected costochondritis noted on examination were not severe enough to warrant medication.  Having reviewed the record evidence, and in light of the decision to award an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis, the Board concludes that an opinion concerning the ameliorative effects of medication would not impact the analysis of the Veteran's entitlement to an initial compensable rating for costochondritis and a remand of this claim is not required.  See Sabonis, 6 Vet. App. at 430.  

The Veteran's report on VA examination in September 2021 that the muscle pain which she experienced as a result of her service-connected costochondritis varied in intensity with each of the 10 episodes of pain that she experienced per year persuasively suggests to the Board that her symptomatology is not at least moderately severe or severe in nature such that an initial rating greater than 10 percent is warranted under DC 5321, however.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  The Board acknowledges here that the terms "severe" and "moderately severe" listed in the rating criteria for a maximum 20 percent rating in DC 5321 are not defined anywhere in the Rating Schedule.  Id.  

According to Merriam-Webster's Dictionary, "mild" means not very severe. See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild. "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect. See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate. "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree. See Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe. 

The Board finds that the September 2021 VA examination shows that the Veteran did not have either a "moderately severe" or "severe" muscle injury attributable to her service-connected costochondritis.  Id.  In other words, because neither a "moderately severe" or "severe" muscle injury is present, the record evidence does not support finding that the Veteran is entitled to a maximum initial 20 percent rating for her service-connected costochondritis under DC 5321.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DC 5321.  The record evidence instead more nearly approximates the criteria for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis under DC 5321 throughout the appeal period (i.e., since she filed her service connection claim on August 17, 2021).  Id.  In summary, and after resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis have been met throughout the appeal period.  The claim is granted.

4. Entitlement to an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis

The Board finally is not persuaded that the evidence supports assigning an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis.  The Board already has granted a higher initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis throughout the appeal period (i.e., since the Veteran filed her service connection claim for this disability) as discussed above.  Although the precise earlier effective date sought by the Veteran in this appeal is not clear from a review of the record evidence, she essentially contends that she is entitled to an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for her service-connected costochondritis.  The evidence shows instead that August 17, 2021, is the appropriate effective date for an initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis, however, because that it is the date that VA received the Veteran's intent to file.  

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0966, "Intent To File A Claim For Compensation And/Or Pension Or Survivors Pension And/Or DIC," dated on August 17, 2021, which VA acknowledged in a letter sent to her and her agent that same day.

The Veteran, through her agent, filed her original claim of service connection for costochondritis in statements on a VA Form 21 526EZ, "Application For Disability Compensation And Related Compensation Benefits," dated on August 23, 2021, and date-stamped as received electronically by VA that same day.  With respect to costochondritis, she stated on this form, "I often carried my gear and duffle bags throughout my military career that would often cause muscle strain and pain.  The bags and gear would often result in me seeking medical attention due to the pain that I experienced that would get worse when I coughed, any physical activity, and simply breathed."  This form clearly related back to the Veteran's intent to file received by VA on August 17, 2021.

In the currently appealed AMA rating decision dated on October 28, 2021, and issued to the Veteran and her agent on November 1, 2021, the AOJ granted, in pertinent part, the claim of service connection for costochondritis, assigning a zero percent rating effective August 17, 2021.  The AOJ concluded that August 17, 2021, was the appropriate effective date for an award of service connection and a zero percent rating for costochondritis because that was the date that VA received the Veteran's intent to file followed by her formal service connection claim.

The Veteran disagreed, in pertinent part, with the October 2021 AMA rating decision and requested an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for the initial zero percent rating for service-connected costochondritis in statements on a VA Form 10182, "Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice Of Disagreement)," dated on September 12, 2022, and date-stamped as received electronically that same day by VA.

The Board recognizes that the effective date for an initial zero percent rating was assigned since the grant of service connection for costochondritis effective August 17, 2021.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The Board next recognizes that it assigned a higher initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis effective throughout the appeal period (i.e., since the Veteran filed her service connection claim for this disability on August 17, 2021) as discussed above.  The Board also notes again that the precise earlier effective date for the initial 10 percent rating for service-connected costochondritis sought by the Veteran and her agent is not clear from a review of the record evidence.  Nevertheless, the Veteran also does not contend - and the record evidence does not show - that she submitted a formal service connection claim (or an intent to file followed by a formal service connection claim dated within 1 year) for costochondritis prior to August 17, 2021, or the date when VA received her intent to file.  She and her agent otherwise have not identified or submitted any evidence demonstrating her entitlement to an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for her service-connected costochondritis.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply.  See Lynch , 21 F.4th at 776.  In summary, the Board finds that the criteria for an earlier effective date than August 17, 2021, for an initial 10 percent rating for costochondritis have not been met.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael T. Osborne, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.