Citation Nr: A25031395
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 221219-307045
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is granted.

A compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

A rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastrointestinal problems is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is in at least an approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's current left elbow disability was incurred in and caused by his service.

2. The evidence is in at least an approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's current right shoulder disability was incurred in and caused by his service.

3. The probative medical evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran had greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side

4. The evidence is persuasively weighted against finding that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder has caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.20, 4.27, 4.97, DC 6522.

4. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from August 2017 to August 2022.

There matters were appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2022 rating decision through submission of a December 2022 VA Form 10182 with election of the direct review appeal docket. The July 2022 rating decision was promulgated after the Veteran requested higher-level review of an April 2022 rating decision.

Here, the Veteran requested an informal conference when he submitted his June 2022 VA Form 20-0996 Higher-Level Review request. The informal conference was not held, and the AOJ issued the July 2022 higher-level review rating decision in the absence of an informal conference

An informal conference is defined as contact with a "claimant's representative or, if not represented, with the claimant, telephonically, or as otherwise determined by VA, for the sole purpose of allowing the claimant or representative to identify any errors of law or fact in a prior decision based on the record at the time the decision was issued." 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(h). If an informal conference is requested, "VA will make reasonable efforts to contact the claimant and/or the authorized representative to conduct one informal conference during a higher-level review, but if such reasonable efforts are not successful, a decision may be issued in the absence of an informal conference." Id. 

The AOJ made two attempts to schedule the Veteran for an informal conference by contacting him over the phone during the hours he requested on the June 2022 VA Form 20-0996 Higher-Level Review request. See July 12, 2022. VA Form 27-0820 Report of General Information; July 15, 2022 VA Form 27-0820 Report of General Information. The DRO indicated that the Veteran's mailbox was full and that they were unable to leave a message. 

The Board finds that the AOJ's two attempts to schedule an informal conference in connection with the higher-level review request prior to the issuance of a decision, under the facts of this case, constitutes reasonable efforts to satisfy the Veteran's request for an informal conference. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(h). As such, a decision may be issued in these matters absent this development.

Thus, The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records. Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further than they have included or identified relevant evidence. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If a Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same. Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

38 C.F.R. § 3.103 provides that a Veteran, upon request, is entitled to a hearing prior to VA's adjudication of an initial or Supplemental Claim. The Board observes that notice regarding the opportunity for a hearing at the AOJ was not provided in this case. In Bowen, the Court found that there was no due process violation in the denial of the Veteran's requested hearing before the AOJ because the Veteran had subsequently been offered the opportunity to have a hearing before the Board. Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253 (2012). Here, the Veteran was offered a choice of three dockets in the AMA framework to include the Board hearing docket. Although the issue in Bowen was not one of notice, the Board cannot discern a basis to find that the underlying holding and logic of Bowen would not lead to the same finding of a lack of prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability

Factual Background & Analysis 

It is relevant to these claims that the Veteran was separated from active duty service in April 2022. Approximately a month later, the Veteran underwent VA examinations in connection with the above-listed disabilities in May 2022. He was diagnosed with left elbow medial epicondylitis and right shoulder rotator cuff tendonitis. The Veteran communicated to the VA examiners that his left elbow and right shoulder symptoms began during service and have persisted to the present.

The Board has been given no reason to doubt the credibility of the Veteran lay statements that these disabilities first began during service and continued to the present. Indeed, the credibility of these statements are bolstered when considering that the disabilities were diagnosed approximately a month after service during the May 2022 VA examinations. 

Given these contemporaneous diagnoses and the Veteran's credible lay statements, the Board finds that the elements for direct service connection have been satisfied and these claims are granted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. It is necessary to rate the disability from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work, 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, and to resolve any reasonable doubt regarding the extent of the disability in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. If there is a question as to which disability rating to apply to the Veteran's disability, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

When a claimant is awarded service connection and assigned an initial disability rating, separate disability ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time in accordance with the facts found. Such separate disability ratings are known as staged ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999) (noting that staged ratings are assigned at the time an initial disability rating is assigned).

3. Increased rating for allergic rhinitis

Rating Criteria 

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is rated under DC 6522. DC 6522 provides that a 10 percent disability rating is awarded for rhinitis without nasal polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. The maximum 30 percent disability rating is awarded for rhinitis with polyps. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97

Factual Background & Analysis 

VA treatment records note a diagnosis for seasonal allergies. A May 2022 VA examination notes asymptomatic allergic rhinitis. Greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis was not indicated. There was no evidence of nasal polyps. No other signs, symptoms or functional impairment was attributed to allergic rhinitis. The Veteran was not noted to be taking any medications for symptoms of allergic rhinitis. 

At the outset, the Board recognizes that where a DC does not explicitly contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication on a disability, the Board must evaluate the disability without regard to the ameliorative effects of the medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 62 (2012); see also McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271 (2016) ("[I]f [a diagnostic code] does not specifically contemplate the effects of medication, the Board is required pursuant to Jones to discount the ameliorative effects of medication."). DC 6522 does not explicitly contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522. In this case, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran takes medication for his allergic rhinitis. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran had greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side, as required for a higher 10 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements and while the Veteran is competent to report any nasal symptoms he has had, but he is not competent to report the percentage of obstruction in his nasal passages, as that requires medical expertise to diagnose and measure. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The Board finds that the objective medical findings by medical professionals, which incorporate the Veteran's reported symptoms and treatment, provide the most persuasive evidence regarding the level of severity of the Veteran's rhinitis, and outweigh the Veteran's lay assertions.

Based on the above, the Veteran's rhinitis is not manifested by sufficient symptomatology to warrant a compensable rating, and this claim must be denied. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522.

To the extent that the increased rating claim is being denied, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit-of-the-doubt rule therefore does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. Increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder

Rating Criteria 

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440 pursuant to the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the General Formula, a 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

The symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Factual Background & Analysis 

A May 2022 VA examination notes struggles with anxiety and fatigue. He reported having some loss of interest in activities. He communicated that he is able to manage his personal issues from interfering with his work performance. Symptoms noted were depressed mood, anxiety and chronic sleep impairment. The Veteran had no observed behavioral abnormalities. The Veteran arrived early for the appointment and was pleasant and cooperative throughout the clinical interview.  On mental status exam, the Veteran was alert and oriented.  Orientation was intact for person, time, place, and situation.  Immediate memory was good; delayed memory was poor, 1 of 4 objects recalled after five minute delay despite the use of category prompts.  Fund of information was good.  Mental control was good when asked to spell "world" backwards and while subtracting serial 3's from 20 (no    errors).  There was no abnormality of gait, posture or deportment. Speech    functions were appropriate for rate, volume, prosody, and fluency. The Veteran's communication skills were good, with appropriate eye contact.   Speech revealed normal rate and flow.  Affect was flat and mood was appropriate to content.  Abstract thinking, judgment, and insight appeared to be good.  Thought content was clear and logical with no evidence of delusions or hallucinations.  

After a thorough review of the evidence, the Board has determined that the evidence does not warrant assigning a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder. The evidence during this period does not show that the Veteran's symptoms caused a degree of impairment contemplated by higher ratings.  The evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran has been assessed as having flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships causing occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Moreover, the evidence during this period, when viewed in its totality, consistently documents symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment and a problem with delayed memory. These symptoms are specifically contemplated by or are closely analogous to those listed under the criteria for a 30 percent rating. 

In sum, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against assigning an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 

To the extent that the increased rating claim is being denied, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit-of-the-doubt rule therefore does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

5. Service connection for eczema 

6. Service connection for gastrointestinal problems

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE ADJUDICATOR:

"	The Veteran reported having itchiness or rashes on his skin "everywhere" after swimming in a chlorinated pool and during the springtime. He reported "break outs" in his armpits after using certain deodorants. In addition, a May 2022 VA examination notes a diagnosis of lactose intolerance and reports of chronic stomach pain since service. However, no VA medical opinions were obtained addressing a direct service connection theory of entitlement. These are pre-decisional duty to assist errors that must be corrected on remand.

"	In addition, VA has a statutory duty to provide a medical examination and opinion when there is evidence of a current disability and that the Veteran engaged in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) which is presumed based on the Veteran's service in Bahrain. These claims will be remanded for this development.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW:

1. Schedule the Veteran for in-person VA TERA examinations with a qualified medical practitioner(s) in connection with the claimed disabilities of eczema and gastrointestinal problems.

The below medical opinions must be provided:

a) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any skin disorder had its onset in or is otherwise etiologically related to active service to include to include the synergistic, combined effects of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  Why or why not?

"	Please note the Veteran's lay reports of having itchiness or rashes on his skin "everywhere" after swimming in a chlorinated pool and during the springtime. He reported "break outs" in his armpits after using certain deodorants.

c) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any gastrointestinal disorder had its onset in or is otherwise etiologically related to active service to include the synergistic, combined effects of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  Why or why not?

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. 

The examiner is informed by the Board that chronicity is not required to find a nexus to service or for service connection to be granted.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty.  Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

2. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mckone, Kyle

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.