Citation Nr: A25031649
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231207-406246
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an April 2023 rating decision that revised an October 2013 rating decision on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) to award a higher 70 percent initial disability rating for the Veteran's posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); the appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's May 2022 appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated December 2022 fee agreement, are valid.

2. In an October 2013 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) awarded service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial disability rating of 50 percent effective from November 8, 2012. 

3. In March 2023, the Veteran, through his attorney, submitted a claim seeking revision of the October 2013 rating decision based on CUE, to obtain a higher initial disability rating than that which was originally assigned. In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found CUE in the initial evaluation assigned by the October 2013 rating decision and assigned a higher 70 percent initial disability rating effective from November 8, 2012.

4. The April 2023 rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the case regarding the initial rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the April 2023 rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from January 1982 to December 2002. 

The appellant is the Veteran's attorney, appointed to represent him in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. For that reason, the attorney does not represent the Veteran in this matter due to their opposing financial interests. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from the April 2023 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's December 2023 Notice of Disagreement in January 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal. 

The appellant is eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an April 2023 rating decision; the appeal is granted in favor of the attorney.

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

Agents and attorneys may not charge fees for services provided before the date on which a claimant or appellant is provided notice of the AOJ's initial decision with respect to the case. This limitation does not apply to fees charged, allowed, or paid for services provided with respect to proceedings before a court. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). 

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

The "benefit-of-the-doubt" rule is not for application in a contested claim such as this case because the benefit of the doubt cannot be given to both parties who have competing interests. See Elias v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 259, 263 (1997).

Analysis & Conclusion

The Board finds that the attorney is eligible for attorney fees based on the past-due benefits awarded by the April 2023 rating decision because this rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the proper disability rating to be assigned for the Veteran's PTSD for the relevant period of time, and all other requirements to establish the attorney's eligibility to receive a fee were met. 

First, the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the April 2023 rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision increased the Veteran's combined rate of disability compensation from 70 percent to 80 percent, effective from November 8, 2012, to April 12, 2013. To the extent that the retroactive monetary award due to the Veteran may have ben offset based upon required withholding due to the Veteran's concurrent receipt of military retirement pay, the Board notes as discussed above that the holding in Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264, establishes that fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable or actually paid to the Veteran. 

Finally, the Board also finds that the April 2023 rating decision was not the initial decision with respect to the increased rating case for the Veteran's PTSD because the April 2023 rating decision revised a prior October 2013 rating decision on the basis of CUE. In that regard, the October 2013 rating decision was the initial decision to assign the disability rating for the Veteran's PTSD for the relevant period. Attorney fees are payable for services provided after the date on which a claimant is provided notice of the AOJ's initial decision with respect to the case, which in this instance was provided via notice issued in October 2013. Given these facts, all required criteria have been met to establish the attorney's eligibility to receive a fee derived from the past-due benefits awarded from the April 2023 rating decision. The attorney's appeal is granted. 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.