Citation Nr: A25031564
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-432334
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include/claimed as anxiety and depression, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep impairment disorder (claimed as insomnia), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for back pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee pain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2014 to September 2018.  She then served in the U.S. Army Reserve until 2022.

These matters are on appeal from rating decisions issued in January and April of 2024.  See January 11, 2024, rating decision, and April 2, 2024, rating decision.  See also RO's January 16, 2024, notification to the Veteran of the January 11, 2024, rating decision; the RO's April 4, 2024, notification to the Veteran of the April 2, 2024, rating decision; and the Veteran's April 10, 2024, VA Form 10182-Board Appeal.  

In Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims stated that the Board should not adjudicate an appellant's appeal until the period to switch Board dockets has elapsed; that is, one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In this case the prescribed wait period has elapsed and the claims are ready for the Board's review.  See RO's April 4, 2024, letter notifying the Veteran of the most recent (April 2, 2024) rating decision on appeal.  See also Veteran's April 10, 2024, VA Form 10182-Board Appeal.  

In her April 10, 2024, VA Form 10182-Board Appeal, the Veteran selected the Direct Review Option.  The evidence under consideration in this appeal is thus all of the evidence of record at the time of the January 11, 2024, rating decision, regarding service connection for back pain, a psychiatric disorder, a sleep disorder/insomnia, and right knee pain; and all of the evidence of record at the time of the April 2, 2024, rating decision regarding service connection for left hip pain, hearing loss, and tinnitus.  

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

All Claims

In an original VA Form 21-526EZ claim for compensation that was received by VA on August 7, 2023, the Veteran requested service connection for a psychiatric disorder, insomnia, hearing loss and tinnitus, and for back, left hip, and right knee pain; and in 2024 the RO denied the claims.  It appears, however, that the claims file was not properly documented at the time of the 2024 rating decisions.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  

Specifically, in November 2018 the service department notified VA that some of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) were missing.  See service department's November 1, 2018, CERTIFICATION that STRs were missing.  This communication from the service department to VA was, however, years before the Veteran's August 2023 report that she actually had active service until May 2022.  See Veteran's August 7, 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ claim.  See also service department record dated May 31, 2022, which appears to corroborate the Veteran's contention.  

This was the information at the time of the RO's January and April 2024 denial of the claims for service connection; however, the RO did not make a request for the acknowledged extant STRs before its January and April 2024 denial of the claims - a pre-decisional duty to assist error that was especially remiss given the presumptive provisions at 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2), which provides that VA will make as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records, including military records and service medical records, from a Federal department or agency.  Remand for correction by the RO of this fundamental pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

In addition to the foregoing, efforts to correct the following pre-decisional duty to assist errors must be taken. 

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder 

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep impairment disorder 

In addition to the foregoing, the Board observes that in documentation dated in December 2023 the VAMC noted that the Veteran would be unable to report for a proffered psychiatric examination until January, and that the examination would be rescheduled.  See RO/VAMC's December 18, 2023, "Exam Scheduling Request Clarification Response."  There is, however, no indication that the RO/VAMC ever attempted to reschedule the Veteran for the promised examination - a pre-decisional duty to assist error that was especially remiss given the state of the Veteran's mental health in 2023.  See psychotherapy records dated in February 2023.  Remand for correction by the RO of this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip pain

In addition, the Board notes that although the Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding the claim of service connection for a left hip disorder, imaging testing was not done in conjunction with that examination, so it was inadequate for decisional purposes.  See February 19, 2024, VA Hip/Thigh Conditions examination report, p. 17. VA regulations provide for service connection for certain chronic diseases if manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within 1 year from the date of separation from service  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  See also Schroeder v. West, 212 F.3d 1265, 1271 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that "the agency's duty to assist pursuant to section 5107(a)... attaches to the investigation of all possible in-service causes of that current disability, including those unknown to the veteran").  

Unfortunately, the RO did not return the matter for a new VA examination - a pre-decisional duty to assist error that was especially remiss given the Veteran's report during the VA examination of a "chronic ache in the front of her left hip" since 2017.  See February 19, 2024, VA Hip/Thigh Conditions examination report, pp. 3, 18.  See also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  Remand for correction of this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  See also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once the Secretary undertakes to provide an examination, he must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided)

Entitlement to service connection for back pain and right knee pain

Finally, and in addition to its failure to request the Veteran's service records, the Board is mindful that the RO also did not schedule the Veteran for a VA examination regarding her claims for back pain and knee pain - a pre-decisional duty to assist error that was especially remiss given the presumptive provisions for service connection at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a), which provide for service connection for certain chronic diseases manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within 1 year from the date of separation from service.  See also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); and Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018) (holding that evidence of pain, alone, which results in functional impairment can constitute a disability, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis).  Remand for correction by the RO of this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate action to obtain all of the Veteran's extant service treatment records (STRs) - to include those that the service department has previously certified are missing; and all STRs compiled during the Veteran's September 2018 to May 31, 2022, active military service.  Document all efforts to obtain these records and associate all located records with the claims file.  If, after due diligence, no additional service treatment records are found, notify the Veteran in writing and prepare a Formal Finding for the record.

2. After completion of step 1, reschedule the Veteran for the promised VA examination regarding the issues of service connection for a psychiatric disorder- to include/claimed as anxiety, depression, and a sleep disorder manifesting as/productive of insomnia.  The examiner must review the claim file and note that the claim file was reviewed; and clinically examine the Veteran.  

The examiner is then asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Provide the diagnosis for all current psychiatric disorders.  

(b.) If the Veteran previously had a psychiatric disorder that is no longer manifest, when did that condition resolve?

(c.) If the Veteran's symptoms support a clinical diagnosis of insomnia, the examiner must categorically state that this is the case.

(d.) For each current disorder, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it

i.	began during the Veteran's military service; or

ii.	is related to some incident of the Veteran's military service; or

iii.	for insomnia, if clinically diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it is secondary to (caused by/or aggravated by) another clinically diagnosed disorder, to include any treatment/medications taken for such.

(e.) If PTSD is diagnosed, please identify the stressor(s) upon which the diagnosis is based.

A discussion of the facts and medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board.  The examiner must discuss the post-service psychotherapy records that are in the claims file.

In answering these questions, the examiner is asked to consider all statements from the Veteran regarding her military experiences and history of symptoms, including during service.  The examiner is asked to explain why the Veteran's statements make it more or less likely that a current condition started during service.  If indicated, it should be explained whether there is a medical reason to believe that the Veteran's recollection of her symptoms during and after service may be inaccurate or not medically supported as the onset or cause of her current diagnosis or diagnoses.

The examiner should not rely on silence in the medical records unless it can be explained: (a) why the silence in the available records can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why the fact would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

3. After completion of step 1, schedule the Veteran for a new VA examination regarding the issue of service connection for a left hip disorder, and for a VA examination regarding the issues of service connection for back pain and right knee pain.  The examiner must review the claim file and note that the claim file was reviewed.  The examiner must also

(a.) discuss the Veteran's in-service experiences and current complaints and symptoms with the Veteran and document the Veteran's contentions in the examination report.  

(b.) physically examine the Veteran. 

(c.) conduct appropriate radiology testing and report all findings in detail.  

The examiner is then requested to respond as follows:

(d.) Provide the diagnosis for all back, left hip, and right knee disorders found on examination.   

(e.) If a current diagnosis for the claimed back pain, hip pain, and knee pain is not warranted, does the Veteran nevertheless have symptoms, such as joint pain, which causes functional impairment?

(f.) If a current disorder is diagnosed or if there has been a functional impairment present, opine, for EACH such disorder, as to whether it is at least as likely as not that it,

i.	may have begun during the Veteran's military service; or, 

ii.	may be related to some incident of the Veteran's military service, such as the exigencies (running, rucking, etc.) of this Veteran's service; or,

iii.	for each diagnosis of arthritis, it may have become manifest within 1 year after the Veteran's separation from service.

A discussion of the facts and medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

In answering these questions, the examiner is asked to consider all statements from the Veteran regarding her experiences, injuries, and symptoms during service.  The examiner is asked to explain why the Veteran's statements make it more or less likely that a current condition started during service.  If indicated, it should be explained whether there is a medical reason to believe that the Veteran's recollection of her symptoms during and after service may be inaccurate or not medically supported as the onset or cause of her current diagnosis.

The examiner should not rely on silence in the medical records unless it can be explained: (a) why the silence in the available records can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why the fact would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

 

 

David Gratz

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Childers, Phyllis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.