Citation Nr: A25031010
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240726-458958
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition, to include pain, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's right hip disability began in-service and continued since.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a right hip condition are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2020 to March 2023. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

The Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD). She selected the Direct docket. Therefore, the Board may only review evidence in the record at the time of the August 2023 decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. Specifically, the Veteran underwent a VA hip examination in August 2024; the examination report and corresponding medical opinion were added to the claims file. As the Board is deciding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  

The Veteran contends that she has a right hip disability, and it is etiologically related to service.

Service connection will be granted if it is shown that the veteran suffers from a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, during active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Disorders diagnosed after discharge will still be service connected if all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); see also Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

In order to establish service connection on a direct basis, the record must contain competent evidence of: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Veteran's service treatment records do not document any diagnosis, treatment, or complaint of a right hip disability. The Board notes that an August 2022 running evaluation related to shin splints indicated that her running impacted her hips. 

In July 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA hip examination. During the examination, the Veteran reported that pain in her hips started after repetitive military exercises and training. The examiner found no diagnosed right hip disability. During the examination, the Veteran reported painless and painful popping bilaterally in the hips as well as constant mild ache that was stabbing and throbbing, which was aggravated by activities. She reported functional impairment of pain with walking, running, and standing due to her right hip. The examiner found abnormal range of motion and noted that abnormal range of motion itself contributed to functional loss, noting pain with walking, running, and standing.  The examiner noted a flexion endpoint of 115 degrees with pain exhibited at flexion. The Veteran had pain on weight-bearing and active motion, which caused functional loss of pain with walking, running, and standing. The examiner found mild lateral hip joint tenderness upon palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. There were additional contributing factors of interference with standing, disturbance of motion, and less movement than normal due to the right hip condition. No imaging studies had been performed in conjunction with the examination. The examiner was unable to render a diagnosis because the Veteran had not been diagnosed with any condition, and the claims file was silent for any hip pain or related diagnosis. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with the condition based on the evidence located in the claims file.

The Board finds that the July 2023 VA examination is not adequate for adjudication. Pain that results in a functional impairment of earning capacity is a disability and should not be summarily discounted in a situation where there is no other disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). The examiner found pain on examination that caused functional impairment and limited range of motion in flexion of the right hip. The examiner's rationale that there was no diagnosis of a hip disability and there was no reported pain with the hips in the claims file failed to take into account the actual, in person examination she conducted that documented pain. The examiner remarked there was no evidence of pain in the record after finding extensive objective evidence of pain during the examination. The Board finds the July 2023 opinion holds no probative value.  

Providing the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds service connection for a right hip condition is warranted. Evidence in the record document objective evidence of pain in the right hip, which caused functional impairment and limitation of range of motion in the right hip within four months of separating from service. The Veteran is competent to state that her right hip symptoms began in-service and continued since. The Board finds her credible. There is no probative medical evidence in the record to indicate her right hip condition did not begin in-service. Therefore, service connection for a right hip condition is granted.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robert Batten

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.