Citation Nr: A25031606
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 221020-291415
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for unspecified depressive disorder associated with degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, vertebral fracture, status post discectomy, with spinal stimulator in place is denied.

A disability rating higher than 40 percent for degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, vertebral fracture, status post discectomy, with spinal stimulator in place (back disability) is denied.

A disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability prior to January 20, 2022 is denied.

A disability rating higher than 60 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability from January 20, 2022 is denied.

Prior to February 1, 2022 a disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability is denied.

From February 1, 2022 a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability is denied.

A disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity femoral nerve associated with back disability is denied.

A disability rating higher than 10 percent for painful scar, spinal stimulator placement associated with back disability is denied.

A compensable disability rating for residual scar, lumbar discectomy associated with back disability is denied. 

A total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted from July 27, 2019, but no earlier. 

An?earlier?effective?date?of July 27, 2019, but no earlier, for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) is?granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder, when considering the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms, manifests in disability tantamount to occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Neither occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, nor total occupational and social impairment, are shown.

2. The Veteran's back disability is manifested by pain and limitation of flexion; unfavorable ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine or the functional equivalent is not shown.  The maximum evaluation for limited motion is assigned.

3. Prior to January 20, 2022 the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve was productive of no more than moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

4. From January 20, 2022 the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve is productive of no more than severe incomplete paralysis.

5. Prior to February 1, 2022 the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve was productive of no more than moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

6. From February 1, 2022 the Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve is productive of no more than mild incomplete paralysis.

7. The Veteran's lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity femoral nerve is productive of no more than mild incomplete paralysis.

8.  The Veteran's residual scars associated with his back disability consist of mid-thoracic, lumbar, and left hip just above the posterior hip.  Only the scar on the left hip just above the posterior hip is painful, and none of the scars limit function.  

9. A claim for?TDIU?was received in September 2019 as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for service connection for unspecified depressive disorder.  

10. The Veteran became unemployable on July 27, 2019.

11. The basic eligibility criteria for Chapter 35 (DEA) benefits were not met prior to July 27, 2019.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 50 percent for unspecified depressive disorder have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

2. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 40 percent for the Veteran's back disability are not met.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243. 

3. Prior to January 20, 2022 the criteria for a disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

4. From January 20, 2022 the criteria for a disability rating higher than 60 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

5. Prior to February 1, 2022 the criteria for a disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

6. From February 1, 2022 the criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

7. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity femoral nerve are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

8. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's painful scar, spinal stimulator placement associated with back disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7804.

9. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for residual scar, lumbar discectomy associated with back disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802.

10. The criteria for entitlement to?TDIU?are met from July 27, 2019. 38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.340, 3.341, 3.400, 4.16. 

11. The criteria for an?effective?date?of July 27, 2019 for the grant of DEA benefits have been met.? 38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400, 3.155. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1971 to August 1978. 

These matters come to the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) from May 2022 and July 2022 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.? See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.? The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).? 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a Veteran's present symptomatology with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38?C.F.R. §?4.7. 

When determining the appropriate rating to assign to a disability, the veteran's symptoms are the "primary consideration." See, e.g., Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The regulations concerning evaluations and ratings caution against expecting a veteran's disability picture to fully align with the criteria in a diagnostic code, however. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. See also, Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2006) (holding that symptoms listed are not an "exhaustive list," but rather "examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating," and so the Board should consider all symptoms of a veteran's disability when assessing severity of impairment); Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117 (a veteran may qualify for a given rating "by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."). 

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?589 (1991); 38?C.F.R. §?4.1.  Because the severity of a disability may fluctuate over time, the VA may assign multiple ratings to a single disability for different time periods. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 ("Over a period of many years, a veteran's disability claim may require reratings in accordance with changes in... his or her physical or mental condition."). See also, e.g., Breland v. McDonough, 22 F.4th 1347, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2022). ("Separate disability ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time...based on facts available for the periods of time in question...."); O'Connell v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 89, 93 (2007) (staged ratings are a "sensible mechanism" for ensuring precision in assigning a rating while simultaneously accounting for the "possible dynamic nature" of a given disability). This process is commonly referred to as "staging" the ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

However, it is important to note at the outset under the AMA, the period on appeal when a veteran is seeking a higher initial rating is from receipt of the claim (or the Intent to File document) to the mailing of the decision granting service connection. Any worsening of a disability after service connection has been granted should be addressed via a separate claim for an increased rating. In contrast, when a veteran filed a separate claim for an increased rating, the period on appeal may begin up to one year before the claim was received, depending on the specific facts of the case. 

In cases where staged ratings are appropriate, the Board takes into account the evidence pertaining to the veteran's level of disability throughout the period on appeal. Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 127; Hart, 21 Vet. App. at 509. The effective date of each rating corresponds to the date that level of disability initially became ascertainable. Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015).

1. An initial disability rating higher than 50 percent for unspecified depressive disorder associated with degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, vertebral fracture, status post discectomy, with spinal stimulator in place is denied.

The Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder is rated as 50 percent disabling under 38?C.F.R. §?4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435. 

Unspecified depressive disorder is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  See 38?C.F.R. §?4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.  Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 100 percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id. 

A 70 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id. 

A 50 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.  Id. 

VA is precluded from differentiating between symptomatology attributed to a nonservice-connected disability and a service-connected disability in the absence of medical evidence that does so.  Mittleider v. West, 11?Vet. App.?181, 182 (1998) (per curiam), citing Mitchem v. Brown, 9?Vet. App.?136, 140 (1996).  The reasonable doubt doctrine dictates that all symptoms be attributed to the veteran's service-connected disability.  See Mittleider, 11?Vet. App.?at 181. 

When evaluating mental health disorders, the factors listed in the Rating Schedule are simply examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating; the analysis should not be limited solely to whether a veteran exhibited the symptoms listed in the Rating Schedule.  Rather, the determination should be based on all of a veteran's symptoms affecting his level of occupational and social impairment.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436, 442-43 (2002).  The lists of symptoms under the Rating Schedule are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the disability evaluation, but are not meant to be exhaustive.  Id. 

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that VA "intended the General Rating Formula to provide a regulatory framework for placing veterans on a disability spectrum based upon their objectively observable symptoms."  The Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under §?4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  It was further noted that "§?4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  See also Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?10 (2017) (indicating that the Board should consider the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of a mental disorder when determining the appropriate rating). 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in February 2022.  He reported that he had been married for the past 27 years and did not have children.  He retired from working as a biomedical engineer in the automotive industry in 2019 due to back pain.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder was manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  The examiner documented symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

VA treatment records note the Veteran's depression.  Also, the Veteran's wife submitted a statement noting the Veteran's sleep impairment and difficulty with motivation as well as irritability.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that during the period under consideration, the overall severity, frequency, and duration of the mental health symptoms reflect that the Veteran is not entitled to a higher 70 percent disability rating for the service-connected unspecified depressive disorder.  In this regard, the Board notes that the Federal Circuit held in Vazquez-Claudio that "in the context of a 70 percent rating, §?4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 116. 

In this regard, the Board finds that the evidence indicates that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder, when considering severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms, is most closely approximated by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

The Board acknowledges that during the period under consideration, the competent and probative medical and lay evidence arguably documents the Veteran's difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances and impaired impulse control.  This is criteria found in the 70 percent rating category; however, it cannot be viewed in isolation of the other evidence of the Veteran's overall functioning.  When considering the record as a whole, the Board does not find these symptoms to be of such severity, frequency, and/or duration to reach the level of occupational and social impairment considered by a 70 percent (or higher) disability rating. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has denied suicidal ideation and there have been no findings of obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities or near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively.  Further, his speech, orientation, and hygiene have been documented as normal.  Additionally, while the Board acknowledges the Veteran's social impairment, the evidence does not indicate an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Although the Board notes the Veteran's report of social impairment, the Veteran reported in the VA examination that he is married.  As such, the Board finds that inability to establish and maintain effective relationships is not demonstrated. 

In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that, while the Veteran demonstrates some of the criteria commonly associated with a 70 percent disability rating, the evidence of record does not show that his overall disability picture, when considering the severity, frequency, and duration of the mental health symptoms, more closely approximates the criteria for a 70 percent (or higher) disability rating under 38?C.F.R. §?4.130 at any time during the period under consideration.  Moreover, there are no other factors which would lead the Board to conclude that a 70 percent (or higher) disability rating is warranted.  See Mauerhan, supra [the specified factors for each incremental rating are examples rather than requirements for a particular rating; analysis should not be limited solely to whether the claimant exhibited the symptoms listed in the rating scheme].  Rather, the level of functioning is greater than that contemplated by the 70 percent rating category.  The Board finds that the evidence as whole indicates that the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder traits also include hyperarousal, intrusive thoughts, feelings of isolation, and hypervigilance.  In consideration of these symptoms with the Veteran's other unspecified depressive disorder symptoms, the Board finds that these criteria do not approximate a 70 percent disability rating or higher as they are not of such a severity or frequency to result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

Given the actual psychiatric symptoms shown in this case, the Board finds that level of overall psychiatric impairment, when considering the severity, frequency, and duration of the mental health symptoms, is shown to be consistent with a 50 percent disability rating.  The Veteran's increased rating claim is therefore denied.

2. A disability rating higher than 40 percent for degenerative disc disease, spinal stenosis, vertebral fracture, status post discectomy, with spinal stimulator in place (back disability) is denied.

VA regulations set forth at 38?C.F.R. §§?4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 provide for consideration of functional impairment due to pain on motion when evaluating the severity of a musculoskeletal disability.  If feasible, these determinations are to be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, or pain.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?202 (1995); see also Johnston v. Brown, 10?Vet. App.?80, 84-5 (1997); 38?C.F.R. §?4.59 (2023).  Moreover, joint testing is to be conducted on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  Correia v. McDonald, 28?Vet. App.?158, 170 (2016). 

The Veteran's back disability is rated 40 percent disabling pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243 (IVDS).  

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative disc disease and spinal stenosis.  See, e.g., VA back examination report dated February 2022.  Based on reported symptomatology, and consistent with Diagnostic Code 5243, the Board will rate the Veteran under both the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine and the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome. 

The General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine provides that with or without symptoms such as pain, stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease, the following ratings will apply. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 

A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A 40 percent rating is warranted when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. 

A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees, but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. 

A 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or vertebral body fracture with loss of 50?percent or more of the height. 

Note (1): Evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code. 

Under the formula for rating intervertebral disc syndrome based on incapacitating episodes, the following ratings will apply. 

A 60 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 

A 40 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 

A 20 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months. 

A 10 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months. 

Note (1): For purposes of evaluating under diagnostic code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest and prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 

The applicable rating criteria for musculoskeletal disorders, in particular lumbar spine disabilities, under 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a were amended, effective February 7, 2021 [Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Musculoskeletal System and Muscle Injuries, 85 Fed. Reg. 76453-69 (November 30, 2020) (codified at 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242)].  The Board notes that Diagnostic Code 5242 was changed to include degenerative disc disease (other than IVDS) with arthritis.  However, as the rating criteria did not otherwise change with regard to the Veteran's back disability on appeal, the Board finds that remand for a new VA examination to consider the new rating criteria is not necessary. 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in October 2019 for his back disability.  He reported flare-ups that occurred with increased pain and stiffness but did not report functional loss.  He used a cane on an occasional basis to assist with ambulation.  Range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 60 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees.  The examiner noted pain on examination that did not result in or cause functional loss.  There was no evidence of pain with weight bearing as well as no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue of the thoracolumbar spine.  The Veteran was able to perform three repetitions of motion with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  There was no finding of ankylosis.  The examiner noted the back disability affected employment in that the Veteran was unable to do prolonged walking, standing, bending, and climbing.  had difficulty running, lifting heavy items, and sitting for long periods of time. 

On VA examination dated April 2021, the Veteran reported constant back pain and used medication for treatment.  He did not report flare-ups but noted functional loss manifested by riding in a car, walking, standing, sitting, and climbing stairs.  He used a cane on a regular basis.  Range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 35 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 10 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 10 degrees.  Passive range of motion testing was not performed due to risk of falling.  The examiner noted pain on examination that caused functional loss and pain with weight bearing and nonweight bearing.  There was no objective evidence of crepitus as well as no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue of the thoracolumbar spine.  The Veteran was able to perform three repetitions of motion with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  As to repeated use over time, the examiner noted forward flexion to 30 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 5 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 5 degrees.  There was no finding of ankylosis.  The examiner noted the back disability affected employment in that the Veteran had increased pain with riding in a car, walking, standing, sitting, and climbing stairs.    

On VA examination dated February 2022, the Veteran reported a worsening of back pain.  He reported flare-ups that occurred weekly, lasted 1-2 days in duration, were characterized by intense pain and getting out of bed, were severe in nature, and were alleviated by rest, time, and medication.  He further noted functional loss manifested by difficulty walking and anything that required being on his feet for a while.  He used a cane on a constant basis Range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 28 degrees, extension to 8 degrees, right lateral flexion to 6 degrees, left lateral flexion to 4 degrees, right lateral rotation to 5 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 5 degrees.  Passive range of motion testing was not performed as the examiner noted it could cause further damage.  There was evidence of pain on motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight bearing.  There was no objective evidence of crepitus and but there was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue.  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with forward flexion to 10 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right lateral flexion to 5 degrees, left lateral flexion to 4 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 5 degrees.  As to repeated use over time, the examiner noted forward flexion to 8 degrees, extension to 4 degrees, right lateral flexion to 4 degrees, left lateral flexion to 3 degrees, right lateral rotation to 4 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 4 degrees.  As to flare-ups, the examiner noted forward flexion to 6 degrees, extension to 3 degrees, right and left lateral rotation to 3 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 3 degrees.  There was no finding of ankylosis.  The examiner noted the back disability affected employment in that the disability caused limited lifting, bending, climbing, walking, sitting, and standing.  

VA and private treatment records note the Veteran's report of back pain.  His wife also submitted a statement as to the Veteran's constant back pain. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating higher than 40 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected back disability at any time during the appeal period.  In this regard, with respect to favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine (favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine is required for a 40 percent rating and unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine is required for a 50 percent rating), the objective medical evidence of record is pertinently absent any indication that ankylosis exists.  The Board has considered the possibility of awarding a higher rating with consideration of 38?C.F.R. §§?4.40 and 4.45.  The CAVC held in Chavis v. McDonough, 34?Vet. App.?1, 11 (2021) that application of §§ 4.40 and 4.45 permits consideration under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine of an evaluation based on ankylosis if a claimant's functional loss is consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  In Chavis, the CAVC noted that the rating criteria define ankylosis in terms of limitation of motion.  See 38?C.F.R. §?4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note (5) (ankylosis is a condition in which the spine or a spinal segment is fixed in flexion or extension).  Essentially, ankylosis contemplates "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure."  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (32nd ed. 2012); see also Villareal v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?13 (2001) (defining ankylosis to mean that "a joint is fixed, or 'frozen' in one position").  

Here, neither the medical nor lay evidence of record suggests that the Veteran's thoracolumbar spine is immobile.  Although the Board acknowledges she has symptoms indicative of functional loss, the Board concludes that such functional impairment is not consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis.  On the contrary, the record shows that the Veteran has maintained motion, albeit limited motion, throughout the course of the appeal.  Such motion is not comparable to any type of immobility, and the Board concludes a higher rating is not warranted as his disability is not the equivalent of ankylosis. 

The Board further finds that the assigned disability rating adequately compensates the Veteran for any functional impairment attributable to his service-connected back disability.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?4.41, 4.10 (2023).  

Notably, the rating criteria adequately contemplate the Veteran's symptoms, which includes the impaired ability to move or bend or sit and stand for prolonged periods.  For all musculoskeletal disabilities, the schedular rating criteria contemplate functional loss, which may be manifested by, for example, decreased or abnormal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance that affects stability, standing and weight-bearing.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?4.40, 4.45; Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?32, 37 (2011).  For disabilities of the spine in particular, the criteria specifically contemplate factors such as weakened movement, excess fatigability, pain on movement, disturbance of locomotion and interference with sitting, standing, and weight bearing.  38?C.F.R. §§?4.45, 4.59; Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. at 37.  

There is no indication in the medical evidence of record that any subjective complaints, such as pain, result in additional limitation of function so as to meet the criteria for an evaluation in excess of 40 percent.  The VA examination reports specifically noted the absence of ankylosis and indeed, the Veteran maintained motion on range of motion testing.  

Further, the Veteran's complaints of pain upon range of motion have already been considered.  Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781 (Fed. Cir. 2016) and Mitchell stand for the proposition that the concepts of functional loss and painful motion are still used to apply the rating criteria found in the diagnostic codes.  The Thompson court noted that: "Section 4.40 also makes clear that functional loss may be due to pain and that pain may render a part seriously disabled.  When evaluating a disability, § 4.40 provides a broad canvas.  However, whatever the background, an applicant for disability benefits is rated based on the criteria set forth in § 4.71a." Thompson, 815 F.3d at 786.  

So, in other words, here, the Veteran's rating is based on the rating criteria discussed above, and the schedular criteria for musculoskeletal disabilities contemplate a wide variety of manifestations of functional loss, to include no range of motion in the spine at all.  The Board thus finds that the rating criteria and the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 contemplate the Veteran's symptomatology and functional impairment, and the assigned schedular rating is adequate. 

The Board also finds that a higher rating is not warranted at any period under consideration under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  Crucially, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has been prescribed bed rest by a physician based on incapacitating episodes at any period under consideration such that an increased rating is warranted.  Therefore, the Veteran's service-connected back disability does not warrant an increased disability rating alternatively under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes at any time during the course of this appeal. 

3. A disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability prior to January 20, 2022 is denied.

4. A disability rating higher than 60 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability from January 20, 2022 is denied.

5. Prior to February 1, 2022 a disability rating higher than 40 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability is denied.

6. From February 1, 2022 a disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve associated with back disability is denied.

7. A disability rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity femoral nerve associated with back disability is denied.

The Veteran is in receipt of a 40 percent rating for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity prior to January 20, 2022 and a 60 percent rating thereafter under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520 (paralysis of the sciatic nerve).  Additionally, he is in receipt of a 10 percent rating for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity femoral nerve under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526 (neuritis of the femoral nerve).  Finally, he is in receipt of a 40 percent rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve prior to February 1, 2022 and a 10 percent rating thereafter under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.  

The Board notes that the 40 percent rating was reduced to a 10 percent rating in a March 2022 rating decision.  The above-referenced rating decision on appeal issued in May 2022 continued the 10 percent rating.  As such, the propriety of the March 2022 rating decision that reduced the rating is not an issue before the Board.  However, the Board notes at the outset that what is before the Board is the propriety of the 40 percent rating during the appeal period under consideration and the 10 percent rating assigned from February 1, 2022.  Because the Board is the higher adjudicative body, the subsequent actions of the AOJ that do not award the benefit sought cannot deprive the Board of its jurisdiction to resolve that issue.  Juarez v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 537, 543 (2008) (citing Myers v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 228 (2002)); Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 122, 125 (2009); Warren v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 214, 221 (2016).

Diagnostic Code 8520 relates to impairment of the sciatic nerve and provides that a 10 percent disability evaluation is assigned for mild, incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  Moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants a 20 percent evaluation.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants a 40 percent evaluation.  Severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with marked muscular atrophy warrants a 60 percent evaluation.  Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants an 80 percent evaluation.  38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

Under Diagnostic Code 8526, mild incomplete paralysis warrants a 10 percent rating.  Moderate incomplete paralysis warrants a 20 percent rating.  Severe incomplete paralysis warrants a 30 percent rating.  Complete femoral nerve paralysis warrants the assignment of a 40 percent rating and contemplates paralysis of quadriceps extensor muscles.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526 (2023).

In rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment and motor function, atrophic changes, or sensory disturbances.  38?C.F.R. §?4.120. 

Under 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, disability from neurological disorders is rated from 10 to 100 percent in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function.  With partial loss of use of one or more extremities from neurological lesions, rating is to be by comparison with mild, moderate, severe, or complete paralysis of the peripheral nerves.  The term 'incomplete paralysis' indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. 

When the involvement is only sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  In rating peripheral nerve disability, neuritis, characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating, is to be rated on the scale provided for injury of the nerve involved, with a maximum equal to severe, incomplete paralysis.  The maximum rating to be assigned for neuritis not characterized by organic changes referred to in this section will be that for moderate incomplete paralysis, or with sciatic nerve involvement, for moderately severe incomplete paralysis.  38?C.F.R. §?4.123. 

Neuralgia, cranial or peripheral, characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain, of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve, is to be rated on the same scale, with a maximum equal to moderate incomplete paralysis.  38?C.F.R. §?4.124 (2023). 

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately?severe," and "severe."  Spellers v. Wilkie,?30?Vet. App.?211, 219?(2018) ("DC 8520 does not define 'mild,' 'moderate,' 'moderately?severe,' or 'severe,' or generally associate those terms with specific symptoms").  Although the Board has at times attempted to define these terms using dictionary definitions, those definitions are problematic because they "do little to explain the Board's understanding of these terms and do not 'disclos[e] that benchmark it employed to reach [its] conclusion.'" Casey v. McDonough, No. 21-7569, slip op. at 3 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2023) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (quoting Johnson v. Wilkie,?30?Vet. App.?245, 255?(2018) (discussing the Board's attempt to define the terms slight,?mild,?moderate, and?severe?in DC 8515).  

With regard to Diagnostic Code 8520, although?38 C.F.R. § 4.120, 4.123, and 4.124 are "helpful in framing the analysis, [they] are not alone sufficient to explain the Board's decision absent an articulated connection to specific evidence."  Lemon v. McDonough, No. 21-3949,?2022 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1998, *7?(Dec. 16, 2022) (mem dec) (Toth, J.).  See also Bethea v. Derwinski,?2?Vet. App.?252, 254?(1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  

As explained in Lemon, these regulations leave gaps in defining the relevant terms that are filled by VA's Adjudication Manual, M21-1. The Board "is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases."  Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. 257, 264 (2018).  Clearly relevant to this case are M21-1 provisions regarding evaluations of paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  The M21-1 describes?mild?incomplete paralysis as a disability "limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a smaller area."  Part V, sbpt. iii, ch. 12, sec. A.2.c.? Moderate?incomplete paralysis, per the M21-1, should be "reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment," where the sensory involvement covers "a larger area in the nerve distribution."  Id.  M21-1 examples of a?moderate?disability include "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically?moderate."   Id.  And the M21-1 provides that a moderately severe evaluation (that is, a 40% rating) is available when there is "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a higher level of limitation or disability."  Id.  Atrophy may, but need not, be present for a?moderately?severe?rating. 

In discussing?severe, incomplete paralysis, VA's Adjudication Manual, V.iii.12. A.2.c., indicates, "In general, expect motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability.  Trophic changes may be seen in?severe?longstanding neuropathy cases."  The Manual also indicates, "For the sciatic nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520) marked muscular atrophy is expected." 

 Moreover, according to the Manual, "[e]ven though?severe?incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for?severe?incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve."  

Finally in this regard, the Manual states, "Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as?severe?incomplete paralysis of the nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.123)." 

As concluded by the Court in Lemon, given the relevance of these provisions to rating disabilities of the peripheral nerves, "the Board's failure to mention the M21-1's relevant guidance in this area constitutes clear error." Lemon, at *7-*8. See also Bethea,?2 Vet. App. at 254.  The Board will therefore mention, and apply, these definitions in the instant case.  See also Boothe v. McDonough, No. 21-4488,?2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 121, *2?(Jan. 27, 2023) (Nonprecedential Panel Order) (granting a Joint Motion for Remand in which the parties "agree[d] that the Board erred when it refused to consider relevant portions of the VA Adjudication Procedures Manual"). 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for his back disability in April 2021 at which time neurological testing of his lower extremities was conducted.  He reported shooting pain, burning, and tingling in his lower extremities.  He used medication for treatment.  Reflex testing showed knee and ankle at 2+ in the right lower extremity and zero and zero in the left lower extremity.  As to sensory exam, the examiner documented normal findings in the right upper anterior thigh, thing/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes and decreased sensation in the left upper anterior thigh and thigh/knee and absent in the left lower leg/ankle and foot/toes.  Straight leg testing was positive in both lower extremities.  The examiner documented moderate constant pain, no intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and no numbness in the right lower extremity and severe constant pain, no intermittent pain, severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and severe numbness in the left lower extremity.  The examiner did not report any other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy.  

The Veteran was provided another VA examination for his back disability on February 1, 2022 at which time neurological testing of his lower extremities was conducted.  The Veteran continued to report radiating pain down both lower extremities as well as numbness.  Reflex testing was 2+ for the right knee and ankle and 1+ for the left knee and ankle.  As to sensory examination, the examiner noted in the right lower extremity normal upper anterior thigh, decreased thigh/knee, normal lower leg/ankle, and normal foot/toes and for the left lower extremity decreased upper anterior thigh, decreased thigh/knee, decreased lower leg/ankle, and decreased foot/toes.  Straight leg testing was positive in both lower extremities.  In the right lower extremity, the examiner documented mild constant pain, moderated intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness.  In the left lower extremity, the examiner documented moderate constant pain, severe intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness.  The examiner did not document any other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy. VA and private treatment records note the Veteran's reports of neurological impairment. 

The Board finds that the aforementioned evidence supports only a 40 percent evaluation for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve prior to February 1, 2022.  In this regard, the evidence does not show greater than moderately severe paralysis of the sciatic nerve during this period. 

 The Board notes the VA examiner's findings indicating no greater than moderately severe impairment as to reflex and sensory testing as well as consideration of neurological pain approaching no greater than moderate.  

Further, the Board finds that from February 1, 2022, the evidence supports no greater than a 10 percent rating.  Specifically, there is no evidence that the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic nerve from February 1, 2022 as well as the femoral nerve during the entire period under consideration approached more than mild incomplete paralysis.  Pertinently, while there was some reflex and sensory impairment and impaired straight leg testing, the Veteran's neurological pain was not characterized as more than mild.  As such, a higher rating, in particular 20 percent which requires moderate incomplete paralysis, is not evidenced.  

Also, the evidence supports no greater than a 40 percent rating for lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity prior to January 20, 2022.  In particular, the evidence does not show severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve during this period.  

Moreover, 10 percent evaluation for lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity sciatic and femoral nerves under Diagnostic Code 8520.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's complaints of pain in his lower extremities.  However, in the April 2022 VA examination, examiner documented the Veteran's report of documented normal muscle strength testing and reflex testing as well as no constant pain, mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness.  Notably, the examiner also reported that there were no other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy other than the aforementioned findings.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence does not approximate an 80 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8520.

8. A disability rating higher than 10 percent for painful scar, spinal stimulator placement associated with back disability is denied.

9. A compensable disability rating for residual scar, lumbar discectomy associated with back disability is denied. 

The Veteran asserts that his painful scar, spinal stimulator placement and his residual scar, lumbar discectomy are more disabling than reflected in his current 10 percent and noncompensable ratings, respectively.

The Veteran's residual scar, lumbar discectomy is currently rated noncompensable under Diagnostic Code 7802 which applies to burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck that are superficial and nonlinear.  Under this provision, a maximum schedular evaluation of 10 percent is warranted for scars with an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm.) or greater.  Note 1 provides that a superficial scar is one not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.

The Veteran's painful scar, spinal stimulator placement is rated 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 7804 which provides that one or two scars that are unstable or painful are rated 10 percent disabling.  Three or more scars that are unstable or painful are rated 20 percent disabling.  Five or more scars that are unstable or painful are 30 percent disabling.  Note (1) to Diagnostic Code 7804 provides that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar.  Note (2) provides that if one or more scars are both unstable and painful, add 10 percent to the evaluation that is based on the total number of unstable or painful scars.  Note (3) provides that scars evaluated under Diagnostic Codes 7800, 7801, 7802, or 7805 may also receive an evaluation under this Diagnostic Code, when applicable.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

On VA examination dated October 2019, the examiner documented one scar on the posterior trunk that measured 6 cm. X.25 cm.  On VA examination dated April 2021, the VA examiner noted the scar on the posterior trunk measured 6 cm. X.2 cm.  On VA examination dated February 2022, the examiner documented a scar on the mid-thoracic area measuring 5.5 cm. X.2 cm; a scar on the lumbar area measuring 9 cm. X.2 cm.; and a scar on the left hip just above the posterior hip measuring 3.5 cm. X.3 cm.  Pertinently, only the scar on the left hip just above the posterior hip was documented as painful.  None of the scars were noted to cause limitation of function or have an effect on employment and indeed, no other pertinent findings were documented.  The remainder of the objective evidence does not contradict the VA examination reports.  

The weight of the evidence shows the Veteran's residual scar, lumbar discectomy approximates the criteria for a noncompensable rating.  There is no evidence to show that the Veteran's scars are 144 square inches or greater to warrant a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7802.  Additionally, the Veteran's painful scar, spinal stimulator placement does not warrant a rating higher than 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 7804.  In this regard, there is no evidence of three or more scars that are unstable or painful which is the criteria for a higher 20 percent under Diagnostic Code 7804.

10. Effective date of entitlement to a TDIU.

The Veteran contends that TDIU is warranted prior to the effective date currently assigned, which is December 13, 2021, the date the Veteran's claim for a TDIU was received. See December 2021 VA 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

When determining the correct effective date for a TDIU, the starting point is the realization that a TDIU is not a disability-it is a rating based on the cumulative impairment caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. As a result, a TDIU is treated like an increased disability rating for purposes of assigning an effective date. Phillips v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 394, 402 (2024); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 31-32 (2007). 

Also, when entitlement to a TDIU is raised during the adjudicatory process of the underlying disability, it is part of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).

Thus, the effective date of a TDIU will generally be: (1) the date the veteran's claim for a TDIU was received, (2) the date the issue of entitlement to a TDIU was implicitly raised by another claim, or (3) when the veteran became unemployable, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1).  

When entitlement to a TDIU was implicitly raised hinges on when the Veteran became unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due solely to impairment resulting from service-connected disabilities.? 38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  

Under VA regulations, a veteran is entitled to schedular consideration for a TDIU if they have either one disability ratable at 60 percent or higher, or one disability ratable at 40 percent along with enough additional disability to bring their combined rating to 70 percent or higher.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  As of October 28, 2016, the Veteran met this threshold.

In September 2019, the Veteran submitted a claim seeking increased ratings for several disabilities. This timing closely corresponded to the date the Veteran's employment ended, which was in July 2019. Additionally, in a February 2022 VA examination report for his unspecified depressive disorder, the Veteran explicitly identified back pain and the psychiatric disorder as to why he retired in July 2019.  Also, during that examination, the examiner documented symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting.  Further, during a February 2022 VA back examination, the examiner documented the Veteran's limited lifting, bending, climbing, walking, sitting, and standing in consideration of effect on employment.  

As a result, the Board finds a claim for TDIU was as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for increased compensation submitted in September 2019.  Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 452-53. 447 (2009). The Board further finds September 2019 is not the correct effective date, however, because of an added benefit to veterans filing claims for increased ratings: a one-year filing "grace period."

Specifically, when it comes to claims for increased ratings, the VA provides veterans with a one-year "grace period" to file their claims-that is, if the veteran files a claim for an increased rating within one year after the change in the severity of their symptoms or impairment initially becomes "factually ascertainable," the effective date of the increased rating will be the date the change became evident.  If the veteran files the claim beyond the one-year mark, however, this grace period has already expired, and the general rule therefore applies. Because the date of the claim is necessarily the later date in that scenario, it will be the effective date of the increase. 38 U.S.C. §5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. §3.400(o)(2).

The Board finds it is common sense that the Veteran must have ascertained some worsening in his back pain leading to his decision to file the claim, and to stop working. However, the Board need not re-examine the entire one-year period prior to the September 2019 claim to determine when that occurred, because the Veteran has cited July 26, 2019, as the final date he was gainfully employed, and thus, by implication, the next day he had reached the point that his disabilities combined to render him unemployable. 

While the Veteran was still gainfully employed, he was virtually precluded from qualifying for a TDIU because the fact of actual employment is practically per se evidence of employability. See, e.g., Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 356 (2000).

Therefore, the Board finds because the Veteran's first day of actual unemployment occurred during the one-year grace period preceding the filing of the claim, that day is the correct date of eligibility for a TDIU. Therefore, this appeal is granted, with a new effective date of July 27, 2019, but no earlier.

11. DEA prior to December 13, 2021 

DEA?benefits are payable to the child or surviving spouse of a Veteran will have basic eligibility if the following conditions are met: (1) The Veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in service; and (2) the Veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the?date?of the Veteran's death; or (4) the Veteran died as a result of a service-connected disability.?38?U.S.C. §?3510;?38?C.F.R. §?3.807(a). 

Here, as a result of this decision, the Veteran has been awarded a total disability rating from July 27, 2019.  As such, he meets the schedular requirements for?DEA, as of that?date. 

Accordingly, an?earlier?effective?date?of July 27, 2019, but no earlier, for DEA benefits, is granted.

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nadia Kamal, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.