Citation Nr: A25031766
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230508-344712
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Service connection for hemorrhoids is granted. 

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Service connection for tinnitus is denied. 

Service connection for a psychiatric disability, including neuropsychological symptoms attributable to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses, is denied. 

Service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is denied.

Service connection for fibromyalgia is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hepatic steatosis (fatty liver disease) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. It is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD was caused by his service-connected polymyositis. 

2. It is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were caused by his service-connected irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 

3. The Veteran does not have hearing loss that qualifies as a disability for VA compensation purposes.

4. Tinnitus was not shown during service or within one year of service, and the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's current tinnitus was incurred in or caused by service.

5. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder, nor does the record show six months or more of neuropsychological signs or symptoms that have not been attributed to a diagnosed, service-connected disability.  

6. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.

7. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of fibromyalgia. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for GERD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for hemorrhoids have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1154(b), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.

4. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1154(b), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for service connection for a psychiatric disability, including neuropsychological symptoms attributable to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

6. The criteria for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

7. The criteria for service connection for fibromyalgia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1988 to June 1992, including service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2022 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In a May 8, 2023, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran appealed the December 2022 rating decision to the Board and selected direct review. Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 rating decision. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. With respect to the claims that are being remanded, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran has separately appealed other issues addressed in the December 2022 rating decision, including the initial ratings assigned for polymyositis, IBS, sinusitis, and rhinitis and the assignment of a 10 percent rating based on multiple noncompensable service-connected disabilities. The Veteran requested a hearing before the Board with respect to those claims, and they will be addressed in a later decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).

"Current" means near the time a claim is filed or at any time during its pendency, even if the disability subsequently resolves. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). "Disability" refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1359, 1363 (Fed Cir. 2018) (holding that pain resulting in functional impairment can constitute a disability even without an identified underlying diagnosis). Functional impairment in earning capacity can be demonstrated by "showing manifestations of a similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person." Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 17 (2020).

Where a veteran served continuously for 90 days or more during a period of war, or during peacetime service after December 31, 1946, and certain chronic disabilities, including sensorineural hearing loss and tinnitus, become manifest to a degree of 10 percent within one year from date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. This presumption is rebuttable by affirmative evidence to the contrary. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Service connection may also be established for a disability which is due to or the result of a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). A disability which is aggravated by a service-connected disability may be service-connected to the degree that the aggravation is shown. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448-49 (1995); see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" in favor of a broader "but-for" causation standard for secondary service connection).

Under legislation specific to Persian Gulf War veterans, service connection may be established on a presumptive basis for a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more no later than December 31, 2026. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). Such chronic disability must not be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis by history, physical examination, or laboratory tests. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

The term "qualifying chronic disability" means a chronic disability resulting      from any of the following (or any combination of any of the following): (A) an undiagnosed illness; (B) a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders; or (C) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under subsection (d) warrants presumptive service-connection. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i). 

Objective indications of a chronic disability include both "signs," in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3). Disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4). Manifestations of an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness may include, among other things, fatigue, sleep disturbance, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neuropsychological signs or symptoms, and gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b). 

The record shows that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e) (defining the Southwest Asia theater of operations); see also 38 U.S.C. § 101(33) (defining the Persian Gulf War as beginning on August 2, 1990, and ending on a date thereafter to be prescribed by Presidential proclamation or law). Therefore, he qualifies for consideration of presumptive service connection for disabilities resulting from an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness.

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD

The Veteran seeks service connection for GERD, which he asserts is a manifestation of a qualifying chronic disability related to his Persian Gulf War service. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD was caused by his service-connected polymyositis.

With respect to a current disability, the record shows a current diagnosis of GERD. Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's GERD was caused or aggravated by his service-connected polymyositis.

With respect to a nexus between the Veteran's GERD and his service-connected polymyositis, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which the Veteran reported being diagnosed with polymyositis around 2009 or 2010 after having a number of symptoms, including dysphagia. He stated that his symptoms improved with treatment for polymyositis, but they did not fully resolve. The examiner opined that that the Veteran's GERD was not caused by environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. However, the examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD was due to his polymyositis, as inflamed esophageal swallowing muscles can cause difficulty swallowing, leading to hypomotility of the esophagus. 

The Board finds the September 2022 opinion of the VA examiner to be probative and persuasive, as it is supported by a reasoned medical explanation. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008). Moreover, there is no competent opinion to the contrary. Therefore, the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD was caused by his service-connected polymyositis. Accordingly, service connection for GERD is granted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids 

The Veteran seeks service connection for hemorrhoids, which he asserts are a manifestation of a qualifying chronic disability related to his Persian Gulf War service. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were caused by his service-connected IBS. 

With respect to a current disability, the record shows a current diagnosis of hemorrhoids. Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's hemorrhoids were caused or aggravated by his service-connected IBS.

With respect to a nexus between the Veteran's hemorrhoids and his service-connected IBS, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which the examiner indicated that the Veteran's IBS was manifested by chronic constipation, cramping, and abdominal distension. The examiner opined that that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were not caused by environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. In support of this, the examiner explained that hemorrhoids are veins located in the lower rectum and are associated with straining, chronic constipation, and diarrhea, among other things. 

As service connection is in effect for IBS manifested by chronic constipation, and there is no competent medical evidence of record that disassociates the Veteran's hemorrhoids from his IBS, the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hemorrhoids were caused by his service-connected IBS. Accordingly, service connection for hemorrhoids is granted. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss

For VA compensation purposes, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

The Veteran seeks service for hearing loss, which he asserts was caused by in-service noise exposure. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current hearing loss disability. See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1333 (1997) (holding that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation); see also McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in October 2022, at which time audiometric testing did not show hearing loss constituting a disability for VA compensation purposes. The relevant auditory thresholds at 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz were 0, 5, 15, 30, and 35 decibels, respectively, in the right ear, and 5, 5, 10, 20, and 30 decibels, respectively, in the left ear. Speech recognition testing revealed scores of 98 percent in the right ear and 96 percent in the left ear. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with sensorineural hearing loss in the frequency range of 500 to 4000 and 600 Hertz or higher in the right ear and sensorineural hearing loss in the frequency range of 500 to 4000 Hertz in the left ear. 

Although VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with sensorineural hearing loss in both ears, the Veteran's hearing loss did not rise to the level to be considered a disability for VA compensation purposes. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. A review of the Veteran's treatment records likewise does not show a hearing loss disability either before or after the Veteran's claim for service connection was filed. 

Although the Veteran is competent to report subjective symptoms of decreased hearing, the diagnosis of hearing loss meeting the definition of a disability for VA compensation purposes is medically complex requires knowledge and expertise in conducting and interpreting audiometric testing to determine. Thus, the opinion of the Veteran regarding the diagnosis of a current hearing loss disability is not competent medical evidence. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service-connected benefits to cases where there is a current disability. Although the Veteran has some level of hearing loss, there is no competent evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a hearing loss disability for VA compensation purposes under 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 during the course of the claim. Therefore, there is no basis upon which service connection can be awarded, and the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus

The Veteran seeks service for tinnitus, which he asserts was caused by in-service noise exposure. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is not warranted. 

With respect to a current disability, the record shows a current diagnosis of tinnitus. Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's tinnitus was incurred in or caused by service.

With respect to an in-service event or injury, VA has conceded in-service noise exposure based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS). 

With respect to a nexus between the Veteran's current tinnitus and service, service treatment records show no complaints of tinnitus during service. Post-service treatment records show that the Veteran was asked about symptoms of tinnitus in October 2019 and May 2020; however, he did not report having tinnitus. The record shows no complaints of tinnitus until the Veteran filed his claim for service connection in June 2022. Thus, to the extent that the Veteran claims to have experienced ongoing tinnitus since service or within a year of service, the Board finds that such assertions are not credible, as they are not consistent with the evidence of record, including his own contemporaneous reports. See Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991). Accordingly, service connection for tinnitus is not warranted on a presumptive basis based on continuity of symptomatology of a chronic disease. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in October 2022, during which he reported intermittent tinnitus occurring about once every three or four months. He did not identify a date of onset. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was incurred in or caused by service. In support of this, the examiner explained that service treatment records showed no complaints of tinnitus or any other auditory issues, and audiometric testing revealed stable hearing thresholds throughout the Veteran's period of active duty, indicating that there was no evidence of noise injury during service. The Board finds the opinion of the VA examiner to be probative and persuasive, as is based on a review of the evidence of record and supported by a reasoned medical explanation. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 302-04. 

Although the Veteran believes that his tinnitus is related to service, he has not shown that he has specialized training sufficient to render such an opinion. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Veteran is competent to report subjective symptoms of tinnitus. However, the etiology of tinnitus that had its onset many years after service is complex, involving multiple systems in the body, and requires medical expertise to determine. Thus, the opinion of the Veteran regarding the etiology of his current tinnitus is not competent medical evidence.

As the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for tinnitus loss is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability, including neuropsychological symptoms attributable to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses

The Veteran seeks service connection for psychiatric symptoms, including anxiety, depression, insomnia, sleep disturbance, and memory loss, which he asserts are manifestations of a qualifying chronic disability related to his Persian Gulf War service. 

Generally, in order to receive compensation for a psychiatric disorder, a claimant must have a diagnosis of a mental condition that conforms to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.130, 4.125(a); Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 404 (2020). However, as noted above, neuropsychological signs or symptoms and sleep disturbance may be manifestations of an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness related to service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b). 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current psychiatric disorder, nor does the record show six months or more of neuropsychological signs or symptoms that have not already been attributed to a diagnosed disability. See Degmetich, 104 F.3d at 1333; see also McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

Private treatment records dated prior to the Veteran's claim show that in July 2018, the Veteran was found to be psychiatrically normal. In October 2018, the Veteran's mood, affect, behavior, judgment, and thought content were normal. In December 2018, the Veteran denied depressed mood, and his affect was normal. In October 2019, it was noted that the Veteran did not endorse symptoms of depression, anxiety, or insomnia. In April 2020, the Veteran reported difficulty initiating sleep, unrefreshing sleep, and daytime sleepiness. The Veteran was referred for sleep study for suspected sleep apnea and to behavioral health for chronic insufficient sleep with insomnia features. In May 2020, the Veteran's mood and affect were normal, and he did not endorse symptoms of depression, anxiety, or insomnia. A June 2020 home sleep test revealed mild obstructive sleep apnea. In November 2020, the Veteran denied symptoms of anxiety or depression. He reported sleeping well, and his mood was stable. In July 2021, the Veteran's affect was normal. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported a history of insomnia, which he had not had difficulty with since he stopped taking naps. The Veteran denied any relevant mental health or behavioral history, and he did not report or endorse any psychiatric symptoms other than a history of insomnia. The examiner indicated that the Veteran appeared neat and well-groomed. His mood was euthymic and his affect was appropriate. He was friendly, open, and cooperative, and he maintained appropriate eye contact. The Veteran's speech, thought content, and comprehension were normal. There was no evidence of delusions, phobias, obsessions, compulsions, cognitive distortions, psychomotor retardation, or excitement. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of mental disorder. 

With respect to the Veteran's claimed sleep disturbance, the Veteran underwent a VA examination pursuant to his claim for service connection for polymyositis in September 2022, during which it was noted that sleep disturbance was a symptom of the Veteran's polymyositis. The VA examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's polymyositis was caused by environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. In the December 2022 rating decision, service connection was granted for polymyositis, which was manifested by, among other things, sleep disturbance. As the Veteran's sleep disturbance has been attributed to a diagnosis of polymyositis, which has already been service-connected, service connection is not warranted for an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses manifested by sleep disturbance.

With respect to the Veteran's claimed insomnia, the Board acknowledges the April 2020 notation of insomnia in the Veteran's private treatment records but finds that it is not sufficiently proximate to the Veteran's claim to support a finding of a current disability manifested by insomnia. The April 2020 notion of sleep disturbance was noted over two years prior to filing the instant claim for service connection and was followed by records showing that the Veteran denied insomnia. See Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 293. Moreover, during the September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he no longer experienced insomnia since he stopped taking naps. Accordingly, the Board finds that the record does not show a current disability manifested by insomnia. 

With respect to the Veteran's claimed anxiety, depression, and memory loss, the evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder at the time of the December 2022 rating decision. Although the Veteran is competent to report subjective symptoms of anxiety, depressed mood, and memory loss, the record does not show reports of such symptoms at the time of the December 2022 rating decision. Treatment records show that the Veteran denied anxiety or depression, and his mood and affect were normal. During the September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran did not report or endorse symptoms of anxiety, depression, or memory loss. Accordingly, the Board finds that the record does not show a current disability manifested by symptoms of anxiety, depression, and/or memory loss.

Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service-connected benefits to cases where there is a current disability. In this case, the record does not show a current diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder or six months or more of neuropsychological symptoms, including insomnia, anxiety, depression, and/or memory loss, near the time a claim was filed or at any time during the pendency of the claim. Moreover, the Veteran's sleep disturbance has been attributed to his service-connected polymyositis. 

As the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for a psychiatric disability, including neuropsychological symptoms attributable to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses, is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th 776 at 781-82.

6. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome

The Veteran seeks service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, which he asserts was caused by his Persian Gulf War service. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the December 2022 rating decision granting service connection for polymyositis indicates that fatigue is one of the symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected polymyositis. 

An October 2018 private treatment record shows that the Veteran had a history of hypogonadism, which was treated with testosterone replacement. The Veteran reported being off testosterone replacement for four months and stated that his energy had improved, and his fatigue had resolved. It was noted that the improvement in the Veteran's fatigue coincided with improved management of his polymyositis. Later that month, the Veteran reported being concerned about sleep apnea. The diagnoses included fatigue, unspecified type, and the treatment provider recommended a sleep study and ordered a urinalysis, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and complete blood count (CBC). In April 2020, the Veteran presented for evaluation of sleep apnea and reported symptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, unrefreshing sleep, frequent nocturnal arousals, gasping, and choking. The impression was excessive daytime sleepiness and suspected obstructive sleep apnea. A June 2020 home sleep test revealed a diagnosis of mild obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported feeling chronically fatigued, but stated that he had not been diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. The examiner opined that the Veteran's fatigue was likely multifactorial, including due to obstructive sleep apnea, which was not being treated with a CPAP because the Veteran reportedly could not tolerate wearing the mask. 

The Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, such as feeling fatigued; however, the diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome requires medical expertise to determine. Thus, the opinion of the Veteran regarding the diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome is not competent medical evidence. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1372 at 1377. In this case, there is no competent evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. Therefore, service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is not warranted. See Degmetich, 104 F.3d 1328 at 1333. 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran's claimed fatigue is a symptom of an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses. However, the Veteran's fatigue has been attributed to diagnoses of polymyositis, which has already been service-connected, and obstructive sleep apnea, which is addressed separately below. Accordingly, service connection is not warranted for an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses manifested by fatigue. 

As the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

7. Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia  

The Veteran seeks service connection for fibromyalgia, which he asserts was caused by his Persian Gulf War service. In his June 2022 application for service connection, the Veteran indicated that his claimed fibromyalgia was manifested by joint pain in the neck, shoulders, spine, back, hips, wrists, elbows, hands, knees, ankles, and feet. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of fibromyalgia.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that service connection has been granted for polymyositis (claimed as joint pain, including pain in the neck, shoulders, spine, back, hips, writs, elbows, hands, feet, knees, and ankles). The December 2022 rating decision granting service connection for polymyositis indicates that the Veteran's symptoms of polymyositis include widespread musculoskeletal pain, tender points, stiffness, fatigue, headache, and sleep disturbance. 

Private treatment records show that the Veteran had a history of inflammatory muscle disease, diagnosed as polymyositis-dermatomyositis. A July 2021 private rheumatology treatment record shows that the Veteran's polymyositis began around 2009 or 2010 with symptoms of weakness and pain in the hips and shoulders, and a subsequent muscle biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of polymyositis. 

The Veteran underwent a VA autoimmune disease examination in September 2022, during which he reported weakness in his shoulders and trunk beginning around 2009, which was diagnosed as polymyositis. 

The Veteran underwent a VA fibromyalgia examination in September 2022, during which he reported that he was not claiming to have fibromyalgia, but he was seeking service connection for pain in his left shoulder, hips, neck, and lower back. He denied pain in any joints other than the hips, left shoulder, neck, and lower back. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of fibromyalgia, and there were no trigger points noted during a VA examination. 

Although the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, such as pain and weakness, the diagnosis of fibromyalgia requires medical expertise to determine. Thus, the opinion of the Veteran regarding the diagnosis of fibromyalgia is not competent medical evidence. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77. 

The Board has also considered whether the Veteran's joint pain and weakness are symptoms of an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses. With respect to the Veteran's reported shoulder and hip pan, the record shows that such has been attributed to a diagnosis of polymyositis, which has already been service-connected. With respect to the Veteran's reported neck and lower back pain, the record shows that such has been attributed to diagnoses of degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine and osteoarthritis of the lumbar spine, and those claims are addressed separately below. Accordingly, service connection is not warranted for an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses manifested by joint pain and weakness. 

As the weight of the competent and probative evidence is against the claim, service connection for fibromyalgia is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

8. Entitlement to service connection for hepatic steatosis (fatty liver disease)

The Veteran asserts that his fatty liver disease had its onset during service. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported a history of elevated liver function tests (LFTs) in 2004 and a diagnosis of fatty liver disease around 2009. The VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's hepatic steatosis was caused by environmental exposures while serving in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. In support of this, the examiner indicated that fatty liver disease has multiple causes, including obesity, insulin resistance, celiac disease, medications, high sugar intake, alcohol, viruses, and autoimmune diseases, including polymyositis. As service connection is in effect for polymyositis, the Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's hepatic steatosis was caused or aggravated by his polymyositis. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006); see also Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008) (VA has a duty to develop and consider all theories of entitlement that are reasonably raised by the record or the veteran).

Additionally, the earliest reference to abnormal LFTs in the record is an October 2018 private treatment record. As the Veteran asserts that he had abnormal LFTs and a diagnosis of fatty liver disease much earlier than that, the Board finds that VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct these duty-to-assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

9. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II

The Veteran asserts that his diabetes mellitus was caused by his Persian Gulf War service. 

A July 2021 private rheumatology treatment record shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with polymyositis around 2009 or 2010. It was noted that the Veteran's polymyositis was treated with a lot of prednisone, which spiked his sugar.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported being diagnosed with diabetes mellitus around 2015. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's diabetes was caused by environmental exposures while serving in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

As the Veteran's private rheumatology treatment records note that the prednisone prescribed to treat the Veteran's service-connected polymyositis spiked his sugar, the Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's diabetes was caused or aggravated by the prednisone prescribed to treat his polymyositis. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84; see also Robinson, 21 Vet. App. at 552.

Additionally, the Veteran has not submitted treatment records from his initial diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, which he asserts was around 2015. As those records are relevant to the Veteran's claim, VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct these duty-to-assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

10. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches 

The Veteran asserts that his migraine headaches were caused by his Persian Gulf War service.

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was seen for a slight headache associated with a viral syndrome in February 1990. In November 1990, he sought treatment for a headache that lasted more than three hours. A physical examination revealed pain on palpation over the sinus cavities. The assessment was rule out sinus infection. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported that he started getting migraine headaches during service, and he was first diagnosed with migraine headaches after service around 1996 or 1997. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches and opined that they were less likely than not due to environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's in-service treatment for headaches, but did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's migraine headaches were directly related to service. As service treatment records show treatment for headaches, and the Veteran asserts that his migraines began during service, the Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theory of entitlement. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84. 

Additionally, the Veteran has not submitted treatment records from his reported diagnosis of migraines around 1996 or 1997. As those records are relevant to the Veteran's claim, VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct these duty-to-assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

11. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran asserts that his sleep apnea was caused by his Persian Gulf War service. 

The Veteran has not received a VA examination pursuant to his claim for service connection for sleep apnea. Private treatment records show a current diagnosis of mild obstructive sleep apnea. As noted above, the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. As such, the Veteran is entitled to a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) examination and a medical opinion as to whether his currently diagnosed sleep apnea was caused by in-service exposure to TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving TERA). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to satisfy the statutory duty to provide a TERA examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (the Board may remand for correction of an error of the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility in aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim).

12. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension

The Veteran asserts that his hypertension was caused by his Persian Gulf War service. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported being diagnosed with high blood pressure around 2010 after seeking treatment at an urgent care center for a headache that lasted more than a day. He stated that he was instructed to see his doctor, who diagnosed him with hypertension and started him on medication. The Veteran also stated that he had similar headaches during service, which he now believes were attributable to hypertension. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with hypertension and opined that it was less likely than not due to environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's hypertension is directly related to service. As service treatment records show treatment for headaches, and the Veteran asserts that his in-service headaches were manifestations of hypertension, the Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theory of entitlement. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84.

Additionally, the Veteran has not submitted treatment records from the urgent care center where he was reportedly first diagnosed with high blood pressure around 2010. As those records are relevant to the Veteran's claim, VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct these duty-to-assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

13. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability  

The Veteran asserts that a current low back disability was incurred during service.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2022, during which he reported having constant back pain since service, for which he received physical therapy in 2018. However, service treatment records show no complaints of or treatment for low back pain during service, and the Veteran denied recurrent back pain upon his discharge from active duty. The earliest reference to low back pain in the record is a July 2021 private treatment record, which notes lower back pain of unspecified chronicity. As the Veteran asserts that he received physical therapy for low back pain three years earlier than that, the Board finds that VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct this duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

14. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability 

The Veteran asserts that a current neck disability was incurred during service.

The Veteran underwent a VA neck examination in September 2022, during which he reported that his neck pain began after service when he was in his 30's. He denied any in-service injuries but stated that he believed his current neck disability was caused by having to scrunch into a bunk that was too small for him and sleeping with minimal headroom. He also reported being hospitalized in August 2022 for left arm pain and paresthesias. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine and opined that it was less likely than not due to environmental exposures in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's current neck disability was caused by having to scrunch into a bunk that was too small and sleeping with minimal headroom. The Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theory of entitlement. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84.

Additionally, the Veteran has not submitted treatment records from the hospital where he was reportedly treated for left upper extremity pain and numbness in August 2022. As those records are relevant to the Veteran's claim, VA should have attempted to obtain those records of treatment. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct these duty-to-assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to submit a signed authorization to obtain the records from the following treatment providers:

(a.) The treatment provider where the Veteran was first reportedly found to have elevated liver function tests (LFTs) around 2004;

(b.) The treatment provider who reportedly first diagnosed the Veteran with fatty liver disease around 2009;

(c.) The treatment provider who reportedly diagnosed the Veteran with migraines around 1996 or 1997;

(d.) The urgent care center where the Veteran was reportedly first diagnosed with high blood pressure around 2010 after having a headache that lasted longer than a day;

(e.) The physical therapist who reportedly treated the Veteran's low back pain in 2018;

(f.) The hospital where the Veteran was reportedly treated for left upper extremity pain and numbness in August 2022.

If any requested records are unavailable, the Veteran should be notified of such.

2. Obtain another medical opinion pursuant to the Veteran's claim for service connection for hepatic steatosis (fatty liver disease). Upon review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it at as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that the Veteran's hepatic steatosis would not have developed but for, or was worsened or prevented from improving by, his service-connected polymyositis.

The examiner should provide a detailed rationale and complete medical explanation for all opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

3. Obtain another medical opinion pursuant to the Veteran's claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II. Upon review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it at as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II, would not have developed but for, or was worsened or prevented from improving by prednisone prescribed to treat the Veteran's polymyositis.

The examiner should provide a detailed rationale and complete medical explanation for all opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

4. Obtain another medical opinion pursuant to the Veteran's claim for service connection for migraine headaches. Upon review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it at as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that the Veteran's current migraine headaches began during service or are otherwise related to the in-service treatment for headaches in February 1990 and November 1990.

The examiner should provide a detailed rationale and complete medical explanation for all opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

5. Schedule the Veteran for an examination of his claimed sleep apnea. After review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it at as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by his service, to include in-service exposure to TERA during his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. The examiner should consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA.

The examiner should provide a detailed rationale and complete medical explanation for all opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

6. Obtain another medical opinion pursuant to the Veteran's claim for service connection for a neck disability. Upon review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it at as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance, if not higher) that the Veteran's current degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine was caused by having to scrunch into a bunk that was too small and sleeping with minimal headroom during service. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should provide a detailed rationale and complete medical explanation for all opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

 

 

Marissa Caylor

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Banister, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.