Citation Nr: A25031960
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-431518
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, diagnosed as major depressive disorder (MDD) with anxious distress, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, her MDD with anxious distress had onset with symptoms in service that continued after service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for MDD with anxious distress have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2006 to March 2011.

In a September 2021 claim, the Veteran sought service connection for depression and anxiety. In an April 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), denied service connection for MDD with anxious distress.

In April 2024 the Veteran appealed that denial to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the related claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

1. Service connection for major depressive disorder with anxious distress

The Veteran contends that a disorder manifested by depression and anxiety began during her service and continued after service. The record also raises a claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder as secondary to pain from her service-connected disabilities of the knees and feet. The Veteran is service-connected for arthritis in each knee, bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis, and hallux valgus in each foot.

In the April 2024 rating decision, the RO made the favorable findings that during the Veteran's service she complained of depression and that she has been diagnosed with MDD with anxious distress. The Board is bound by those findings absent clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service connection may be established on a direct basis for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after service when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has explained that, in general, service connection requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) medical evidence, or in certain circumstances lay evidence, of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a claim, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107. In Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc), the Federal Circuit explained that positive and negative evidence does not have to be in exact equipoise before the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. Rather, a claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance, that is, "nearly equal." The Federal Circuit explained that evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal when the evidence "persuasively favors one side or the other."

During service the Veteran sought treatment in April 2008 for nightmares and problems sleeping. She reported that she had been in combat in Iraq, with experiences including firing at the enemy, being under enemy fire, and being in danger of being injured or killed. She reported flashbacks to her father's funeral and to experiences in combat. The treating clinician found that the Veteran had symptoms of major depressive episodes and of anxiety syndrome. The clinician stated that the posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms the Veteran endorsed were in response to both her father's death and her deployment in Iraq. From April 2008, lists of diagnoses included adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood. Treatment with medication was considered. In an August 2008 assessment, the Veteran reported recent depression symptoms, including decreased interest or pleasure in activities. 

In January 2009, a list of the Veteran's problems included nightmare disorder and adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood. In treatment in June 2009, the Veteran reported spells of blacking out and shaking. The treating clinician characterized the described symptoms as chronic recurring convulsions. The clinician stated that the convulsions might be an anxiety-related disorder.

In a May 2010 post-deployment assessment, the Veteran reported that in the past month she had nightmares about a past experience and she went to sick call for problems sleeping. She indicated that she was not presently bothered by those problems. On the November 2010 separation examination the clinician marked normal for the Veteran's psychiatric condition. On the accompanying medical history, the Veteran marked no for history of depression or excessive worry. In treatment in January 2011, a list of problems included adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood.

After the Veteran's March 2011 separation from service, she submitted in May 2011 a claim for service connection for PTSD, with onset in service in 2007.

The record on appeal contains VA treatment records from as early as 2015. In 2015 a list of the Veteran's problems included psychologic conversion disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed emotional features. 

In September 2015 the Veteran's husband wrote that, since about 2007, constant pain in the Veteran's knees and feet had caused her trouble with everyday tasks, and had left her barely able to go places and enjoy things. The Veteran's mother wrote in September 2015 that the Veteran had constant knee and foot pain that was worsened by even brief activity and that caused the Veteran to cry.

In VA treatment in March 2018, the Veteran was noted to have an adjustment disorder with some flashbacks. A clinician found that the Veteran was in a mild depressive state.

In the September 2021 claim, the Veteran stated that depression and anxiety were present in the last year of her service and were caused by events in service.

In VA treatment in September 2021, the Veteran reported chronic worry and increasing anxiety, with onset of symptoms in 2010. She related trouble falling and staying asleep. The treating clinician stated that the Veteran reported symptoms that might be consistent with major depression and moderate to severe anxiety. A clinician prescribed Lexapro (escitalopram) to treat anxiety. In December 2021 the Veteran reported depression and history of anxiety. She indicated that she had combat deployment and had chronic issues with her feet. Treatment notes from 2022 and 2023 reflect ongoing and resumed mental health treatment, including with escitalopram. 

On the report of an April 2024 VA examination, the examiner stated that the Veteran had no history of treatment with psychiatric medication. The examiner observed that the Veteran's mood was somewhat dysphoric. The examiner found that the Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment. The examiner assigned a diagnosis of MDD with anxious distress. The examiner expressed the opinion that the Veteran's disorders were less likely than not incurred in service or caused by events in service. As rationale, the examiner stated that there was insufficient documentation of continuous depression and anxiety starting in service and continuing through the present. The examiner found that the Veteran experienced bereavement during service and that depression resumed after service around 2013.

The Veteran's service treatment records contain reports of psychiatric disorder symptoms on multiple occasions between 2008 and 2010. Anxiety and depression symptoms continued to be noted among the Veteran's problems in 2011, shortly before the Veteran's separation from service. In seeking service connection for PTSD in May 2011, shortly after separation, the Veteran asserted a history of psychiatric disorder symptoms during and after service. The treatment records and the Veteran's statements support a picture of symptoms during service and continuing after service. 

The April 2024 examiner found insufficient documentation of continuity of symptoms in service after service. However the examiner did not address the 2010 and 2011 STR notations of psychiatric symptoms. The examiner also incorrectly found no history of prescription of psychiatric medication. The Board concludes that the April 2024 VA opinion is inadequate because it is based on an incomplete factual basis. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). Thus, the Board gives the opinion no probative value. 

Based on the evidence, the likelihood is at least evenly balanced, that there is continuity of the Veteran's anxiety and depression symptoms during and after service. Having found a nexus between her established symptoms in service and diagnosis after service, the Board grants service connection for her diagnosed MDD with anxious distress.  

As service connection is granted on a direct basis, the theory of service connection on a secondary basis need not be addressed.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. J. Kunz, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.