Citation Nr: A25031988
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-516095
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1964 to May 1968.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2023 and March 2024 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, for the issues of service connection for carpal tunnel bilateral upper extremities, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. For all remaining issues, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding all issues herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those issues. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ implicitly or explicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the issues of service connection for hypertension, thrombocytopenia, and obstructive sleep apnea. These are favorable findings by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to address the issues on the merits. See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Regarding other issues listed in the Veteran's May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the issues of service connection for monoclonal gammopathy, unknown joint pains, a gall bladder disability, polycythemia, and dizziness are not before the Board in this matter, but they are on appeal in other appeal streams. If they have not been yet adjudicated, they will be adjudicated in the future, if otherwise appropriate. See January 2024 Notice of Disagreement; December 2024 Notice of Disagreement; March 2025 Board correspondence. Putting aside whether there can be a claim of service connection for obesity or protein deficiency, such issues have not been adjudicated by the AOJ and those issues are therefore not before the Board. The issues of service connection for glaucoma and a kidney condition are not before the Board because the appeal is not timely. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral upper extremity carpal tunnel syndrome.

The Veteran is conceded to have been exposed to several toxins in service, including asbestos, lead paint and zinc chromate paint. See, e.g., December 2023 VA memorandum. 

The Veteran underwent a VA peripheral nerves examination in December 2023, wherein the examiner diagnosed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. The Veteran was unable to recall the onset of his disability.

The December 2023 VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provided any indication of a relationship between carpal tunnel syndrome and the Veteran's TERA. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. As a result, the opinion is inadequate, and remand is necessary.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran asserted that he has constantly suffered from his hypertension and has yet to be cured. See June 2023 statement. A December 2023 VA examiner diagnosed hypertension and found that the date of diagnosis was November 2011. The Veteran reported an onset date of 1969, which would be about a year after service.

The December 2023 VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated there was no medical evidence that exposure to asbestos, lead paint, and zinc chromate causes, aids, or contributes to hypertension while working as a boatswain's mate during service. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. As a result, remand for a new opinion is necessary.

There is no opinion regarding whether the Veteran's hypertension manifested within one year of his discharge from service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). As a result, remand is warranted on this basis as well.

3. Entitlement to service connection for thrombocytopenia.

The Veteran asserted that his thrombocytopenia is associated with his service-connected dermatophytosis. See July 2023 statement.

A December 2023 VA examiner diagnosed thrombocytopenia and provided a date of diagnosis of October 2010. The examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated that there was no medical or scientific literature found to support thrombocytopenia caused by exposure to asbestos. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature and only considers one of the Veteran's TERAs.

A February 2024 VA examiner also opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated that there was no medical evidence that exposure to asbestos, lead paint, and zinc chromate causes, aids, or contributes to thrombocytopenia while working as a boatswain's mate during service. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. Because there is no adequate opinion of record, remand is necessary.

There is no opinion regarding whether the Veteran's thrombocytopenia is related to his service-connected dermatophytosis. As a result, remand is warranted on this basis as well.

4. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

The Veteran asserted that he had sleep apnea during service, and it continued from that time. See August 2023 statement. He also asserted that his disability is related to his service-connected dermatophytosis. See, e.g., July 2023 statement.

A December 2023 VA examiner diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea and provided a date of diagnosis of 2008. The Veteran again reported an onset of his disability between 1963 to 1964, which would include time prior to his active-duty service, stating that he had loud snoring, sneezing, a runny nose, and apnea.

The December 2023 VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated that there was no medical or scientific literature found to support obstructive sleep apnea caused by exposure to asbestos. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature and only considers asbestos exposure without discussion of other TERAs.

A February 2024 VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's disability was due to his TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner stated that there was no medical evidence that exposure to asbestos, lead paint, and zinc chromate causes, aids, or contributes to thrombocytopenia while working as a boatswain's mate during service. This opinion is inadequate because it relies solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. Because there is no adequate opinion of record, remand is necessary.

There are no medical opinions regarding a direct relation to service or a relation to dermatophytosis. As a result, remand is necessary on these bases as well. At this time, there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's disability pre-existed his service. Thus, the Board will not remand for development rebutting the presumption of soundness.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should arrange for a VA opinion, with examination of the Veteran only if deemed necessary by a medical professional, to determine the nature and likely cause of his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

Is the Veteran's bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to toxins? When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, to include asbestos, lead paint and zinc chromate paint exposure. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature.

2.  The AOJ should arrange for a VA opinion, with examination of the Veteran only if deemed necessary by a medical professional, to determine the nature and likely cause of his hypertension. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's hypertension at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to toxins? When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, including asbestos, lead paint and zinc chromate paint exposure. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension manifested within one-year from his separation from service? Please explain why. If so, please describe the manifestations.

3. The AOJ should arrange for a VA opinion, with examination of the Veteran only if deemed necessary by a medical professional, to determine the nature and likely cause of his thrombocytopenia. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's thrombocytopenia at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his in-service exposure to toxins? When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, including asbestos, lead paint and zinc chromate paint exposure. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's thrombocytopenia was either caused or aggravated by his service-connected dermatophytosis? Please explain why. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence without a proper foundation.

The opinion must address whether the disability increased in severity beyond its natural progression (i.e., was aggravated).

4. The AOJ should arrange for a VA examination of the Veteran to determine the nature and likely cause of his obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his in-service exposure to toxins? When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, including asbestos, lead paint and zinc chromate paint exposure. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature.

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was either caused or aggravated by his service-connected dermatophytosis? Please explain why. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in medical literature. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence without a proper foundation.

The opinion must address whether the disability increased in severity beyond its natural progression (i.e., was aggravated).

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was either incurred in or otherwise related to his active-duty service? Please explain why. The examiner must discuss the Veteran's report of onset during service. The examiner may not rely solely on the absence of evidence in service treatment records or medical records after service without a proper foundation.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Sandler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.