Citation Nr: A25031772
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 220223-222825
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 70 percent evaluation for traumatic brain injury with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and memory loss (hereinafter TBI) effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to Chapter 35 Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to June 23, 2021, for the grant of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for pseudofolliculitis barbae is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for scarring on back is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's TBI facets warranted a highest level of impairment of 3 for the remaining applicable time period for his June 23, 2021, increased evaluation claim.  It was factually ascertainable that an increase in the disability occurred within the one-year period prior to the claim date but also prior to the April 9, 2021, effective date for service connection.

2.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) originally granted entitlement to Chapter 35 DEA benefits based on the effective date of the grant of the 70 percent evaluation for TBI, along with consideration of other disabilities for which service connection was already in effect from April 9, 2021.

3.  The Veteran submitted an intent to file a claim for compensation benefits (intent to file) on June 23, 2021, followed by an application form that contained the necessary information to constitute a complete claim (initial claim) for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea in October 2021, which was within the one-year period to preserve the effective date based on the intent to file.  No earlier record constitutes a formal or informal claim or intent to file for the benefit.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for a 70 percent evaluation for TBI effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.321, 4.1-4.14, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

2.  The criteria for entitlement to Chapter 35 DEA benefits effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3020, 21.3021.

3.  The criteria for an effective date earlier than June 23, 2021, for the grant of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1983 to October 1987.  He had additional service in the United States Navy Reserve.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2021 rating decision. 

The Veteran filed a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Form 10182 in February 2022 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 AOJ decision.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider for the issues decided herein, he may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  Nevertheless, the TBI and Chapter 35 DEA benefits decisions are full grants of those benefits sought on appeal.  The AOJ will also be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider for the other increased evaluation issues because they are being remanded.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Regarding the nature of the issues on appeal, the February 2022 VA Form 10182 is unclear as written as to which issues the Veteran wanted to appeal from the December 2021 rating decision; however, his representative provided the necessary clarification in the March 2022 appellate brief.  In addition, the AOJ deferred, rather than adjudicated, the issue of an increased evaluation for migraine headaches in the December 2021 rating decision.  The AOJ adjudicated the issue in a February 2022 rating decision.  The Veteran then appealed the issue, along with earlier effective date issues (TBI, hypertension, pseudofolliculitis barbae, back scarring, and migraine headaches, in relevant part) from September 2021 rating decision in a May 2022 VA Form 10182 that is currently pending on the Board's hearing docket.  Thus, the record confirms that the Veteran wishes to have those issues in the separate docket.

Regarding the nature of the increased evaluation claims, the AOJ originally granted service connection for hypertension (then characterized as high blood pressure) in a May 2017 rating decision.  In the September 2021 rating decisions, the AOJ granted service connection for the other disabilities (TBI, pseudofolliculitis barbae, and back scarring) and continued the evaluation for hypertension based on an April 9, 2021, intent to file/May 2021 application form.  Meanwhile, the Veteran submitted a June 2021 intent to file.  It appears that he did not file a decision review request to the September 2021 rating decisions as to the initial evaluations assigned; however, he did file an October 2021 application form requesting increased evaluations that attached to the June 2021 intent to file, as adjudicated in the December 2021 rating decision on appeal.  The issue of entitlement to an earlier effective date for the assignment of the 70 percent evaluation for TBI (granted in the December 2021 rating decision) as identified in the March 2022 appellate brief has been recharacterized as stated above, because, in essence, the Veteran is seeking that evaluation for the remaining time period applicable for this non-initial increased evaluation claim.  The entitlement to Chapter 35 DEA benefits issue has been similarly characterized as a related issue that was originally awarded in connection with the TBI increased evaluation award.

Law and Analysis

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues with the pre-decisional duty to notify or duty to assist.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board . . . to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

Increased Evaluation

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  While the regulations require review of the recorded history of a disability by the adjudicator to ensure a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over the current medical findings.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?55 (1994).  Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different or "staged" ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505 (2007).

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) with Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV) and Memory Loss 

The Veteran is currently assigned a 10 percent evaluation prior to June 23, 2021, and a 70 percent evaluation thereafter for his service-connected TBI pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Under Diagnostic Code 8045, there are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after TBI), emotional/behavioral, and physical.  Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.  The above regulation and diagnostic code also provide further rating criteria, as detailed in relevant part below.

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.  Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.  Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.  In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.  Evaluate cognitive impairment under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified."

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.  Evaluate subjective symptoms that are residuals of TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified."  However, separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table.

Evaluate emotional/behavioral dysfunction under § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings-mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.  When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified."

Evaluate physical (including neurological) dysfunction based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions.

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of TBI.  For residuals not listed here that are reported on an examination, evaluate under the most appropriate diagnostic code.  Evaluate each condition separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation, and combine under § 4.25 the evaluations for each separately rated condition.  The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations.

Consider the need for special monthly compensation for such problems as loss of use of an extremity, certain sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, the need for aid and attendance (including for protection from hazards or dangers incident to the daily environment due to cognitive impairment), being housebound, etc.

For the evaluation of cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms, the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" contains 10 important facets of TBI.  It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total."  However, not every facet has every level of severity.  The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.  Assign a 100-percent evaluation if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets.  If no facet is evaluated as "total," assign the overall percentage evaluation based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent.  For example, assign a 70 percent evaluation if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet.

For the facet memory, attention, concentration, executive functions, a "0" level of impairment is assigned with no complaints of impairment.  A "1" level is assigned with a complaint of mild loss of memory (such as having difficulty following a conversation, recalling recent conversations, remembering names of new acquaintances, or finding words, or often misplacing items), attention, concentration, or executive functions, but without objective evidence on testing.  A "2" level is assigned with objective evidence on testing of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment.  A "3" level is assigned with objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in moderate functional impairment.

For the facet judgment, a "0" level of impairment is assigned when normal.  A "1" level is assigned with mildly impaired judgment.  For complex or unfamiliar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision.  A "2" level is assigned with moderately impaired judgment.  For complex or unfamiliar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision, although has little difficulty with simple decisions.  A "3" level is assigned with moderately severely impaired judgment.  For even routine and familiar decisions, occasionally unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision.

For the facet social interaction, a "0" level of impairment is assigned when social interaction is routinely appropriate.  A "1" level is assigned when social interaction is occasionally inappropriate.  A "2" level is assigned when social interaction is frequently inappropriate.  A "3" level is assigned when social interaction is inappropriate most or all of the time.

For the facet orientation, a "0" level of impairment is assigned when always oriented to person, time, place, and situation (i.e., the four aspects of orientation).  A "1" level is assigned when occasionally disoriented to one of the four aspects of orientation.  A "2" level is assigned when occasionally disoriented to two of the four aspects of orientation or often disoriented to one aspect of orientation.  A "3" level is assigned when often disoriented to two or more of the four aspects of orientation.

For the facet motor activity (with intact motor and sensory system), a "0" level of impairment is assigned for normal motor activity.  A "1" level is assigned for motor activity normal most of the time, but mildly slowed at times due to apraxia (inability to perform previously learned motor activities, despite normal motor function).  A "2" level is assigned for motor activity mildly decreased or with moderate slowing due to apraxia.  A "3" level is assigned for motor activity moderately decreased due to apraxia.

For the facet visual spatial orientation, a "0" level of impairment is assigned when normal.  A "1" level is assigned when mildly impaired.  Occasionally gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps or following directions.  Is able to use assistive devices such as global positioning system (GPS).  A "2" level is assigned when moderately impaired.  Usually gets lost in unfamiliar surroundings, has difficulty reading maps, following directions, and judging distance.  Has difficulty using assistive devices such as GPS.  A "3" level is assigned when moderately severely impaired.  Gets lost even in familiar surroundings, unable to use assistive devices such as GPS.

For the facet subjective symptoms, a "0" level of impairment is assigned for subjective symptoms that do not interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships.  Examples are: mild or occasional headaches, mild anxiety.  A "1" level is assigned with three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships.  Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: intermittent dizziness, daily mild-to-moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, and hypersensitivity to light.  A "2" level is assigned with three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships.  Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are: marked fatigability, blurred or double vision, headaches requiring rest periods during most days.

For the facet neurobehavioral effects, a "0" level of impairment is assigned for one or more neurobehavioral effects that do not interfere with workplace interaction or social interaction.  Examples of neurobehavioral effects are: irritability, impulsivity, unpredictability, lack of motivation, verbal aggression, physical aggression, belligerence, apathy, lack of empathy, moodiness, lack of cooperation, inflexibility, and impaired awareness of disability.  Any of these effects may range from slight to severe, although verbal and physical aggression are more likely to have a more serious impact on workplace interaction and social interaction than some of the other effects.  A "1" level is assigned with one or more neurobehavioral effects that occasionally interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.  A "2" level is assigned with one or more neurobehavioral effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.  A "3" level is assigned with one or more neurobehavioral effects that interfere with or preclude workplace interaction, social interaction, or both on most days or that occasionally require supervision for safety of self or others.

For the facet communication, a "0" level of impairment is assigned when able to communicate by spoken or written language (expressive communication), and to comprehend spoken and written language.  A "1" level is assigned when comprehension or expression, or both, of either spoken or written language is only occasionally impaired.  Can communicate complex ideas.  A "2" level is assigned with inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, more than occasionally but less than half the time.  Can generally communicate complex ideas.  A "3" level is assigned with inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, at least half the time but not all the time, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, at least half the time but not all the time.  May rely on gestures or other alternative modes of communication.  Able to communicate basic needs.

Note (1): There may be an overlap of manifestations of conditions evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code.  In such cases, do not assign more than one evaluation based on the same manifestations.  If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, assign a single evaluation under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.  However, if the manifestations are clearly separable, assign a separate evaluation for each condition.  Note (2): Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular evaluation.  Note (3): "Instrumental activities of daily living" refers to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone.  These activities are distinguished from "Activities of daily living," which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet.  Note (4): The terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" TBI, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of TBI made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning.  This classification does not affect the rating assigned under Diagnostic Code 8045.

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits.  VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent evaluation for his service-connected TBI for the remaining applicable time period for the June 2021 increased evaluation claim.

The AOJ granted service connection for the disability effective from April 9, 2021, in the second September 2021 rating decision.  The AOJ then granted the increased 70 percent evaluation in the December 2021 rating decision effective from the June 23, 2021, increased evaluation claim date based on findings in the November 2021 VA TBI examination report supporting a change in the level of impairment for the judgment facet to 3 - which made that the highest facet level.  The examiner determined that the Veteran had moderately severe impaired judgment described as difficulty in making decisions and needing his spouse most of the time.  On the other hand, the June 2021 VA TBI examination report and November 2021 VA mental health examination report show that the Veteran's judgment was normal.

Nevertheless, there is a reasonable doubt as to whether the Veteran's TBI facets also warranted a highest level of impairment of 3 for the remaining applicable time period for the June 2021 claim.  For example, the June 2021 and November 2021 VA TBI examiners and the November 2021 VA mental health examiner all determined that it was not possible to differentiate the Veteran's mental health disorder symptomatology from his TBI symptomatology.  While the TBI examiners findings result in mild impairment for the memory facet of a 1 or 2, the mental health examiner explained that the Veteran's overlap of his anxiety, depression, panic, and memory loss prevented identifying which disorder completely caused memory loss, noting that the diagnosis of memory complication had been confirmed on examination with objective testing results.  See also, e.g., historical VA treatment records from March 2014 (mental health appointment with diagnosis of moderate neurocognitive disorder, TBI with anxiety), December 2015 and February 2016 (memory testing results with some impairment; first record shows report of difficulty with memory and finding the right words).  The VA mental health examiner also determined that the severity and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Similarly, a November 5, 2020, VA treatment record shows that the Veteran reported having worsening anxiety attacks every few days that he described as a panic attack.  His treatment provider included an assessment/plan for his anxiety disorder to try to add a new medicine as needed for breakthrough anxiety attacks.

In other words, the Veteran's mental health symptomatology, including the increased symptomatology shown in the November 2020 VA treatment record, should be considered in connection with his TBI evaluation based on the VA examiners' determinations.  See also Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).  Thus, the medical and lay evidence as to the Veteran's functional impairment attributable to his TBI supports the assignment of a level of impairment of 3 in the memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions facet based on objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment resulting in moderate functional impairment.  Estevez v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 157 (2023) (citing Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219 (2015)).  The Board notes that there may be additional non-VA treatment records for TBI-related treatment (as detailed in the remand below for the remaining issues); however, there is adequate evidence to decide the case as to this issue at this time.

Based on the foregoing and resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence supports the assignment of a 70 percent evaluation for TBI effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021, and the claim is granted.  It was factually ascertainable that an increase in the disability to occurred within the one-year period prior to the June 2021 claim date but also prior to the April 2021 effective date for service connection.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983 (Fed. Cir. 2010) ("It is clear from the plain language of [section] 5110(b)(2) that it only permits an earlier effective date for increased disability compensation if that disability increased during the one-year period before the filing of the claim."); Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 511, 519 (1997) ("increase" for this purpose is one to the next disability level); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (Sept. 23, 1998).  This decision represents a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal because it awards the earliest effective date possible based on the currently assigned service connection effective date.

The Veteran and his representative have not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 368 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Chapter 35 DEA Benefits

In relevant part, for purposes of Chapter 35 DEA benefits, a child, spouse, or surviving spouse of a veteran or serviceperson will have basic eligibility if the veteran: (1) was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable; and (2) has a permanent total service-connected disability.  P&T means permanent and total "disability," permanently and totally "disabled," or permanent and total "rating," when any of these terms are used in reference to a veteran with a service-connected disability rating determined by VA to be total for the purposes of VA disability compensation where the impairment is reasonably certain to continue throughout the life of the disabled veteran.  The term "effective date of the P&T rating" means the date from which VA considers that the veteran's P&T disability commenced for purposes of VA benefits, as determined by the initial rating decision.  38 U.S.C. § 3501; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3020, 21.3021.

The AOJ originally granted entitlement to Chapter 35 DEA benefits effective from June 23, 2021, based on the effective date of the increased 70 percent TBI evaluation, along with consideration of other disabilities for which service connection was already in effect from April 9, 2021, because the Veteran had a total service-connected disability that was permanent in nature.  The new award of the 70 percent TBI evaluation in this decision, again considered with the other service-connected disabilities that formed the basis of the initial award, similarly warrants entitlement to the Chapter 35 DEA benefits award effective from April 9, 2021, to June 22, 2021.  This decision represents a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal because it awards the earliest effective date possible based on the currently assigned service connection effective date for the relevant service-connected disabilities, including TBI.

Earlier Effective Date

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an initial claim, or a supplemental claim, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).  The effective date for an award of service connection is the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, the effective date is the later of the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement to service connection arose.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2).

For continuously pursued claims, except as otherwise provided, the effective date will be fixed in accordance with the date of receipt of the initial claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if a claimant continuously pursues an issue by timely filing in succession any of the available administrative review options as specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c), generally within one year of the issuance of the decision.  Except as otherwise provided, for supplemental claims received more than one year after the date on which the AOJ issues notice of a decision or the Board issued notice of a decision, the effective date will be fixed in accordance with the date entitlement arose, but it will not be earlier than the date of receipt of the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).

A specific claim in the form prescribed by VA must be filed in order for benefits to be paid or furnished to any individual under the laws administered by VA.  38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.151(a).  The term "claim" means a written or electronic communication requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a specific benefit under the laws administered by VA submitted on an application form prescribed by VA.  

An initial claim is any complete claim, other than a supplemental claim, for a benefit on a form prescribed by VA.  The first initial claim for one or more benefits received by VA is further defined as an original claim (see 38 C.F.R. § 3.160(b)).  Initial claims include a new claim requesting service connection for a disability or grant of a new benefit and a claim for increase in a disability evaluation rating or rate of a benefit paid based on a change or worsening in condition or circumstance since the last decision issued by VA for the benefit.  A supplemental claim is any complete claim for a VA benefit on an application form prescribed by VA where an initial or supplemental claim for the same or similar benefit on the same or similar basis was previously decided.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (supplemental claims).  A pending claim is a claim which has not been finally adjudicated.  A claim adjudicated by VA as either allowed or disallowed is considered finally adjudicated under the modernized review system when the period in which to file a review option available under 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 expires or with disposition on judicial review where no such review option is available.  38 C.F.R. § 3.160(c)-(d).

A communication or action, to include an electronic mail that is transmitted through VA's electronic portal or otherwise, that indicates a desire to file for benefits under the laws administered by VA from a claimant that does not meet the standards of a complete claim is considered a request for an application form for benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 3.150(a).  Upon receipt of such a communication or action, VA shall notify the claimant and the claimant's representative, if any, of the information necessary to complete the application form or form prescribed by VA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(a).  

An intent to file a claim may be submitted to VA to indicate a claimant's desire to file a claim for benefits.  Upon receipt of an intent to file a claim, VA will furnish the claimant with the appropriate application form prescribed by VA.  If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by VA, as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.160(a), appropriate to the benefit sought within one year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received.  An intent to file a claim can be submitted in one of three ways, including a saved electronic application; written intent on the prescribed intent to file a claim form; and oral intent communicated to designated VA personnel and recorded in writing.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

A complete claim is required for all types of claims.  The regulations also provide for action following receipt of incomplete application forms.  Only one complete claim for a benefit (e.g., compensation, pension) may be associated with each intent to file a claim for that benefit, though multiple issues may be contained within a complete claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(c)-(d).  A complete claim is defined as a submission of an application form prescribed by VA, whether paper or electronic, that meets the following requirements: (1) provides the name of the claimant; the relationship to the veteran, if applicable; and sufficient service information for VA to verify the claimed service, if applicable; (2) is signed by the claimant or a person legally authorized to sign for the claimant; (3) identifies the benefit sought; (4) provides a description of any symptom(s) or medical condition(s) on which the benefit is based to the extent the form prescribed by VA so requires; and (5) for nonservice-connected disability or death pension and parents' dependency and indemnity compensation claims, provides a statement of income to the extent the form prescribed by VA so requires.  38 C.F.R. § 3.160(a).

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

Regarding the date of claim, the Veteran submitted an intent to file on June 23, 2021, followed by an application form that contained the necessary information to constitute a complete claim (initial claim) for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea in October 2021, which was within the one-year period to preserve the effective date based on the intent to file.  The AOJ granted service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a secondary basis to the service-connected TBI effective from the date of the June 2021 intent to file in the December 2021 rating decision.

The record does not contain any earlier communication with VA indicating an intent to file a claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea prior to the June 2021 intent to file followed by the October 2021 application form, including consideration of the former versions of the relevant laws and regulations for claims.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(p), 3.151(a), 3.155(a), 3.160(c).  Cf. Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32, 35 (1998) (holding that before VA can adjudicate a claim for benefits, "the claimant must submit a . . . document identifying the benefit and expressing some intent to seek it") and Talbert v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 352, 356-57 (1995).  The Veteran and his representative have not made any specific argument in support of this claim.  The Board has considered the content of the May 2021 and June 2021 application forms where the Veteran claimed other disorders secondary to his TBI; however, those submissions do not contain language that would indicate an intent to seek benefits for obstructive sleep apnea at those times (where the second application form was filed the same day as the current effective date assigned), even when sympathetically read.  See Shea v. Wilkie, 926 F.3d 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2019) and Sellers v. Wilkie, 965 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 2020) (holding that, in evaluating the sufficiency of formal and informal claims, the claim is required to identify the sickness, disease, or injury for which compensation is sought with at least a high level of generality).

Regarding the date of entitlement, even assuming the evidence shows that the Veteran met the requirements for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea prior to June 23, 2021, the effective date for an award based on an initial claim (i.e., the first claim filed for that benefit) cannot be earlier than the date of VA's receipt of the claim.  The date of receipt of the claim based on the intent to file is the effective date assigned for the disability in this case.  Thus, as the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

On review, the Board finds that additional development is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the remaining issues on appeal.  Specifically, it appears that there may be outstanding non-VA treatment records that have not yet been associated with the record.  The record shows that the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, in December 2021, which identified his private treatment providers.  While it appears from subsequent December 2021 correspondence that development was initiated, it does not appear that it was completed, prior to the December 2021 rating decision on appeal.  Notably, on the December 2021 Rating Decision Codesheet, the AOJ made a note that "4142" development was still needed, which refers to the December 2021 VA Form 21-4142 that was submitted.  If those treatment records were received after the December 2021 rating decision, the AOJ need not request them again.  

The record also shows that the Veteran has a non-VA primary care provider, and as such, he should be given an opportunity to submit or request that VA attempt to obtain those treatment records.  See, e.g., March 2021 VA Treatment Record. 

The case is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should request that the Veteran provide the names and addresses of any and all health care providers who have provided treatment for his hypertension, pseudofolliculitis barbae, and back scarring.  After acquiring this information and obtaining any necessary authorization, the AOJ should obtain and associate these records with the claims file.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A specific request should be made for any providers identified on the December 2021 VA Form 21-4142, as well as the Veteran's non-VA primary care provider.

 

J. SAIKH

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.