Citation Nr: A25031362
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230917-377255
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an eye disorder (claimed as vision loss) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2004 to May 2010. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an October 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) in September 2023. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and cited the October 2022 rating decision on appeal. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301.

As a preliminary matter, it is noted that the Veteran was notified by mail that there is no VA Form 21-22 in his claims file appointing an accredited representative and he was reminded he has the right to be represented. However, there is an SF 180 (signed by the Veteran) from an unaccredited representative assigning themselves a power of attorney and requesting his records in 2022, completed in 2023. The Veteran was provided with 30 days to respond and/or appoint a representative. The Veteran did not respond. Therefore, the Board will proceed with this appeal. The Veteran is pro se. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran attempted to appeal an October 2022 rating decision for service connection for hearing loss. However, the AOJ did not adjudicate service connection for hearing loss in October 2022 or within a year of the September 2023 NOD. The record reveals that the matter was addressed in a July 2021 rating decision. As such, the September 2023 NOD for service connection for hearing loss is untimely and the matter will not be addressed herein. 

In order to fully contemplate the Veteran's appellate contentions, the issue on appeal has been recharacterized as entitlement to service connection for an eye disorder (claimed as vision loss).  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Entitlement to service connection for an eye disorder (claimed as vision loss).

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for his eye disorder, claimed as vision loss, due to January 2010 LASIK surgery. He maintains that his post-surgery eyesight is significantly worse including without the use of glasses. See Veteran's August 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. The Veteran further contends that he has worn glasses since he was approximately 5 years old which only made the words bigger and bolder, but prior to his surgery he could see just fine without the glasses. Id. 

For the following reasons, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain a new medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's eye condition. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

In September 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA eye examination and a medical opinion was obtained. On examination, the examiner noted a history of vision loss/refractive error. Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran has been wearing glasses since about 4 years old, the Veteran had LASIK surgery in 2010 and the Veteran reports that his vision was worse - blurrier - post LASIK.  After examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of an eye condition - there is not a left nor right vision loss diagnosis because there are no findings, signs and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis. However, in the accompanying medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran has a slight right visual impairment but no nexus to service can be established.

The Board finds that the medical opinion is inadequate. While the examiner noted the Veteran's history and contentions during examination, he did not address the Veteran's lay statement that his eyesight has been worse since undergoing LASIK surgery in service when rendering his medical opinion. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (addressing a veteran's lay reports of symptomatology is required when considering their prior medical history). Further, the examiner did not address the July 2022 VA treatment record showing diagnoses of keratoconus in the right eye (oculus dexter 2 (OD)), pellucid marginal degeneration in the left eye (oculus sinister 3 (OS)) and irregular astigmatism in both eyes (oculus uterque (OU)). Also, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's service treatment records, including records dated in March 2010 and April 2010.  A March 2010 Report of Medical Assessment notes the Veteran's comment that eye surgery deteriorated my vision, and an April 2010 report shows a notation of refractive error, hypermetropia, blurry vision and astigmatism. Additionally, the examiner did not address the note in a September 2022 VA examination of headaches originating in the occipital region of the head towards the frontal area and sensitivity to light. Service connection for tension headaches is in effect. Furthermore, the Board notes that the September 2022 examiner's opinion is contradictory because the examiner opined that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of an eye condition nor bilateral vision loss, and simultaneously that the Veteran currently has slight right visual impairment. Thus, the Board finds that the September 2022 medical opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

In addition, the Board notes that the Veteran's January 2004 entrance examination report noted that he "wears glasses" due to myopia. It is acknowledged that congenital or developmental defects and refractive error of the eye are not diseases or injuries for compensation purposes under VA law. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 4.9. However, such defects can be the subject to superimposed disease or injury. That is, if during a Veteran's military service, a superimposed disease or injury occurs, service connection may be warranted for the resultant disease or injury. VAOPGCPREC 82-90 (July 18, 1990). Because of the Veteran's entrance notation and in-service eye surgery, this matter was raised by the evidence of record and should have been considered. 

As such, the Board finds that the duty to assist was not fulfilled. The failure to provide an adequate medical opinion was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and it is well established that the VA's duty to assist includes providing the Veteran an adequate medical opinion to substantiate a claim on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). A remand is required to obtain a new medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's eye conditions.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's eye disorders.

It is left to the discretion of the examiner whether a new examination is needed. The claims file should be made available to the examiner in conjunction with the examinations. If an examination is conducted, any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all pertinent symptomatology and findings must be reported in detail. 

Specifically, the examiner should:

(A) Identify all eye diagnoses present. 

(B) For the Veteran's myopia, opine as to whether there is evidence of a superimposed disease or injury. If so, identify the resultant/additional disability.

(C) For every other eye diagnosis, opine as to whether it at least as likely as not began in service, was caused by service, or is otherwise related to service. 

(D) For every other eye diagnosis, opine as to whether it at least as likely as not is related to or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tension headaches. 

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion expressed. The examiner should address the evidence of record, to include the Veteran's service treatment records and his lay statement that his eyesight has worsened - since his in-service January 2010 LASIK surgery.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wright, Kadia

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.