Citation Nr: A25031347
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430850
DATE:  April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from November 2002 to September 2023. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the March 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection - Back Disability

The Veteran asserts his back disability had its onset during active service or is otherwise etiologically related to service. 

As to current disability, the Veteran has been diagnosed with lumbosacral strain. See January 2024 VA examination. The Board notes the Veteran's August 2002 enlistment examination also contains a diagnosis of scoliosis. 

As to in-service event, as noted above, the Veteran's August 2002 enlistment examination notes a diagnosis of scoliosis and references an orthopedic examination. However, this examination does not appear to be in the record. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) contain a December 2003 chest X-ray, which found the Veteran's skeletal structures and other soft tissues were normal. July 2014 and October 2015 post deployment health assessments note the Veteran reported he was bothered a little by back pian, and a February 2019 post deployment health assessment notes the Veteran reported he had been bothered a lot by back pain. A May 2019 periodic health assessment reflects the Veteran reported experienced recurring muscle, joint, or low back pain that impacted his duty performance, but he had not sought medical care. An August 2019 STR reflects the Veteran reported injuring his back during physical training. The provider diagnosed muscle spasm of the back and noted the Veteran complained of acute lumbar spine pain. The provider further noted the Veteran reported a history of similar symptoms intermittently that had never been evaluated. A September 2019 follow up reflects the Veteran continued to experience back pain, but he had been managing his pain with medication and a home exercise program. He reported his symptoms were improving but had not resolved completely. A September 2020 post-deployment health assessment notes the Veteran reported he had been bothered a lot by back pain, and a September 2020 periodic health assessment reflects the Veteran again reported recurring muscle, joint, or low back pain that impacted his duty performance, but he had not sought medical care. A May 2022 STR reflects the Veteran reported ongoing mild, low back pain, and his past medical history noted low back pain. On the Veteran's February 2023 separation report of medical history, the Veteran reported recurrent back pain and stated he had injured his back during physical training and had continued to experience recurring random pain. In a March 2023 separation report of medical history, the Veteran reported he had experienced chronic lower back pain since an injury in 2019, and that his lower back strain had made it difficult for him to perform his work and other regular daily activities during the past month. The Veteran's March 2023 separation report of medical examination notes a normal spine examination, and reflects the Veteran reported intermittent back pain usually with increased activity. On physical examination, the provider found there was no costovertebral angle tenderness, and that the Veteran's mobility was not limited. 

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA back (thoracolumbar spine) conditions examination. The Veteran reported his back condition had onset in 2019 following an injury during physical training. The Veteran reported that initially he experienced decreased motion due to pain, but he underwent physical therapy, and the condition had improved. He reported he had continued to experience lingering soreness, and that he had to be careful with lifting heavy objects. He also reported he had a hard time standing for long periods of time, which he defined as more than an hour. The Veteran reported he experienced flare-ups 2 to 3 times per month, which were moderate to severe. The Veteran reported the flare-ups lasted a few minutes, were precipitated by heavy lifting, and alleviated by rest and pain medication. On physical examination, the Veteran's initial range of motion was full, but the examiner found the Veteran would experience decreased range of motion during flare-ups. No diagnostic testing was performed in conjunction with the examination, and the examiner noted there were no significant diagnostic test findings or results related to the claimed condition that had been reviewed in conjunction with the examination. Based on the examination and a review of the record, the examiner diagnosed lumbosacral strain. 

In February 2024, the AOJ obtained a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's claim. The examiner, who was different than the examiner who provided the January 2024 examination, opined the Veteran's claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the examiner stated the Veteran was noted to have scoliosis upon enlistment, and while the condition had not been included in the diagnosis of the January 2024 examination, it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran still had the condition as scoliosis did not resolve with time. As such, the examiner found there was evidence of a pre-service condition. The examiner stated lumbosacral strains were commonly seen in patients with scoliosis, and the Veteran's back complaints of pain were expected findings. The examiner noted the Veteran's range of motion was normal, he had had common treatment, and there was no evidence of any aggressive therapy, such as surgery. Therefore, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed back condition was aggravated by service.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA examination and February 2024 VA medical opinion are inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, neither the January 2024 examination nor the February 2024 medical opinion adequately address the conflicting evidence of record. The January 2024 examiner did not note or diagnose the Veteran with scoliosis nor was diagnostic testing reviewed or performed in conjunction with the examination to evaluate the Veteran's claimed back condition. The February 2024 examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's 2019 back injury, which the Veteran claimed caused his chronic back pain, had aggravated the Veteran's pre-existing back condition. Further, the February 2024 examiner's rationale lacks a sufficient level of detail to support the negative conclusions reached. As the examination and medical opinion are inadequate, they cannot serve as the basis of a denial of entitlement to service connection. 

As the VA examination and medical opinion obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal are inadequate for consideration of the Veteran's claim and the other evidence of record is insufficient to support the Veteran's claim, remand for corrective action is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed.

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must first identify all back disabilities present during the pendency of the claim or proximate thereto. Then, for each identified disability, the examiner must indicate whether such disability is a congenital or developmental defect, a disease, or acquired. 

The examiner is advised that a congenital defect is a structural or inherent abnormality or condition that is more or less stationary in nature whereas a congenital disease is defined as any deviation from or interruption of the normal structure or function of any part, organ, or system of the body that is manifested by a characteristic set of symptoms and signs and whose etiology, pathology, and prognosis may be unknown.

For any disability characterized as a defect, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such defect was subject to superimposed disease or injury during the Veteran's active service.

For any disability characterized as a disease or otherwise acquired, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether such disability clearly and unmistakably existed prior to the Veteran's active service, and if so, was clearly and unmistakably NOT aggravated by service.

For any disability characterized as a disease or otherwise acquired found to NOT preexist the Veteran's active service, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.J. Woodward, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.