Citation Nr: A25031103
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-455527
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence is at least in equipoise that his PTSD is due to his reported in-service stressor.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for PTSD are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2010 to June 2015.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of issue of entitlement to service connection for mental health disorders most recently addressed in a January 2021 rating decision.  In June 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In the June 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with PTSD.  This finding is binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  

Pursuant to the Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA), VA has duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159.  Given the Board's favorable disposition of the claim, the Board finds that all notification and development action needed to fairly adjudicate the appeal has been accomplished.

1. Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is granted.

The Veteran contends that his PTSD is due to an in-service stressor, specifically believing that two planes had collided while he was an air traffic controller at the Air Force base in Columbus, Mississippi.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).  Generally, service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 - 67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition; a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f).  A diagnosis of PTSD must be established in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125 (a), which provides that all psychiatric diagnoses must conform to the fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-5).  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f).

If a stressor claimed by a veteran is related to the veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted, confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(3).

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(3), "fear of hostile military or terrorist activity" means that a veteran experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or circumstance that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of the veteran or others, such as from an actual or potential improvised explosive device; vehicle-imbedded explosive device; incoming artillery, rocket, or mortar fire; grenade; small arms fire, including suspected sniper fire; or attack upon friendly military aircraft, and the veteran's response to the event or circumstance involved a psychological or psycho-physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror.  Id. 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the AOJ has conceded the Veteran has been diagnosed with PTSD.

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was admitted for alcohol dependence treatment in July 2012 and discharged in August 2012.  He reported that his drinking had increased approximately two months prior to admission (May 2012).  The only stressor that he could identify was his upcoming marriage, which was scheduled for November 2012.  He had been having conflicts with his fiancée. 

Service personnel records show that the Veteran stationed at the Air Force base in Columbus, Mississippi from at least August 2010 to April 2013.  His DD 214 shows that his MOS was air traffic control.  

In a November 2017 lay statement, the Veteran reported that his stressor occurred in March 2012 at the Air Force base in Columbus, Mississippi.  He was working as an air traffic controller during a cloudy day with poor visibility.  There was a near miss with two planes and he thought that they had collided.  He said that his radar screen was on a four second sweep delay, so for four seconds both the planes became one.  Fortunately, one of the planes had descended in time, but he was unable to work the rest of the day and had a hard time working for some time after that.  

In a January 2018 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with depressed mood.  The examiner stated that the Veteran had received mental health treatment during service.  Once for alcohol dependence, which was in remission at time of discharge, and again in 2014 for coping with work stressors and an upcoming divorce.  The examiner opined that there was no evidence to suggest that his reported symptoms represent a chronic or disabling condition which began in service.  Rather, the Veteran described his current symptoms as being short term and precipitated by an interpersonal stressor.

In a February 2018 VA examination, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD.  The Veteran reported that while he was working as an air traffic controller in the Spring of 2012, two planes nearly collided.  The sky was cloudy and he could not see the planes.  At some point, he froze and the radar showed "two dots were one" meaning that the planes were so close that they could not be distinguished as separate objects on radar.  For the four seconds the "two dots were one," the pilot was silent.  The Veteran described high anxiety after it was confirmed that the pilots did not collide.  The examiner found that this stressor met Criterion A (adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD).  No other stressor was reported. 

In a March 2020 VA treatment record, the Veteran admitted to a traumatic experience when he nearly crashed two planes while working in air traffic control.

In a December 2020 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD.  The Veteran reported drinking nightly after the stressor occurred.  His reported stressor was the same as that in the February 2018 VA examination and the examiner found that it met Criterion A.  The examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's PTSD was due to service.  He stated that the Veteran did not have a mental health diagnosis prior to service and that he now met the criteria for PTSD.  The diagnosis of PTSD was at least as likely as not caused by the March 2020 VA treatment evidence.

In a December 2020 VA addendum opinion, the examiner found that the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis was due to military service and the stressor that had been outlined in various assessment reports.  He explained how the Veteran met the DSM-5 criteria for PTSD and that his symptoms had worsened considerably since his adjustment disorder with depressed mood diagnosis.  The traumatic event, which occurred during service, was sufficient to meet Criterion A and be a precipitating event for PTSD.  The Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused significant impairment in functioning and the re-emergence/surge of symptoms was consistent with the nature and course of PTSD as a diagnosis.

In a June 2024 lay statement, the Veteran reported the same in-service stressor, further explaining that he thought he had crashed the two aircraft he was tracking and had killed all involved.  It was not until later that day that he learned that the pilots were alive.  He always second guessed himself afterwards which impacted his job and performance. 

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a webpage from the Aviation Safety Network which showed that there was an aircraft malfunction causing it to land on its belly with its wheels retracted in June 2012 at the Air Force base in Columbus, Mississippi.  The incident occurred while student pilots were practicing acrobatics maneuvers, takeoffs, and landings.  No one was hurt. The source of this information was the website https://www.airforcetimes.com.  

In a September 2024 appellate brief, the Veteran's representative contended that the June 2024 webpage was sufficient to substantiate the Veteran's in-service stressor. 

Based on a careful review of the evidence and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence is approximately balanced that the Veteran's PTSD is due to his active duty service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board finds that (1) the Veteran's diagnosis for PTSD has been conceded, (2) the evidence, to include the June 2024 webpage, his consistent lay statements, and his MOS as air traffic control, established his in-service stressor, and (3) the December 2020 VA examiner found that the Veteran had PTSD and that his reported in-service stressor was adequate to support a diagnosis for PTSD.  While the February 2018 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, the Veteran had not yet developed PTSD and the examiner still found that the reported in-service stressor was adequate to support a diagnosis for PTSD.  

Accordingly, and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD was due to his active duty service.  Accordingly, his claim for service connection for PTSD is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ko, Elise

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.