Citation Nr: A25031002
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240630-451697
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for a back condition is remanded.

The claim for service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 2003 to July 2007, to include service in the Southwest Asia.   

A rating decision in February 2024 denied service connection for a back condition and headaches. In June 2024, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review Docket, a process by which the Board is only allowed to review the evidence up to the February 2024 rating decision.  However, since the Board is remanding the issues for further development, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) will review any evidence received after the February 2024 rating decision that the Board could not consider in this decision.  

1. Back  

In a statement dated May 2023, the Veteran stated that he injured his back in service due to marching long distances while carrying heavy gears and equipment, riding in bouncing vehicles, and participating in airborne jumps, etc.; that he continuously experienced back problems after service; and that he sought treatment from civilian doctors. 

A VA examination in February 2024 diagnosed the Veteran with an acute lumbar strain. The examiner opined that the Veteran's back condition was less likely related to his active service, noting that service treatment records (STRs) and medical records immediately after military discharge are silent for any complaints of or diagnosis of a chronic back condition. 

Review of the records as of the February 2024 rating decision shows that there are not any VA treatment records or private medical records that have been associated with the claims file. However, the Veteran reported that he had sought treatment from civilian doctors, and there do not appear to have been any efforts undertaken by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) to try to retrieve private medical records. Hence, the Board finds that a duty to assist error occurred and a remand is necessary. 

2. Headaches

In a statement dated May 2023, the Veteran stated that he developed migraines during his deployment to Afghanistan; and that he experienced bad headaches at least once per month which totally incapacitated him for approximately an hour, and forced him to lie down in a quiet and cool place to ease the pain. 

A VA examination in February 2024 did not diagnose the Veteran with chronic headaches. The examiner opined that there is no objective medical evidence of a chronic headache condition, noting that no objective medical evidence of chronic headaches in the STRs or other available records for review. 

As discussed above, the Veteran had reported that he had sought medical treatment from civilian doctors, however, review of the records as of the February 2024 rating decision revealed no private medical records associated with the claims file, nor evidence of efforts by the AOJ to retrieve private medical records. The Board finds that a duty to assist error occurred and a remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain private medical records relating to the Veteran's back condition and headaches. 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Wang, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.