Citation Nr: A25031236
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240628-451307
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating more than 10 percent for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating of 20 percent for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is manifest by no more than mild incomplete paralysis.

2. The Veteran's right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is manifest by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating more than 10 percent for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

2. The criteria for a disability rating of 20 percent for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1972 to July 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

The Board notes that the appeal period before the Board begins on January 11, 2016, the date service connection for bot6h left and right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy associated with diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction was granted.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered because of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. All benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and increase in disability rating is at issue, present level of disability is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Thus, although the Board has thoroughly reviewed all evidence of record, the more critical evidence consists of the evidence generated during the appeal period. Further, the Board must evaluate the medical evidence of record since the filing of the claim for increased rating and consider the appropriateness of a "staged rating" (i.e., assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts). See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

1. Entitlement to a rating more than 10 percent for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is denied. 

2. Entitlement to a rating of 20 percent for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is granted. 

The Veteran was granted service connection for his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in a December 2023 rating decision. He is appealing the initial ratings of 10 percent each he received. The Veteran's service-connected left and right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy associated with diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction are currently rated pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8520.

Background

Addressing the Veteran's claim for an increased rating, his lower extremity radiculopathy was evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Schedule of ratings - neurological conditions and convulsive disorders, Diagnostic Code 8520, Sciatic nerve. According to Diagnostic Code 8520, a 10 percent evaluation is appropriate for mild, incomplete paralysis, a 20 percent evaluation is assigned for moderate, incomplete paralysis, a 40 percent evaluation is awarded for moderately severe, incomplete paralysis, and a 60 percent evaluation is given for severe, incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy. Finally, an 80 percent evaluation is provided for complete paralysis, including foot dangling and drop, no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and with flexion of the knee weakened or (vary rarely) lost. Under Diagnostic Code 8520, an 80 percent evaluation is the maximum possible schedular rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe."

Considering this and to aid its evaluation of the evidence, the Board considered the general definitions of the terms "marked," "mild," "moderate" and "severe." "Marked" means "having a distinctive or emphasized character." See www.merriam-webster.com, last accessed December 30, 2024. "Mild" is defined as "not severe" or temperate; with "temperate" being defined as "keeping or held within limits" and "not extreme or excessive." Id. "Moderate" is defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount," "not violent, severe, or intense," and "limited in scope or effect." Id. "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree." Id. The term "severe" is used throughout the rating schedule, including in Diagnostic Code 8526, to indicate a very great degree of the specific listed disability, to differentiate between lesser (or sometimes greater) cases of that same disability within the specific diagnostic code. Thus, by implication, "moderately severe" means a greater than the mean or average level of impairment, but less than severe.

Additionally, the VA Adjudicative Procedures Manual M21-1 (hereinafter M21-1) contains provisions regarding rating peripheral nerve disabilities. The Board is not bound by the provisions of the M21-1, and the manual does not "carry the force of law." See DAV v. Sec'y of Veterans Affs., 859 F.3d 1072, 1077 (Fed. Cir. 2017). Nevertheless, the Board will consider any provisions relevant to an issue on appeal as part of its analysis. Overton v. Nicholson, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2006); Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 75, 80 (2021).

Here, the Board finds that the M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A(c) provides "general guidelines" for the terms "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" in the context of evaluating incomplete paralysis of peripheral nerves. "Mild" is described as the lowest level of evaluation based on the symptoms, however, slight, if they were sufficient to support a diagnosis of the peripheral nerve impairment. Generally, "mild" is limited to a disability of sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, and affecting a small area and / or a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality.

"Moderate" is described as the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment. The M21-1 further elaborates that the following "sign/symptom combinations" may fall into the moderate category: combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and / or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate.

"Moderately severe" is only applicable for involvement of the sciatic nerve and is described as motor and / or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability is expected. Atrophy may be present with moderately severe peripheral neuropathy.

"Severe," in general, is expected to include motor and / or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen with severe longstanding neuropathy. Even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs / symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.

The term "incomplete paralysis" with this and other peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement [of impaired nerve function] is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves.

Evidence

The Veteran underwent an in-person VA examination in November 2023. The examiner noted a diagnosis of diabetic peripheral neuropathy.  Symptoms noted included moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness for right lower extremity. For left lower extremity, symptoms of mild intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness were noted.  The Veteran had normal strength testing and deep tendon reflexes.  No muscle atrophy was noted.  The examiner also noted the Veteran had mild incomplete paralysis in both the left and right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy affecting sciatic nerve.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms reported. 

Analysis

Considering the foregoing, the Board concludes that a rating of 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy affecting the right sciatic nerve is granted, and a rating in excess of 10 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy affecting the left sciatic nerve is denied. The Veteran has not asserted, and the record does not reflect, that he has suffered from muscle atrophy or weakness related to his bilateral lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy associated with diabetes mellitus with erectile dysfunction. As documented at the VA examination, the Veteran's right lower extremity symptoms manifest as moderate pain (intermittent), paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness. The Veteran's left lower extremity symptoms manifested in a lesser degree as mild pain (intermittent), paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.

As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy has manifested with wholly sensory symptoms, without muscle atrophy or trophic changes, for the entire period on appeal. The evaluation of this disability is accordingly limited to either a mild or moderate rating. Miller, 28 Vet. App. at 376. His symptoms on the right lower extremity meet the standard of moderate in severity and as such, an increase in rating to 20 percent is warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. The Veteran's right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is more persistent than mild but less than a high level of limitation or disability as needed for a moderately severe rating. The Veteran also did not have atrophy. Thus, the Veteran's right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is manifest by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

As for the 10 percent ratings assigned for the left-sided diabetic peripheral neuropathy, the peripheral neuropathy has manifested with wholly sensory symptoms, without atrophy or trophic changes, but at a degree lower and less peristent than the right lower extremity diabet6ic peripheral neuropathy. As noted, the evaluation is therefore limited to either a mild or moderate ratings. Miller, supra. Thus, the Board concludes that the 10 percent rating, for mild diabetic peripheral neuropathy, is appropriate as the Veteran's left lower extremity is manifest by no more than mild incomplete paralysis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

The Board has considered all other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes, but there is no evidence showing the Veteran has neurological impairment associated with any other peripheral nerves that have not already been service-connected. Therefore, a separate or higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code is not warranted.

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against any higher ratings than that which have been granted, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Concluding, entitlement to a rating more than 10 percent for left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is denied and entitlement to a rating of 20 percent for right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy is granted.  

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	KMMH

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.