Citation Nr: A25031413
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-453052
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

Since the September 2022 rating decision, the Veteran submitted new and relevant evidence related to his claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder are met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1971 to June 1974. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression.

The Veteran requests readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that readjudication of such claim is warranted.

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidenced is presented or secured. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). New evidence is evidence that was not of record at the time of a prior final determination. "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim, "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the former "new and material" evidence standard.

Procedurally, in August 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression. An October 2021 rating decision denied service connection for anxiety and depression. The Veteran subsequently filed a May 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application seeking service connection for anxiety and depression. A September 2022 rating decision denied service connection. In September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application seeking service connection for generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder. A February 2024 rating decision denied service connection for anxiety and depression because the evidence submitted was not new and relevant. The Veteran then filed a July 2024 VA Form 10182 appealing the claim to the Board. Thus, the Board shall address the issue of new and relevant evidence.  

A Veteran-Provided Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) for Mental Disorders was added to the file in January 2023. The DBQ found diagnoses of generalized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder. The social worker who completed the DBQ also found that it was more likely than not that the Veteran's diagnoses were a result of the anxiety/depression resulting from his medical conditions while on active duty. The Board finds that the information provided was not previously submitted to agency decisionmakers and that it tends to prove the existence of a current disability and a nexus. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran has submitted new and relevant evidence in support of his claim for service connection and that readjudication is therefore warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression. Upon a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a VA examination and opinion.

The September 2022 VA examination found that the Veteran's claimed condition of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. More specifically, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had one and only visit for treatment while being stationed in Germany. The Veteran was given a diagnosis of situational stress reaction when his father was ill in the continental United States, and he was disappointed about not being transferred back to the continental United States. The VA examiner further found that no additional behavioral health treatment notes were found in the Veteran's behavioral health history. The only note mentioned above was dated August 21, 1973. 

The Board finds the September 2022 VA examination inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner found that the only in-service treatment note related to the Veteran's claim was from August 1973 service treatment records. However, upon a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran was treated for flashbacks in January 1973. January 1973 treatment records also show additional treatment for flashbacks as well as a diagnostic impression of anxiety. The VA examiner failed to address these relevant service treatment records and, instead, reasoned that, because the Veteran only sought treatment one time for psychiatric-related symptoms, the Veteran's current disability was not related to service. Therefore, the Board finds the medical opinion to be inadequate and lacking a reasoned explanation and rationale. The VA examiner failed to offer clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

Further, in the August 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran sought entitlement to service connection for depression and noted that such disability was due to the Veteran's many issues with chest pains and constant stomach issues during service. The VA examiner failed to address the connection between the Veteran's current diagnosis and the Veteran's contended in-service event. While the Veteran is not competent to provide a medical diagnosis or medical opinion, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms such as feeling depressed and the time of its onset and, thus, such should be considered by the VA examiner. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470. Therefore, as the Board finds the September 2022 VA examination inadequate, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA examination and opinion. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression. The examiner must review the entire claims file, including but not limited to a copy of this REMAND, the Veteran's lay statements and the Veteran's service treatment records (including January and August 1973 service treatment records). The examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

Identify by diagnosis each psychiatric disability present during the pendency of the appeal.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For each diagnosed psychiatric disability, identify the etiology. The examiner should specifically address for each diagnosed psychiatric disability whether the Veteran's diagnosed psychiatric disability was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, his active service. 

Any opinion expressed must include a complete explanation of rationale, citation to supporting factual data and medical principles, as deemed appropriate. If an opinion sought cannot be provided other than through speculation, there must be explanation why that is so.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.