Citation Nr: A25031580
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240827-469237
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from May 1987 to December 1993.

The present appeal arises from a February 2024 supplemental claim rating decision which denied entitlement to service connection for low back strain. The Board notes that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) did not explicitly address whether new and relevant evidence had been received with respect to the claim for entitlement to service connection for low back strain. However, by addressing the merits of the claim. the AOJ implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received such that readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for low back strain was warranted. The determination that new and relevant evidence has been received is a favorable finding that is binding on the Board of Veterans' Appeals (the Board).

The Veteran appealed the February 2024 decision by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in August 2024. He elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, consideration may only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his current low back disability. He contends his low back pain is due to or related to an October 1992 in-service injury when he fell off a military transport vehicle. See August 2024 Correspondence. 

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error where the issues cannot be granted in full. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Following a review of the evidence, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 1998 in conjunction with his initial claim for entitlement to service connection for a back disability. See VA Examination. The Veteran reported worsening low back pain since a military accident. He described increasing low back pain two months after the accident. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a chronic lumbosacral strain. A medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed chronic lumbosacral strain was not provided. Without such an opinion, the AOJ issued a decision in August 2002 that denied service connection for low back strain based on the finding that there was a lack of evidence connecting his current low back disability to an isolated report of back pain after lifting boxes in May 1992.

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, several lay statements and medical evidence were added to the record regarding the onset, progression of, and treatment for the Veteran's low back pain since the in-service accident which led to his medical discharge. See September 2023 Buddy / Lay Statement; September 2023 Buddy / Lay Statement; September 2023 Correspondence; June 2023 Correspondence; June 2023 Correspondence; June 2023 Correspondence. The AOJ continued the denial-of-service connection without making any effort to provide an opinion addressing the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, or even the Veteran's contentions that his low back pain is due to or related to the military vehicle accident not his isolated report of low back pain before the accident. Such is particularly troubling as the Veteran was not provided a VA opinion in 1998 and has centered his low back claim around an in-service injury which led to his medical discharge. Failure to develop such evidence presents a duty to assist error.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to cure the duty to assist error by not obtaining a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's assertion. Remand is necessary to cure this defect.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified VA examiner for an opinion regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain. The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner. All necessary tests and studies should be accomplished, and the examiner should provide a complete rationale for the conclusion reached. The need for a full, in-person examination shall be left up to the discretion of the examiner.?

Following a review of the record and, if applicable, an in-person examination or telephone interview, the VA examiner shall opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain had its initial onset or is otherwise etiologically related to active service, to include his October 1992 fall from a military transport vehicle? 

In rendering the requested opinion, the VA examiner must specifically consider and discuss, but is not limited to, the relevant evidence of record, including: 

"	The medical and lay evidence of the Veteran's October 1992 accident in a military transport vehicle which led to his medical discharge located in his STRs and Military Personnel Record;

"	The Veteran's numerous lay statements regarding experiencing low back pain since his accident in the military and his personal reluctance to seek treatment for low back pain; 

"	The lay statement from J.P., a witness of the Veteran's military accident; 

"	The lay statements from the Veteran's wife, daughter, and friends regarding his chronic low back pain and reluctance to visit doctors; 

"	Private medical treatment records from UC Davis Health Systems for low back pain in 2003, received on September 27, 2023; and 

"	Private medical treatment records for low back pain from Angelo Chiropractic, Inc. for low back pain from 2018 to 2023, received on May 24, 2023. 

The examiner must fully explain the rationale for the opinion, with citation to supporting data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, they should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation. 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michelle B., Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.