Citation Nr: A25031537
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 221005-283324
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Restoration of the 20 percent rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic nerve), effective December 1, 2022, is granted, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards.

Restoration of the 20 percent rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (femoral nerve), effective December 1, 2022, is granted, subject to regulations governing payment of monetary awards.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence does not show improvement in the Veteran's service-connected radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic and femoral nerves) that is reasonably certain to be kept under ordinary conditions of life and work.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction in the rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic nerve) from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective December 1, 2022, was improper and restoration of the 20 percent rating is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

2. The reduction in the rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (femoral nerve) from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective December 1, 2022, was improper and restoration of the 20 percent rating is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June to July 1983.

In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Rating Reduction

Radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic nerve)

Radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (femoral nerve)

The Veteran contends that the reduction in rating from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective December 1, 2022, for his service-connected radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic and femoral nerves) was improper. 

The Veteran was awarded service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic nerve) in a June 2014 rating decision. A 10 percent rating, effective February 21, 2014, was assigned. The Veteran was awarded service connection for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (femoral nerve) in an August 2017 rating decision. A 10 percent rating, effective June 28, 2017, was assigned.

An October 2019 rating decision awarded increased 20 percent ratings, effective July 30, 2019. In a January 2022 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to decrease the disability ratings from 20 percent to 10 percent. A September 2022 rating decision implemented reduced 10 percent ratings, effective December 1, 2022.

The Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic nerve) is rated under Diagnostic Code 8520. Under Diagnostic Code 8520, as relevant here, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve and a 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

The Veteran's radiculopathy of right lower extremity (femoral nerve) is rated under Diagnostic Code 8526. Under Diagnostic Code 8526, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis and a 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

The words "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

As noted above, the terms in the Diagnostic Code are not defined; therefore, the Board will provide the required definition. Here, VA guidance provides that mild incomplete paralysis is generally characterized by a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area. Mild incomplete paralysis could involve a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality. Moderate incomplete paralysis will likely be described by the veteran and medically graded as significantly disabling and a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected by sensory symptoms. Other signs or symptoms may be demonstrated by combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. 

In rating reductions, when VA contemplates reducing an evaluation for a service-connected disability, it must follow specific procedural steps prior to such discontinuance. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). As enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), where the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability or employability status is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. In addition, the beneficiary will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore, and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level. The beneficiary also will receive notification that he or she will have an opportunity for a pre-determination hearing, provided that the request is received within 30 days from the date of the notice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). Thereafter, a final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or stopped effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e); 3.500(r).

In this case, the procedural requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) were properly carried out by the AOJ. A January 2022 rating decision proposed to reduce the rating for the Veteran's conditions from 20 percent to 10 percent. In a January 2022 letter, the AOJ informed the Veteran of the proposed rating reductions and attached a copy of the January 2022 rating decision which set forth all the material facts and reasons for the reduction. The letter also informed the Veteran that he could send more evidence to show the changes should not be made, and that if no added evidence was received within 60 days, his disability ratings would be reduced. The Veteran was also advised that he could request a hearing to present evidence or argument on any point in his claim, and that he had 30 days to request such a hearing in order to have his benefits continued at the prior rate; if a hearing was requested after 30 days, the AOJ would continue with the proposed action. The Veteran did not request a hearing to present evidence or argument. The AOJ then issued the September 2022 rating decision implementing the proposed reductions, effective December 1, 2022. 

At the time of the September 2022 rating decision that reduced the Veteran's rating for his conditions to 10 percent, the 20 percent rating had been in effect since July 30, 2019. Thus, the ratings had been in effect for less than five years. According to 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c), where a rating or ratings have been in effect for less than five years, as here, reexaminations disclosing improvement, physical or mental, in the disability will warrant reduction in rating. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c); Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 417 (1993). Additionally, any such improvement must reflect improvement in the veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-21; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10.

In considering whether a reduction was proper, the Board must focus on the evidence of record available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction medical evidence may be considered for the limited purpose of determining whether the condition had demonstrated sustained, actual improvement. Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-82 (1992). However, post-reduction evidence may not be used to justify an improper reduction. VA is required to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a rating reduction is warranted. See Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 325 (1995).

"When any change in evaluation is made, the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the conditions, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in thoroughness of the examination or use of descriptive terms." 38 C.F.R. § 4.13.

When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Turning to the evidence, the record reflects that the Veteran underwent a VA Peripheral Nerve Conditions examination in August 2019. He was diagnosed with sciatic and femoral neuropathy. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms include moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias, and numbness. There was no constant pain. The Veteran had normal strength (and no atrophy) and normal deep tendon reflexes (DTRs). A sensory examination revealed decreased sensation to light touch in the upper anterior thigh, thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes. There was no evidence of trophic changes, and it was noted that the Veteran had a normal gait and constantly used orthotic shoes for support when walking. The examiner reported that there was moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic and femoral nerves. Lastly, the examiner opined that the Veteran's conditions impacted his ability to work. 

The Veteran also underwent a VA Back Conditions examination. On the report, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported working as a truck driver and that he was unable to continue working because of persistent numbness and tingling in the lower extremities and lower back pain. It was also noted that the Veteran had normal strength (and no muscle atrophy), normal DTRs, and a positive straight leg raise test. A sensory examination revealed decreased sensation to light touch in the thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes. Sensation to light touch was normal in the upper anterior thigh. Signs and symptoms of radiculopathy were noted to include moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias, and numbness; there was no evidence of constant pain. The examiner reported that there was sciatic and femoral nerve involvement and that the conditions were of moderate severity.

In November 2021, the Veteran underwent another VA Peripheral Nerve Conditions examination. He was diagnosed with radiculopathy and sciatica. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms included severe constant pain, paresthesias, and numbness, as well as mild intermittent pain. It was noted that the Veteran had normal strength (no muscle atrophy), normal DTRs, and intact sensations to light touch. There was no evidence of trophic changes and special tests for the median nerve were negative. The Veteran had an antalgic gait because of his back condition and radiculopathy, and it was noted that he did not use any assistive devices. The examiner indicated that there was mild incomplete paralysis of sciatic and femoral nerves and opined that the Veteran's condition impacted his ability to work. 

He also underwent a VA Back Conditions examination. On the report, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had normal strength (and no muscle atrophy), normal DTRs, a normal sensory examination, and a positive straight leg raise test. Signs and symptoms of radiculopathy were noted to include severe constant pain and paresthesias and mild intermittent pain and numbness. The examiner indicated that both the sciatic and femoral nerves were involved. 

In February 2022, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of his claim, in which he indicated that his conditions had worsened, not improved. He reported that he was currently heavily medicated and lived with constant pain, noting that the medications affected his quality of life, sleep, and livelihood since he could no longer work. He reported treating his conditions with medication, a TENS unit, and a heating pad, and indicated that he experienced flare ups of his condition. 

VA treatment records also provide evidence of the Veteran's claims. For example, a March 2020 record shows the Veteran reported experiencing a burning and tingling sensation in his feet daily. Physical evaluation revealed sensation to light touch was intact and that the Veteran had normal muscle strength. A May 2020 record also shows the Veteran reported constant numbness, tingling, and a "pins and needles" sensation in his upper legs (from his knees to his groin). He reported experiencing those symptoms intermittently for the last seven months but reported that the current episode had lasted for about three weeks. A July 2020 record shows he denied experiencing numbness and tingling. A March 2021 record includes a review of his neurological system that was negative for radicular pain and loss of motor/sensory function. A June 2021 record shows there was no muscular or neurological weakness or numbness. A November 2021 record shows the Veteran had normal strength, normal DTRs, and a normal gait. Lastly, a May 2022 record shows the Veteran had been experiencing numbness and spasms in his legs. 

Based on the evidence outlined above, the Board finds the reduction in ratings for the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (sciatic and femoral nerves) from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective December 1, 2022, were improper as the evidence does not show actual improvement in the Veteran's conditions under ordinary conditions of life and work. The record continues to reflect that the Veteran's conditions impact his ability to drive a tractor trailer for work. Additionally, the Veteran has indicated that his symptoms have worsened, not improved, and the contention is supported by medical evidence which shows he previously experienced moderate paresthesias and numbness but began to experience severe paresthesias and numbness. Furthermore, the Veteran has reported that his conditions now impact his sleep and quality of life. 

Therefore, the Board finds the evidence does not show improvement in the Veteran's service-connected conditions. Therefore, the Board cannot conclude that the evidence shows improvement that is reasonably certain to be kept under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.344; Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413. As such, the reductions in the 20 percent ratings were improper, and the 20 percent ratings should be restored, effective December 1, 2022.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S.J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.