Citation Nr: A25031787
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-465720
DATE: April 7, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $5,507.76, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $5,507.76, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from January 1963 to July 1963, and from April 1964 to March 1985. The Veteran died in November 2021. The Appellant is the Veteran's Fiduciary.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 administrative decision, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Debt Management Center (DMC).

Following the January 2024 DMC decision, the Appellant filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Appellant selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 DMC decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the January 2024 DMC decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board has considered the recent holding by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (generally, the Board may not Decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later). In the Appellant's immediate case, a year has not yet passed from the time of the January 2025 DMC decision on appeal. Having said that, the Appellant has not given any indication that they desire a docket switch. Furthermore, because the claim on appeal is being remanded for the reasons set forth below, the Board recognizes that a formal Decision is not being reached on the claim, and therefore the Appellant is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. To the contrary, by virtue of this remand, the Board is correcting a procedural duty to assist error in substantiating the claim. Thus, the Board will proceed accordingly.

And as further discussed below, in addition to claiming entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $5,507.76 the Appellant has also challenged the validity of the debt. Thus, the claim has been expanded to include that challenge.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $5,507.76, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

The Appellant has generally requested that the overpayment of VA compensation benefits be waived. She has also disputed the debt, arguing that VA was solely responsible for an error which created the overpayment.

By way of background, the Veteran had been in receipt of VA compensation benefits from around April 1, 1984. In November 2006, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-686c, Application to Add/Remove Dependents, noting that he had married C. in August 2006. C. was subsequently added to the Veteran's compensation award.

Then, in relevant part, C. applied for an apportionment of the Veteran's award in March 2018. In an attached statement, she wrote that the Veteran had "abandoned our home," in South Carolina, and moved to Maryland. She wrote that the Veteran has a new apartment, that they were no longer living together, and that she was seeking assistance from an attorney in family court to get help paying the bills.

An attached document from the Family Court in Richland County, South Carolina indicates that the Veteran and C. had been separated from around August 2017. The document included an order for separation, how property was to be maintained, and who was going to make prompt payments for various bills. This order was given "due to diverse marital difficulties," which caused the separation.

The Veteran was notified by VA that C. had requested an apportionment of his award. The Veteran responded in April 2018, arguing that she was trying to "have control of my finances and the home." The Veteran stated that he was capable of handling his financial affairs, wrote against C.'s apportionment claim, and mentioned that he was seeking divorce "because of her abusive treatment of me since I came to use a wheelchair for my disabilities." The Veteran wrote from a Maryland address and added that he would return home "when the court action has ended with the final divorce decree."

With that statement, the Veteran attached a VA Form 21-0788, Information Regarding Apportionment of Beneficiary Award. In relevant part, he wrote that the status of C. was "wife in divorce." 

The Veteran and C. then divorced on September 21, 2018. The divorce decree was not immediately uploaded to the claims file, and VA was not promptly informed of the divorce between the Veteran and C.

In May 2020, the Veteran assigned Fiduciary responsibility to the current Appellant, and assigned Power of Attorney responsibility to his daughter, N.

Around December 2020, C. started contacting the Fiduciary, noting that she was "making claims of [the Fiduciary] stealing money." The Fiduciary contacted VA and asked if, and how, an apportionment of the Veteran's award could be sent to C. directly. During this conversation, the Fiduciary clearly stated that she was being blamed by the "ex-wife."

In trying to sort out the apportionment situation, the Fiduciary submitted a copy of the divorce decree, confirming the divorce from September 21, 2018. This is the first time that VA received a copy of the divorce decree.

An internal VA report requested that the Veteran's ex-spouse, C., be removed from the award, since the divorce decree had been uploaded to the claims file.

An internal Award Print screen from June 2021 then noted that C. had been retroactively removed from the Veteran's award, and that this had generated an overpayment of $5,507.76, since the removal was effective from October 1, 2018.

In June 2021, the Veteran's Fiduciary was sent a Notification letter, informing the Veteran that C. had been removed retroactively from his compensation award, following the divorce. The removal was effective October 1, 2018, the first of the month following the divorce. The Fiduciary was informed that this had resulted in an overpayment.

The Veteran then passed away in November 2021. See VA Form 21P-530a, State Application for Interment Allowance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 23. A death certificate was later uploaded to the claims file in April 2022.

In May 2022, the Fiduciary submitted a letter disputing the overpayment debt. It is unclear if a DMC letter had been sent to the Fiduciary by this point as it is not uploaded to the claims file. The Fiduciary asked how she was responsible for the divorce debt, since the divorce took place prior to her being assigned Fiduciary, and VA was informed at the time of the divorce. She wrote that she was not at fault for the debt, does "not take responsibility for repay of this debt," and that it is unfair. She wrote that repayment of the debt would "cause financial hardship," and that therefore she was requesting that VA "please waive this debt."

In January 2024, The Veteran's estate, with his Fiduciary named, was sent a letter from the DMC, informing her of an overpayment created in the amount of $5,507.76. She was informed of her right to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt.

The Fiduciary uploaded a letter from the DMC, dated April 2022. She uploaded this letter in February 2024, and it was not associated with the claims file previously. The DMC letter noted that the Appellant had submitted a check for $50.00, but that the DMC "system shows that you do not have a debt with us." The Board observes that the debt was not likely passed along to the DMC as of yet, due to the Veteran's passing, but this cannot be confirmed.

The Fiduciary then submitted a VA Form 10182, NOD. Of note, this NOD was rejected by the Board, because she selected two Board review Options, and cited to multiple decisions for review (not all of which were formal decisions). Generally, the Board observes however, that the Fiduciary was disputing the debt and requesting a waiver of the overpayment.

In May 2024, the Appellant submitted correspondence, and for AMA purposes, the Board considers these documents argumentative, in nature. She wrote that she was requesting that the debt be "dismissed," as it was not valid. She wrote that the divorce was disclosed to VA, that the Veteran does not have the estate funds to pay off this amount, that the daughter is the executor, and she should be held responsible, not the Fiduciary personally. She submitted a list of income versus expenses, presumably that she made on behalf of the Veteran. The Fiduciary argued that VA was solely responsible for the debt because they failed to remove the Veteran's ex-spouse, and that if anything, the ex-spouse should be the one held responsible for the overpayment.

The Appellant then submitted a clarifying VA Form 10182, NOD in May 2024. The Fiduciary selected the Direct Review option. Again, she cited to multiple VA decisions - some of which are not decisions. Having said that, the Board has reviewed the claims file and has interpreted her appeal as clearly as possible. Simply put, the Appellant disputes the validity of the debt, arguing that VA was solely responsible for the error of failing to remove the Veteran's ex-spouse C. She also argues that the debt should be waived for various reasons, including her limited fault, VA's comparative fault, and her financial hardship, among others. For AMA purposes, the Decision on appeal is the January 2024 DMC letter, which informed the Fiduciary and the Veteran's estate of the overpayment of $5,507.76.

The Appellant's claim is now before the Board.

In consideration of the above, the Board find that additional development is needed. In fact, much of the requested development from the Appellant has not taken place.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately remanding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

First, the Appellant has argued that the debt is not valid. She wrote that VA was informed of the Veteran's divorce form C. Even if this was not stated overtly, VA was clearly aware of the separation, the Veteran's moving to another state, the order from the Family Court, and the soon-to-be ex-wife's Apportionment request. When the Veteran responded to C.'s apportionment request, he wrote that C. was his "wife in divorce," and that he would not return to South Carolina until the divorce was finalized. Thus, the Appellant has generally argued, VA was at the very least on notice of the separation and divorce but failed to timely remove the Veteran's spouse from his award.

The Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has directed that appellate review by the Board on the Veteran's waiver claim must be deferred pending formal adjudication of the Veteran's challenge to the validity of the debt by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991) ("when a Veteran raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application... it is arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion to adjudicate the waiver application without first deciding a veteran's challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against him or her"); VAOPGCPREC 6-98 (July 24, 1998) (holding that when a veteran challenges the validity of the debt and seeks waiver of the debt, the [Regional Office] must first fully review the debt's validity and, if the office believes the debt to be valid, prepare a written decision fully justifying the validity of the debt before referring the waiver request to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC)). A debtor may dispute the amount or existence of a debt, which is a right that may be exercised separately from a request for waiver or at the same time. 38 C.F.R. § 1.911 (c)(1). Resolution of the creation issue must precede consideration of the waiver issue.

No decision has been made regarding the validity of the debt. Furthermore, no formal finding has been made as to whether or not VA committed sole administrative error, based on the fact pattern presented. Thus, because this development has not occurred in the first instance, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has taken place, and a remand is warranted.

Second, the Appellant has on numerous occasions requested a waiver of recovery of the debt. She has argued using the standards of equity and good conscience under 38 C.F.R. § 1.965(a). This includes her arguments regarding her fault, the Veteran's fault, VA's comparative fault, and her financial hardship. Her repeated arguments and statements surrounding these factors reasonably should have triggered VA to forward her requests to the COWC for a decision on the merits of the waiver request, but that has not occurred. Therefore, another pre-decisional duty to assist error has taken place.

Thus, the Board finds that the Appellant's claim must be remanded for additional development. A formal finding regarding the validity of the debt should be made, with consideration of the claim that VA is solely responsible for the error. If that debt is valid, and not solely due to VA error, the claim should be forwarded to the COWC for additional development, followed by a Decision on the waiver claim on the merits. Referral on these grounds would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO must make a formal finding regarding the validity of the overpayment created in the amount of $5,50776.

In so doing, the RO must consider the Appellant's argument that VA is solely responsible for the administrative error resulting in creation of the debt, insofar as VA was reasonably informed of the Veteran's separation, court orders around that separation, and his pending divorce, but no action was taken to clarify the Veteran's marital status.

The RO is reminded that when a claimant raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application, the issue regarding the challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against the claimant must be decided prior to a review of the question of waiver. See Schaper, supra; 38 C.F.R. § 1.911 (c)(1).

2.  Following Step 1, if the overpayment on appeal is determined to be valid, the RO is to refer the issue related to waiver of recovery of debt to the COWC for any additional development deemed necessary, followed by a decision on the issue of entitlement to a waiver of recovery of the debt. The COWC should request an updated VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), if deemed necessary.

The COWC is reminded that the Appellant has argued that she is not at fault for the creation of the debt, as she was appointed Fiduciary after the divorce took place, that VA is comparatively at fault for not removing C. from the Veteran's award, and that she would face financial hardship through recovery of the debt, among other arguments.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.