Citation Nr: A25031419
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452251
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1986 to October 1995.  For his service, he was awarded the National Defense Service Medal and Good Conduct Medal, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  Therefore, this matter is adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In the July 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review Docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R.§ 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the August 2023 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, or if the Veteran would like to submit any new and relevant evidence, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, since the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudicating the claim.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran submitted a statement with the July 2024 VA Form 10182 that selected the Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182 and Attorney Representative Statement.  Under the AMA, if a Veteran elects the Direct Review docket, only argument - not evidence - can be considered after the AOJ decision on appeal.  The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently held that if a Veteran submits evidence with a VA Form 10182 but selects the Direct Review docket, VA is required to clarify with that Veteran that he intended to proceed with direct review by the Board.  Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  Here, the statement submitted with the VA Form 10182 is argument only and presents no new evidence; thus, clarification is not required, and the Board will proceed without further delay.

Service connection for OSA is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is due to weight gain that was caused by the medications he takes to treat his service-connected Unspecified Anxiety Disorder with Depressed Mood and Panic Attacks ("anxiety disorder").  He also asserts that his service-connected left shoulder strain, left ankle strain, and right ankle strain prevented him from exercising which led to weight gain.  Additionally, he asserts that he has pain from his service-connected disabilities which cause sleep difficulties.  Explaining his weight gain, the Veteran states that in November 1986, at enlistment, he weighed 165 pounds and in May 2023, at the time of his statement in support of the claim, he weighed 190 pounds.  See May 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.  The Veteran's representative asserts that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for OSA, either on a direct or secondary basis, including the intermediate step of weight gain.  It is asserted that the weight gain was a result of the Veteran's more sedentary lifestyle related to his disabling service-connected conditions.  See July 2024 Attorney Representative Statement (submitted with Notice of Disagreement).

In the August 2023 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding of a current disability of OSA, based on the diagnosis in September 2022.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding, absent clear and unmistakable error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In connection with the claim, the VA afforded the Veteran an examination to determine whether his OSA was causally connected to his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  See June 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.  Although an opinion was rendered with respect to the link between OSA and the Veteran's TERA, the examiner did not provide opinions addressing whether the Veteran's OSA is otherwise due to service or is secondary to his service-connected disabilities, as originally claimed.  It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ to not obtain a medical opinion to address the Veteran's contentions clearly raised by the record.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board has considered the private medical opinion submitted by the Veteran.  See May 2023, Private Medical Opinion.  The private clinician opined that (1) it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain was due to or related to his service connected disabilities, to include the anxiety disorder, left shoulder strain, left ankle strain, or right ankle strain; (2) the OSA was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain from the service connected disabilities; and (3) it was at least as likely as not that without the Veteran's weight gain he would not have incurred OSA.  The private clinician's rationale is that the medications for the mental health condition, combined with the symptomatology of the service-connected musculoskeletal disability conditions, caused weight gain which in turn caused the OSA.

The private clinician relied on the statement by the Veteran that he weighed 165 pounds at his enlistment examination and that his current weight was 190 pounds.  There is no medical explanation of how the Veteran's weight gain was associated with the medication, when the Veteran's medical history and treatment show that he did not receive treatment for the anxiety disorder until March 2019, more than twenty years after separation from service.  Similarly, the private clinician provided no discussion or analysis of the Veteran's weight gain during service, in comparison with his weight gain after service, and then, his weight after being prescribed the medication.  The private clinician did not reconcile his opinion with the June 2022 and July 2023 treatment records that show the Veteran continued to exercise two to three times per week, despite his service-connected physical disabilities and after his treatment for the anxiety disorder.  See November 2019 Service Treatment Records; September 1998 Service Treatment Records; August 2023 VA Treatment Records.  For these reasons, the Board finds that the private clinician's opinions are not based on complete and accurate facts of record.  Accordingly, the private medical opinion is inadequate for determining service connection.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).

In the absence of an adequate medical opinion of record, and to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error noted above, remand is necessary.  Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, the deficiency must be corrected before the case can be decided.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Please request a medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted to provide the requested opinions, one should be provided.

The clinician should address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was incurred in or is otherwise related to service.  Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

(b.) Whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was caused by his service-connected disabilities, to include unspecified anxiety disorder with depressed mood and panic attacks, right shoulder strain, left ankle sprain, or right ankle sprain, either individually or in combination.

(c.) Whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include unspecified anxiety disorder with depressed mood and panic attacks, right shoulder strain, left ankle sprain, or right ankle sprain, either individually or in combination.

A finding of "aggravation" does not require a permanent worsening of the disorder; rather, any incremental increase in a nonservice connected condition attributable to a service-connected disability, whether permanent or not, constitutes aggravation.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).

In rendering the opinions, the clinician should consider and include an analysis of the relevant treatment and medical records, as well as specifically address the Veteran's contention that his OSA was due to his weight gain that resulted from his medication and inactivity from his service-connected disabilities.  The clinician should consider all appropriate theories of causation, including direct, secondary, and intermediate causes.  The clinician is also to consider the Veteran's reports of his symptoms, and if the clinician rejects the Veteran's lay statements, should provide a reason for doing so.

A complete rationale for any opinions rendered must be provided.  If it is not possible for the clinician to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate such, and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

 

 

Luke Pelican

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, Linda L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.