Citation Nr: A25031908
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-431517
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from November 1987 to August 1995.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition, and a February 2024 rating decision which denied entitlement to a right foot condition.  The Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review for her left foot condition in January 2024 and for her right foot condition in February 2024.  In a March 2024 higher level rating decision, the AOJ again denied entitlement to a left foot condition and a right foot condition. 

The Veteran timely appealed the March 2024 rating decision to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and requesting the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review Lane for a reevaluation of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  The AMA Direct Review does not allow submission of any additional evidence in support of an appeal.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed as of the March 2024 rating decision, as additional development took place after the January 2024 and February 2024 rating decisions. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition is remanded.

The Veteran asserted that she injured both feet due to physical training exercises, a training accident, slipping, and ruck marching, and noted that she was seen several times during active duty for foot pain and has had pain ever since.  See August 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement In Support of Claim. 

The Veteran's enlistment physical in January 1987 noted right foot pes planus.  The Veteran's service treatment records were absent for foot injuries; however, the Veteran had numerous in service complaints for her ankle, back, and knees.  See March 2011 STR - Medical, March 2011 STR - Medical - Photocopy. 

In a March 1996 VA examination, the Veteran complained of ingrown toenails, but reported no other foot conditions.  See March 1996 VA Examination.

The Veteran's next complaint of foot issues was in a September 2010 podiatry note, where right foot pain and plantar right arch pain were noted, with some relief from orthotics.  In a June 2011 emergency department note, the Veteran stated it hurt to walk, especially when her right foot hit the ground.  See September 2016 CAPRI.  In a June 2014 podiatry consult, a history of pronation and leg length discrepancy were noted and the Veteran requested new foot gear.  In July 2014, the Veteran requested new orthotics for her right heel lift.  See September 2016 CAPRI.  

Following the above foot-related complaints, the Veteran sustained a right foot injury in April 2016 when stepping hard off of a curb.  See February 2022 CAPRI. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her feet in February 2024.  The Veteran was diagnosed by the examiner with bilateral pes planus in February 2024 and bilateral plantar fasciitis in February 2024.  The examiner noted the Veteran stated the condition started in 1988 with an injury during physical training and also an accident being thrown from a vehicle.  When the condition began the Veteran stated the symptoms were extreme pain and tenderness with all of the foot.  The Veteran also stated that warts and calluses caused pain.  See February 2024 C&P Exam.

In the opinion section of the examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral foot condition was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service connected condition.  The examiner stated,

Rationale is on the basis of records reviewed, the Veteran's pes planus preceded service.  She sustained an ankle sprain with a mis-documented line of duty for her right ankle.  It noted right foot, however, it was clearly for her ankle given her medical examination clearly reveals it was ankle anatomy.  Her current examination reveals pes planus which pre-existed service and did not take a different clinical course than would be expected.  Her diagnosed plantar fasciitis is unrelated to any events of service and is diagnosed very remote to her injury and service.  Records in the interval support that she sustained a foot injury in 2016, which is the most likely etiology of her current complaints and represents a known cause in the two decade interval period after service.  I find no compelling evidence to support a different conclusion.  See February 2024 C&P Exam.

While the February 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran's 2016 foot injury was the most likely etiology of her current complaints, as shown in the preceding paragraphs, the Veteran had a lengthy history of foot issues following her service which preceded the 2016 foot injury.  As such, the February 2024 VA examination is afforded low probative weight, and a new VA examination is required to take into consideration the Veteran's long history of foot issues prior to 2016 to make a determination if her foot injury was due to or aggravated by service, to include as secondary to her service connected disabilities.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Refer the VA claims file to a medical professional to provide an examination as to the claimed bilateral foot disability.  After reviewing the record, the clinician should address the following:

(a)  Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current left foot disability and right foot disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease?

(b)  If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the diagnosed left foot disability or right foot disability is secondary to the Veteran's service connected disabilities?

(c)  If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the diagnosed pes planus disability which existed before service was aggravated by the Veteran's service or service connected disabilities?  If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity prior to aggravation.

Complete rationale should be provided to support the opinions rendered.

In addressing these questions, the clinician should consider the Veteran's reports of symptoms in service and thereafter, including the nature, onset, progression, and severity of the Veteran's reported symptoms.  

Then, readjudicate the case. 

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Axelrad, E

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.