Citation Nr: A25031849
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-458082
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from February 2019 until his honorable discharge in December 2021.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claim for OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for OSA, including as secondary to his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress, lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylolisthesis, right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy, and left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy, to include with weight gain as an intermediate step. See, e.g., April 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; Arguments received July 23, 2024. The Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct for pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023, which provided the opinion that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress, lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylolisthesis, left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy, or right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy. The examiner explained that while these conditions may negatively impact sleep quality, none of these conditions create an obstruction for airflow into the body during the sleep cycle. The examiner did not provide an opinion on aggravation. The examiner also did not provide an opinion on direct service connection.

The Board finds the June 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate because it was conclusory and not supported by an adequate rationale. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning). It also did not address weight gain as an intermediate step. In addition, as noted above, the examiner did not opine whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress, lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylolisthesis, right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy, and left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy. A medical opinion that does not specifically address aggravation is generally inadequate to decide a secondary service connection claim. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Moreover, as noted above, the June 2023 VA examiner did not provide an opinion on direct service connection. However, prior to the August 2023 decision on appeal, the evidence of record indicated that the Veteran's sleep apnea (or symptoms thereof) may have begun during service. See, e.g., April 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ (statement by Veteran that sleep apnea began in approximately April 2021); Report of Medical History dated September 20, 2021 (checking "YES" for "frequent trouble sleeping"); June 2023 C&P Exam (Sleep Apnea DBQ) (indicating that "the condition began in 2021"). Thus, the failure to obtain an opinion on direct service connection is also a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Accordingly, a remand based on these pre-decisional duty to assist errors is warranted to obtain new medical opinions addressing both direct and secondary service connection, to include whether weight gain was an intermediate step.

Finally, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion dated April 18, 2023, which provided a positive nexus opinion as to secondary service connection. While the Board is not remanding based on the April 2023 private medical opinion, the Board notes that this opinion is also inadequate because it is speculative ("the veteran has a known service connected disability condition(s) which can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances ...") and does not provide an adequate rationale based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

While the Board is remanding the matter at this time, it is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020), and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders. The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriate clinician, who has not previously provided an opinion in this matter, for a medical opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. A VA examination is only necessary if deemed so by the examiner. The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner and such review should be noted in the examination report.

The examiner should respond to the following:

1)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea had its onset during service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to service?

2)	If not directly related, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress, lumbar spine degenerative disc disease with spondylolisthesis, right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy, and left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy ("service-connected conditions")? If not, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea was aggravated (any incremental increase in disability) by his service-connected conditions?

If aggravation is found, is there evidence created prior to the aggravation or between the aggravation and sleep apnea that shows a baseline of the Veteran's sleep apnea prior to aggravation? If so, please identify.

The examiner is cautioned that the term "aggravated," as used in 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b), does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of the nonservice-connected disability. Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for "any incremental increase in disability-any additional impairment of earning capacity-in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase-regardless of its permanence." See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

In rendering the aforementioned opinions, the examiner must also address the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected conditions caused or aggravated his weight gain?

(b)	If so, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such weight gain was a substantial factor in either causing or aggravating his sleep apnea?

(c)	If so, is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the weight gain? 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for each opinion provided. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

 

G. William Riggs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.D., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.