Citation Nr: A25031433
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-434758
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

An effective date earlier than July 30, 2019, for a 50 percent rating for major depressive disorder (claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.  

A rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder (previously rated as 9434 also claimed as PTSD) for the appeal period from July 30, 2019, through February 22, 2022, is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Service connection for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) was granted in a July 2015 rating decision, with a 30 percent rating assigned effective August 27, 2014.  The Veteran did not appeal the initial rating.

2. The Veteran filed a VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) on July 30, 2019, requesting an increased rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD).

3. There is no evidence in the claims file dated between July 2015 and July 2019 that the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD), and it is not factually ascertainable that a 50 percent rating was warranted before July 30, 2019.

4. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's major depressive disorder symptoms do not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas at any point during the period of appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than July 30, 2019, for the grant of a 50 percent rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.157, 3.159, 3.400.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder (previously rated as 9434 also claimed as PTSD) are not met for the appeal period from July 30, 2019, through February 22, 2022.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from August 1995 to July 2005.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

In February 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an August 2019 decision.  In February 2023 correspondence, the Veteran's attorney requested an exemption for timely filing the HLR due to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.  In May 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) granted a time limit extension request due to the COVID-19 pandemic and issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2019 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2019 decision AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. An effective date earlier than July 30, 2019, for a 50 percent rating for major depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) is denied.

In general, the effective date of an award of disability compensation, in conjunction with a grant of entitlement to service connection, shall be the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year of separation from service; otherwise, the effective date shall be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

The law grants a period of one year from the date of the notice of the result of the initial determination for initiating an appeal by filing a notice of disagreement; otherwise, that determination becomes final and is not subject to the revision on the same factual basis in the absence of clear and unmistakable error (CUE).  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).

An effective date for a claim for increase may be granted prior to the date of claim if it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred within one year from the date of claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1) and (2).

Thus, according to Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997), three possible effective dates may be assigned depending on the facts of the particular case:  (1) if an increase in disability occurs after the claim is filed, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (date entitlement arose) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1)); (2) if an increase in disability precedes the claim by a year or less, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (i.e., the date the increase is factually ascertainable) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2)); or (3) if an increase in disability precedes the claim by more than a year, the date that the claim is received (date of claim) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2)).

Here, service connection for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) was granted in a July 2015 rating decision, with a 30 percent rating assigned effective August 27, 2014.  The Veteran had until July 28, 2016, to initiate an appeal of the July 2015 rating decision.  There is no evidence of any notice of disagreement (NOD) during this one-year period.  Thus, the July 2015 rating decision is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.   

On July 30, 2019, the Veteran submitted a VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), requesting an increased rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD).  In an August 2019 rating decision, the rating for major depressive disorder was increased to 50 percent, effective July 30, 2019.  The Veteran appealed the issue regarding entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 50 percent rating.

The Board finds that an effective date prior to July 30, 2019, for the award of a 50 percent rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) is not warranted.

There is no evidence of request for an increased rating submitted after the July 2015 rating decision and prior to the July 2019 application for increased rating.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155; Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 296 (2006) (holding that a freestanding claim for effective date earlier than the date on which the claim was received, impermissibly attempts to vitiate the rule of finality).  In this regard, the Board notes that the only correspondence received from the Veteran during this period were related to his back injury and right knee disability claims.  See September 2015 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, September 2015 5103 Notice Acknowledgement, January 2016 NOD, and March 2018 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

The Veteran contends that an earlier effective date for the grant of the 50 percent rating is warranted.  In February 2023 correspondence accompanying his HLR, the Veteran's attorney alleged that treatment records supported an increased evaluation months prior to the date of the claim.  The attorney specifically referred to treatment records dated January 31, 2019, and March 7, 2019.  Therefore, the Veteran believed that an earlier effective date for the increased evaluation no later than January 31, 2019, was appropriate.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran and his attorney's contentions.  However, the Board finds that it is not factually ascertainable that a 50 percent rating for major depressive disorder was warranted before July 30, 2019.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).  Under Diagnostic Code 9434, Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as:  flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships. A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

Here, VA treatment records dated prior to July 30, 2019, include a January 31, 2019, mental health record noting that the Veteran endorsed disproportionate anger and had been involved in maybe five fist fights in the past year.  He reported that he would blow up at his 7 year old son over small things and felt awful about 30 minutes later. He also finalized his second divorce in 2018 and felt his anger likely contributed to the demise of his marriages.  He denied having any suicidal or homicidal ideations and any auditory or visual hallucinations.  A preventative care record also dated on January 31, 2019, showed that the Veteran denied any changed in his energy level, relationships with family and friends, sleep pattern, and desire to participate in his normal activities.  He also reported that in the past two weeks he did not feel down or hopeless.  In March 2019, he endorsed continued irritability, was easily triggered, had angry outbursts, and felt keyed up. He increased his dose of sertraline from 25 mg to 50 mg, and was open to another increase as typically a therapeutic dose was 100mg-200 mg.  The Board notes that the symptoms reported while seeking VA treatment discussed above were also the same symptoms reported during his July 2015 VA examination, which was the basis of the assigned 30 percent rating in the prior July 2015 rating decision.  During the July 2015 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had a very low frustration tolerance and got into fights with family and friends and described that he eventually "blew up" and was involved in physical altercations.  He also exhibited irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects. Even considering those symptoms, the examiner determined at the time that there was occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency or intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks though generally satisfactory functioning with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  Here, the Board finds there was no evidence that the Veteran's depressive symptoms worsened until the August 2019 VA mental disorders examination, on which, the Veteran exhibited, in addition to his other previously reported symptoms, anxiety; flattened affect; disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Furthermore, the VA examiner remarked that the Veteran's symptoms had progressed and caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

In sum, the Veteran did not appeal prior rating decision that assigned 30 percent rating in July 2015.  As such, this rating decision is not an appropriate date from which to assign an increased rating for depressive disorder, absent a finding that clear and unmistakable error (CUE) has occurred (which has not been alleged by the Veteran or his attorney). There is no evidence in the claims file dated between July 2015 and July 2019 that the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD), and it is not factually ascertainable that a 50 percent rating was warranted before July 30, 2019.  Accordingly, entitlement to an effective date earlier than July 30, 2019, for the increased 50 rating for major depressive disorder is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the benefit of the doubt has been considered; however, the evidence supports a finding that an earlier effective date for the 50 percent rating for major depressive disorder is not warranted.  A such, there is no benefit of the doubt to resolve in the Veteran's favor.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. A rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder (previously rated as 9434 also claimed as PTSD) for the appeal period from July 30, 2019, through February 22, 2022, is denied.   

On July 30, 2019, the Veteran filed a claim seeking an increased evaluation for his service-connected depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD) that was rated as 30 percent disabling.  

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The rating criteria for rating mental disorders, including unspecified depressive disorder, major depressive disorder, and PTSD, reads as follows:  a 100 percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as:  gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions of hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as:  suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 50 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as:  flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.  Id.

Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The Federal Circuit explained that the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms also played an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  Significantly, however, the list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Id. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

The Board finds that for the entire period of appeal, the Veteran's major depressive disorder does not more closely approximate the schedular criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent under Diagnostic Code 9434 at any point during the period of appeal (from July 30, 2019, through February 22, 2022).

On August 2019 VA examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran stated that his divorce finalized about a year ago, although they had been separated for nearly two years. He stated that the marriage failed because he was difficult to live with. His had regular visitation with his 8 year old son. His other children were grown and he saw them regularly now. He moved back to Oklahoma in 2016 to "try and save my marriage." His parents lived in Oklahoma, and he saw them "every once in a while."  He reported that he was not close with any one of his three siblings.  He has been dating someone for some time.  He had some friends who mostly lived out of state.  He sometimes went to happy hour with a friend from work. The Veteran did not work from May of 2016 until January of 2017. He had to quit that job after four months due to his physical problems. He then worked a year for a pharmaceutical company for six months and now worked for a power company as a buyer for the past four months. He stated that he did not like working with people and typically quit his jobs due to this problem. 

The Veteran reported a lack of desire to participate in pleasurable activities and that he no longer found pleasure in activities like he used to in the past. He still took his son to do fun things, such as the state fair or other activities. He had very little desire to get up in the morning and would "dwell" on his relationship with his ex-wife. He spent a lot of time thinking about negative things. He reported that he was irritable and would snap at others.  He felt "lost" and did not know what he was working towards. He also felt hopeless as if he was just "going through the motions of life." He did not sleep well and had problems falling and staying asleep at night. He spent a lot of time in bed ruminating over his mistakes and past events. He had limited sexual desire. His motivation was poor, and he had no ambition or drive to further his career or education. He preferred to isolate and be alone and tried to avoid being around others as much as possible.  He had been in some physical altercations, usually at bars and a few times per year.

The Veteran exhibited depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances in motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Behavioral observations revealed that the Veteran was pleasant and cooperative throughout the interview. He was considered to be a reliable historian. His affect was flat, even somewhat depressed. His cognition, impulse-control and judgment were observed to be intact. There was no obvious thought process, content, or communication impairment observed during the assessment. He maintained eye contact.  There were no other symptoms attributable to his mental disorder.  The examiner remarked that the Veteran's symptoms have progressed, and he now met the criteria for major depressive disorder.  

VA treatment records include a June 2021 mental health initial consult and functional assessment, in which the Veteran reported that he had been struggling with symptoms of anxiety and depression since his military separation. He endorsed feeling tense/keyed up, angry, irritability, sense of dread, worrying, avoidance, intrusive thoughts, racing thoughts, sleep issues, belief people/world were bad, isolation, and emotional numbness. He reported that he can barely tolerate any stress and started having issues at work. He felt on guard at all the times. He eventually was allowed to telework from home which helped, but he continued to struggle due to his symptoms.  He reported that he had been trying to wear masks, but it caused his anxiety symptoms to increase so much he has started having panic attacks. He felt like he could not breathe and then panicked. He described how he struggled to breathe during high stress situations and always worried he would cause something awful to happen. The provider noted that wearing masks, being in crowds, and people getting close to him exacerbated his symptoms.  He denied any suicidal or homicidal ideations as well as auditory and visual hallucinations.  He denied any past suicide attempts or gestures.  He had difficulty falling and staying asleep and increased symptoms of anxiety at night.  He struggled to tolerate working in person.  He was divorced and felt that he would always be alone.  He lost interest in leisure and recreational activities.  He denied any ongoing engagement in mental health treatment and reported that he would call the provider if he decided to engage in anything.  In July 2021, he reported that nearly everyday he felt nervous, anxious, or on edge; was so restless that it was hard to sit still; and became easily annoyed or irritable.  For several days, he would not be able to stop or control worrying, worried too much about different things, had trouble relaxing, and felt afraid that something awful might happen.  He was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder. 

In September 2021, the Veteran reported that had been getting out more and surprisingly enjoyed it.  He described bike rides with friends and having dinner out together.  He did not anticipate much pleasure in these events, but in the end found himself having a good time.  He indicated that in the moment he was unable to correct his negative thoughts using logic and reasoning and would get angry.  He identified that he was rigid and had unreasonable expectations of his romantic partners.  In November 2021, he reported having low energy, lack of motivation, and lack of interest. He reported depressed mood, anhedonia, fatigue, decreased energy, guilt, hypervigilance, generalized excessive worry about numerous things throughout the day, somatic symptoms, issues with initiation and maintenance of sleep, daytime sleepiness, and trauma related nightmares 1-2 times/week.  He had triggers, flashbacks, irritability, mood swings, as well as decreased attention, concentration, and focus.  He denied suicidal and homicidal ideations as well as auditory and visual hallucinations.  No delusions or paranoia was noted.  He lived by himself, been divorced since 2018, and his 10 year old son stayed with him at times.  He worked from home as a buyer for an electric company.  

On mental status examination, the Veteran appeared normal, well-kempt, his stated age, and pleasant. There were no tremors or involuntary movements.   Mild psychomotor slowing was noted otherwise he appeared okay.  His speech had normal rate, rhythm, and tone.  Regarding his mood, he described that he was, "Dealing with low energy, low mood, and lack of motivation." His affect and mood were congruent.  His thought process was linear and goal-directed and no loose associations were noted.  He denied having suicidal or homicidal ideations as well as no auditory or visual hallucinations or delusions.  His recent and remote memory appeared grossly intact.  His attention and concentration were adequate and he was oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  His insight and judgment appeared fair.  

In December 2021, he reported that he continued to struggle with low motivation, but kept a routing of waking up early and working out.  He continued to dislike his job and started a handyman business with another friend.  He had a few projects he was working on and thought the business might "take off".  He enjoyed Thanksgiving with his son and also made an effort to be more social and get out of the house more regularly.  He felt more hopeful about the future.  In February 2021, on mental status examination, the Veteran was alert and oriented to time, place, person, and situation.  He had good eye contact and was appropriately dressed and groomed.   His posture was relaxed and reactions to interviewer were appropriate.  His speech was within normal limits.  His mood was depressed, and his affect was mood congruent and flat.  His through process and content were appropriate.  His insight and judgment were fair to good.  There was no evidence of suicidal or homicidal ideation, plan, or intent.  

The weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran's symptoms have been relatively consistent for the entire period of appeal, including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting, intrusive and ruminating thoughts, irritability, anger, and decreased attention, concentration, and focus.  The Board find that such symptoms more nearly approximate that of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which warrants a 50 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 9434.  As such, the Board also finds that the Veteran's symptoms have not more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood to warrant a higher 70 percent evaluation at any point during the period of appeal.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002) (stating that use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating).  

In this case, the Veteran has not been found to have symptoms consistent with the 70 percent rating criteria such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran experienced anger and irritability and would get into physical alterations usually at a bar and had difficulty in adapting to stressful difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting). However, the Board also does not find these symptoms to be so frequent and disabling as to result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas at any point during the period of appeal.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, at 442 (2002).  Rather, the Veteran maintained relationships with his grown children and younger son, occasionally saw his parents, rode his motorcycle with friends, and socialized with friends.  Also, he worked throughout the appeal period and even started a side business with a friend.  The Board also finds it significant that the VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's depressive disorder progressed and that he now had major depressive disorder and concluded symptoms from his major depressive disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which warranted a 50 percent rating.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's major depressive symptoms are not of such frequency, severity, and duration that they result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas to warrant a higher 70 percent evaluation at any point during the period of appeal from July 30, 2019, through February 22, 2022.

 

 

H. SEESEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crohe, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.