Citation Nr: A25031027
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-465343
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low back condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2007 to November 2011.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (NOD) and elected the Direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include as secondary to service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the Veteran attempted to appeal a claim related to his right knee on his 10182 and cited to a July 12, 2024, decision. However, the notification from VA on July 12, 2024, was a letter informing the Veteran that the VA Form 21-526EZ he submitted on July 3, 2024, was incomplete. Moreover, the Board finds no Rating Decision within a year of the August 19, 2024, 10182 pertaining to the right knee. Therefore, the issue is not on appeal. 

Entitlement to service connection for low back condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his low back condition is related to his active military service. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that his service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis caused him to walk with a limp, which threw off his stride and caused his low back condition. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ at 13. 

The Board finds the AOJ erred in satisfying VA's duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining an adequate VA examination and medical opinion, with sufficient medical information, necessary to make a decision on the claim. See 38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d); 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(4).

Where VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one, regardless of whether it was legally obligated to provide an examination in the first place. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves- Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal conceded that the claimed primary condition, left knee degenerative arthritis, is service connected. No clear and unmistakable error has been shown by the evidence of record to rebut these favorable findings. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The claim for entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include as secondary to left knee degenerative arthritis is remanded to correct a pre-decisional error to assist the Veteran in the development of his claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (the Board shall remand for correction of an AOJ error to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A). Specifically, the September 2023 VA examiner found no current diagnosis for the claimed condition but failed to acknowledge that pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability. Accordingly, the examiner did not opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's reported low back pain results in a functional impairment of earning capacity, i.e., a disability for VA purposes. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018). 

Here, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2023. The Veteran reported that his symptoms began in 2023 and resulting in mid back pain with loss of range of motion. See February 2024 C&P Exam (conducted September 2023) at 2. The Veteran reported that he takes medication twice a day and did not report any flare-ups. Id. The examiner noted that the Veteran functional loss or impairment of his back due to loss of range of motion. Id. Further, the examiner noted that the Veteran's initial range of motion measurements were abnormal or outside of normal range and impact the Veteran's ability to work as a stocker at Lowes. Id. Regarding active motion, the examiner noted the following results: forward flexion limited to 75 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, right lateral flexion to 25 degrees, left lateral flexion to 30 degrees, right lateral rotation to 30 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 25 degrees. Id. Additionally, the examiner noted that all of these active ranges of motion exhibited pain. Id. Passive range of motion testing was not performed due to it being medically contraindicated, as the Veteran stated that pushing past current limits would cause severe pain. Id. at 4. There was evidence of pain with active motion which caused functional loss, as the Veteran was unable to fully bend over and there was a loss of dexterity and mobility due to pain. Id. at 5. The examiner noted that repetitive use range of motion testing was performed without additional functional loss of motion. Id. The examiner noted that repeated use over time was observed with no additional functional impairment. Id. at 5-6. The examiner provided estimated ranges of motion, which were the same as the active range of motion measurements, however, he did not cite specific evidence procured and considered in providing those estimates. Id. at 6. There were no flare-ups, guarding, or muscle spasms noted by the examiner. Id. at 6-7. The examiner found that less movement than normal contributed to the disability. Id. at 7. Muscle strength testing, reflex exam, sensory exam, and straight leg raising test were all normal. Id. 7-9. There was no radiculopathy, ankylosis, other neurological abnormalities, or intervertebral disc syndrome noted. Id. at 9-10. The examiner noted that the Veteran's back condition impacted his ability to work as a night shift stocker at Lowes as the Veteran had "0-1 week work time lost in the last 12 months . . . [the Veteran] stated that despite limitations, he "pushes through the pain" and does not miss work." Id. at 12. Additionally, the examiner noted that imaging studies were performed; however, he later indicated that the provider ordered x-rays in September 2023, but the Veteran never had the tests performed. Id. at 11-12. In the remarks section the examiner stated that the Veteran "had x-rays of his back ordered and failed to have the x-rays completed, or if  they were completed the results were not sent to this provider in order to complete the exam. Due to the length of time that has passed this provider is forced to complete this DBQ without tests that I felt were necessary in order to render a diagnosis." Id. at 12. Ultimately, the examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion with the rationale that "[t]his provider ordered X-rays of the claimant's back in order to render a diagnosis in    this claim, which the veteran failed to have completed. [T]herefore it is not possible for me to render an opinion in this case." See February 2024 C&P Exam: Medical Opinion at 2. 

The Board acknowledges that the file contains an appointment notification letter, addressed to the Veteran, indicating that he had an x-ray appointment scheduled for September 22, 2023. See generally January 2024 C&P Exam: Appointment Notification. Further, there are no x-ray images of the back contained in the file.

The examiner should consider and opine on whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's reported back pain results in a functional impairment of earning capacity, i.e., a disability for VA purposes. See Saunders, supra. 

Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the claims must be remanded to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error of not obtaining an adequate VA opinion. See 38 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; C.F.R. 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. First, requested x-ray images were obtained associate them with the claims file. 

2. Then, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed back condition. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand and the Veteran's lay statements, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician. It is up to the discretion of the reviewing clinician as to whether a new examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion.

The reviewing clinician must opine on: 

(a.) In light of Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018), the examiner should acknowledge that pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability. As a result, if there are no diagnoses for the low back condition, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's reported low back pain results in a functional impairment of earning capacity, i.e., a disability for VA purposes.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current low back disability was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected left knee degenerative arthritis.

In providing the opinion, the examiner is advised that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in nonservice-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions. The examiner is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a reason for doing so.

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale. 

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lewis, Aliece M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.