Citation Nr: A25031574
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-463134
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1969 to December 1971, including service in the Republic of Vietnam. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which he elected the Direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As this case is being decided under VA's modernized appeal system, pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (known as the AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. The relevant favorable findings identified in the September 2023 decision were that the Veteran's herbicide exposure has been conceded, the Veteran has qualifying service in the Republic of Vietnam, the Veteran has been diagnosed with bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to the Veteran's military service. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

1. Left Lower Extremity Peripheral Neuropathy

2. Right Lower Extremity Peripheral Neuropathy

The Veteran has requested service connection for his right and left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

The Veteran attended a VA examination in July 2023. The examiner found that the Veteran had diagnoses of idiopathic peripheral neuropathy in both feet. The examiner then discussed the Veteran's medical history, but found that the condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. As rationale, he wrote that there were no service treatment records that endorse a neuropathy diagnosis or symptoms in service or in the one-year period following service. 

The Board finds this medical opinion inadequate. The examiner failed to provide a nexus opinion rationale regarding the Veteran's conceded exposure to herbicide agents in service and also did not provide a medical explanation to support the rationale. Instead, the examiner relied on a lack of service treatment records to fully support the negative nexus. However, a lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an "absolute bar" to the service connection claim and cannot be used as a rationale in explaining why the current disability is not related to service. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

The Board therefore remands these issues and requests that a new medical opinion be obtained.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's nerve disorders of the lower extremities. If the examiner finds that an examination must be held prior to providing an opinion, schedule such an examination. The entire claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner, who must specify in the report that these records have been reviewed. The examiner should then address:

(a.)  Are the Veteran's i) left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and ii) right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy at least as likely as not incurred in service or is related to any event or injury in service? 

Please specifically discuss the Veteran's presumed exposure to herbicide agents in Vietnam

(b.)  Is it as likely as not that the Veteran has early-onset peripheral neuropathy which manifested within a year of his return from the Republic of Vietnam?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered. If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.

Signature on the next page

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.