Citation Nr: A25031223
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240210-414937
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbance is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current psychiatric disability diagnosis, to include anxiety disorder and PTSD.

2. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current sleep related disability diagnosis.

3. The weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current right elbow disability diagnosis or a diagnosis contemporaneous to the appeal period.

4. The weight of evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has any right or left ear hearing loss disability as defined by VA regulation during or contemporary to the appeal period.

5. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis has not been associated with polyps nor manifested by greater than 50 percent obstruction of each nasal passage, or complete obstruction of one nasal passage.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for anxiety disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1132, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2006 to November 2010.?????? 

This case comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from the June 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)?Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The June 2023 rating?decision established service connection for allergic rhinitis and denied service connection for the other disabilities.  In February 2024, the Veteran requested a direct review of the appeal by the Board.  ?? 

As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of direct review, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based on the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the AOJ decision on the issues on appeal, only evidence of record as of the date of the June 2023 rating decision will be considered.

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for disability caused by disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence, generally medical, of a causal relationship between the claimed in service disease or injury and the current disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Service connection may also be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in-service.  38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); Cosman v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 503 (1992).  The disease entity for which service connection is sought must be chronic rather than acute and transitory in nature.  For the showing of chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations must exist sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic.

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  Lay testimony is competent when it regards the readily observable features or symptoms of injury or illness and may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran is competent to provide testimony concerning factual matters of which he has firsthand knowledge, such as experiencing a physical symptom such as pain.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005).  Therefore, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of lay statements.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility.  Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while weight and credibility are factual determinations going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted.  Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67 (1997).

A Veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail.  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim.  Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518 (1996).

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked pieces of evidence that are not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

1. Service connection for anxiety disorder.

2. Service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

3. Entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbance.

The Veteran contends that entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability and sleep disability is warranted as a result of active service.

The Board finds that the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had any current sleep-related or psychiatric diagnosis, to include PTSD or anxiety, during or contemporary to the pendency of the claim.  Therefore, as the weight of evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current sleep-related or psychiatric diagnosis or has had any sleep or psychiatric disability during or contemporary to the claims period, the claim for service connection must be denied. 

The threshold consideration for any claim for service connection is the existence of a current disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski,?3?Vet. App.?223?(1992).  

The evidence of record shows no evidence of a current sleep-related or psychiatric disability diagnosis. 

An analysis of post-service medical records shows no diagnosed sleep-related or psychiatric disability or condition.  The Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence that demonstrates a current diagnosis of sleep-related or psychiatric disability during the claim period.  No post-service treatment record documents any diagnosed sleep-related or psychiatric disability or condition. 

At an April 2023 VA examination, the examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD, or any other mental disorder, that conformed to the DSM-5 criteria.  The examiner explicitly found that, for the Veteran's claimed condition of sleep disturbances, there was no diagnosis because there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis.  Additionally, for the Veteran's claimed condition of posttraumatic stress disorder, there was no diagnosis because there were no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis.

The Board notes that competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(a)(2); Bruce v. West,?11?Vet. App.?405?(1998) (one not a medical expert is competent to offer evidence of symptoms in support of a claim for an increased rating); Layno v. Brown,?6?Vet. App.?465 (1994).  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has claimed a disability that is related to service.  However, the Board finds that the Veteran, as a lay person, is not competent to provide a diagnosis of a disability, and thus is not competent to diagnose any disability or provide an opinion as to the etiology of any disability. Jandreau v. Nicholson,?492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The Veteran has not submitted competent evidence that supports a finding of a diagnosed sleep-related or psychiatric condition during the pendency of the claim.

Competent evidence concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed disabilities has been provided by a medical professional who has examined the Veteran, and the underlying medical history of the condition, and found that the Veteran did not have any sleep-related or psychiatric disability diagnosis.  To the extent that?there?is?a conflict between the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds the observations and findings of a trained professional to be more probative than any lay assertions in this case because of the training of the examiner. 

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the weight of the evidence is against the claims of entitlement to service connection for sleep disturbance, PTSD, and anxiety.  None of the Veteran's medical treatment providers have given any indication that the Veteran has?been diagnosed with current, chronic sleep-related or psychiatric disability during the course of this appeal.  Further, the Veteran has not submitted any competent medical evidence which supports the claim of a current, chronic sleep-related or psychiatric disability or shows a relationship between any diagnosed sleep-related or psychiatric disability and service. 

In the absence of competent medical evidence finding a current, chronic diagnosis, the threshold requirement for substantiating the claims for service connection is not met.  Brammer v. Derwinski,?3?Vet. App.?223?(1992). 

The Board acknowledges that VA?is?statutorily required to resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran when there?is?an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an outstanding issue.  However, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding of any current diagnosis for any sleep-related or psychiatric disability, or that any sleep-related or psychiatric disability is related to active service.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claims must be denied. 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability.

The Veteran has claimed that a right elbow disability is due to the physical wear and tear of active service, to specifically include lifting heavy objects. 

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds that the evidence of record did not show that the Veteran had a currently diagnosed right elbow disability.  Therefore, as the weight of evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had current chronic diagnosis or has had the claimed disability contemporary to the claim period, the claim for service connection must be denied.

The threshold consideration for any service connection claim is the existence of a current disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). Here, the evidence of record shows no evidence of a current, chronic right elbow disability. 

An analysis of post-service medical records shows no diagnosed right elbow disability or any medical finding of limitation of right elbow function that could be considered a disability.  The Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence that demonstrates a current diagnosis of any right elbow disability during or contemporary to the claim period. 

No post-service medical record documents a right elbow disability diagnosis.  The evidence also does not show that any right elbow disability results in a functional limitation that could be considered a disability. 

The Board notes that competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Bruce v. West, 11 Vet. App. 405 (1998) (one not a medical expert is competent to offer evidence of symptoms in support of a claim for an increased rating); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has claimed a disability related to service. However, the Board finds that the Veteran, as a lay person, is not competent to provide a diagnosis of any disability, and thus is not competent to diagnose any chronic disability or provide an opinion as to the etiology of any disability.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran has not submitted competent evidence that supports a finding of a chronic right elbow disability during the pendency of the claim.

Although VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating a claim, that duty is not a one-way street, and it is important that the Veteran make efforts to assist VA in gathering evidence relevant to the claim.  Woods v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 214 (2000); Hurd v. West, 13 Vet. App. 449 (2000).  The Board finds that the Veteran's bare assertion, without more, that he has an alleged disability due to service, does not require more of VA's duty to assist.  Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the weight of the evidence is against the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability.

None of the Veteran's medical treatment providers have given any indication that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a chronic right elbow disability; or had a right elbow disability resulting in functional impairment.  The Veteran has not submitted any competent medical evidence which supports the claim of a current right elbow disability or shows a relationship between any diagnosed disability and service.

In the abstract, the Board notes a singular acute complaint, even in service, is not a showing of a chronic disability for which service connection can be established.  The evidence does not show any current, chronic right elbow disability.

In the absence of competent medical evidence providing a current, chronic right elbow disability diagnosis, or a showing of functional loss constituting a disability, the threshold requirement for substantiating the claim for service connection is not met.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).

The Board acknowledges that VA is statutorily required to resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an outstanding issue.  However, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding of any diagnosis of a chronic right elbow disability, or functional loss resulting in disability, or that any right elbow disability is related to active service.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim for service connection for a right elbow disability must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

5. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  The Board finds that the evidence of record does not show right or left ear hearing loss that meets the criteria to be considered a disability for VA purposes.  Therefore, as the weight of evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current right or left ear hearing loss disability or has had right or left hearing loss disability contemporary to the claims period, the claim for service connection must be denied.

A June 2023 rating decision found that the record shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as the Veteran's Military occupation was automotive organizational mechanic, an occupation probable for excessive noise exposure. The Board is bound by that favorable finding. 

Organic diseases of the nervous system are among the chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), and service connection for organic diseases of the nervous system may be established based on a continuity of symptomatology.  Service incurrence will be presumed for certain chronic diseases, including organic diseases of the nervous system, such as sensorineural hearing loss, if manifest to a compensable degree within one year after active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold for any of the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; the auditory thresholds for at least three of those frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  The threshold for normal hearing is between 0 and 20 decibels and higher thresholds show some degree of hearing loss.  Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993).

The threshold consideration for any service connection claim is the existence of a current disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has a hearing loss disability as defined by VA regulation.

At an April 2023 VA examination, the Veteran's Maryland CNC Word List speech recognition score and pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were:  

April 2023 VA examination		HERTZ

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000	Avg (1000-4000)	CNC

RIGHT	35	35	15	15	5	18	100

LEFT	10	10	15	5	10	10	96

The Board appreciates that the Veteran contends that he has a bilateral hearing loss disability.  However, the Board notes that none of the evidence of record shows pure tone thresholds or speech recognition scores that meet the numerical standards enumerated by 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 for any diminished hearing to be considered a hearing loss disability for VA compensation purposes in either ear.

Therefore, the Veteran does not have a right or left ear hearing loss disability for VA benefits purposes.  Without a diagnosis of a current hearing loss disability that meets the standards of 38 C.F.R. § 3.385, service connection cannot be established for a hearing loss disability.  Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service-connected benefits to cases where there is a current disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).  The level of right and left ear hearing loss shown by the Veteran does not constitute a disability for VA purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

The Veteran is competent to report difficulty hearing.  However, he is not competent to state that the pure tone thresholds or speech recognition scores rise to levels sufficient to constitute a disability for VA purposes as defined by regulation.  That takes diagnostic testing.  The evidence does not show that the Veteran has the type of training that would allow the Veteran to provide competent evidence regarding interpretation of audiology testing results and diagnosis of hearing loss disability.  Accordingly, the Board has placed greater probative value on the contemporaneous medical evidence that does not support a finding of a right or left ear hearing loss disability for VA purposes during or contemporary to the appeal period.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current right or left ear hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss disability is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

6. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when assigning disability ratings.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  A claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that may result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  The following analysis is undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis has been rated under Diagnostic Code 8865-6522. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one Diagnostic Code requires use of an additional Code to identify the basis for the rating assigned.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27.

Diagnostic Code 8865 is no longer in effect but was used to address Persian Gulf illnesses, while Diagnostic Code 6522 pertains to allergic or vasomotor rhinitis.

Under Diagnostic Code 6522, a 10 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis with polyps.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

The period on appeal is from September 25, 2022, the date service connection was first established, to June 7, 2023, the date of the rating decision on appeal. Allergic rhinitis is currently assigned a 0 percent rating, effective September 25, 2022. 

The Veteran contends that the rating assigned for the service-connected allergic rhinitis does not accurately compensate the severity of the disability, and that a higher rating is warranted.

At an April 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed allergic rhinitis. The Veteran described chronic itchy eyes, watery eyes, runny nose, postnasal drip, sore throat, and mild cough that the Veteran medicated with Benadryl, as needed, for the symptoms.  The Veteran was not found to have greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis, complete obstruction of either the left or right side due to rhinitis, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, nor any granulomatous condition.  The condition was not found to impact the Veteran's ability to work. 

The Board finds that for the period on appeal, the Veteran's rhinitis symptomatology did not more nearly approximate that required for a disability rating in excess of 0 percent.  The Board finds that the rhinitis symptoms during the applicable period were not associated with those suggested for a 10 percent rating under the assigned Diagnostic Code.  Specifically, the rhinitis was not manifested by polyps nor a greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passages on both sides nor complete obstruction on one side.  Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's rhinitis symptoms do not more nearly approximate that required for a rating in excess of 0 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim for an initial disability rating in excess of 0 percent for allergic rhinitis.  The Board finds that the evidence does not more nearly approximate the criteria for higher ratings.  The evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Although the Board regrets the delay, additional development is needed prior to further disposition of the claims of entitlement to service connection for a back disability and a left knee disability.? 

The Veteran contends that current back and left knee disabilities began during active service and continue to the present.  In the alternative, the Veteran contends that the claimed disabilities are the result of the physical nature of active service.

A June 2023 rating decision found the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain with right lower extremity radiculopathy and left knee strain during VA examinations.  The Board is bound by those favorable findings. 

VA's statutory duty to assist the Veteran includes the duty to conduct a thorough examination so that the rating of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one.? Green v.?Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?121 (1991);?Snuffer v. Gober, 10?Vet. App. 400 (1997).? Assistance by VA includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when an examination or opinion is necessary to?make a decision?on a claim.? 38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d); 38?C.F.R. §?3.159.? 

At an April 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed lumbosacral strain.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed injury, event, or illness in service.  The examiner explained that the Veteran served in the Marines from November 2006 to November 2010.  The June 2006 enlistment examination showed no significant past medical history.  The service medical records did not show evidence for recurrent back symptoms or evaluations for a chronic low back condition while in service. The service medical records did not support chronicity of a low back condition while on active duty.  The 2010 separation examination noted recurrent back pain.  However, the medical records following 2010 did not support a chronic lumbar back condition since separation from service over 13 years prior.  The Veteran's lumbar X-ray, performed in May 2023, in conjunction with the examination was overall within normal limits without evidence of chronic degeneration.

At an April 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed a left knee strain.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed injury, event, or illness in service.  The examiner explained that the Veteran served in the Marines from November 2006 to November 2010.  The June 2006 enlistment examination showed no significant past medical history.  The service medical records did not show evidence of recurrent left knee symptoms or frequent evaluations for a left knee condition while in service.  The service medical records did not support chronicity of a left knee condition while on active duty. The service medical records showed that in 2008 that the Veteran was seen for a left knee injury in the emergency room.  The 2010 separation examination noted that the Veteran was evaluated at a Naval hospital emergency room for left knee locking and subluxation.  However, medical records following that left knee injury in 2008 did not support a chronic left knee condition since the Veteran's separation from service over 13 years prior.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed injury, event, or illness inservice, and could be related to post separation actives.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was an electrician.

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  An opinion that relies only on the absence of symptoms or treatment in service is not adequate.  The examiner provided a negative etiology opinion based on the fact that the Veteran did not complain of and was not diagnosed with a chronic back or left knee disability during active service.  As the April 2023 VA examiner relied on the absence of chronic symptoms or treatment continuously since service for the negative opinion concerning the demonstrated disability, the Board finds the April 2023 VA opinions to be inadequate.

The record now shows back and left knee diagnoses and alleged potential causation related to service.  However, the Veteran has not been provided an adequate VA examination which addresses any etiological relationship between any claimed disability and service.  That is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Because the Veteran may have a disability that is related to service, on remand, an opinion as to the etiology of any back and left knee disabilities should be requested. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

In approaching the examinations, the Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  A Veteran is required to cooperate with the examiner's efforts to evaluate the nature and current severity of symptomology.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991).  The Veteran is notified that it is the Veteran's responsibility to report for any scheduled examination and to cooperate in the development of these claims.  The consequences for failure to cooperate with or report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655.  The Veteran is notified that failure to cooperate during the requested VA examination may result in an adverse determination.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655; Connolly v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 566 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to obtain an opinion regarding the nature and etiology any back and left knee disabilities, to include any pain resulting in functional loss.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, and should indicate that review in the report.  The examiner should diagnose all back and left knee disabilities found on examination or shown in the record.  Lumbosacral strain and left knee strain diagnoses have been conceded by VA.  For each back and left knee disability diagnosed, to include any pain resulting in functional loss that constitutes a disability, the examiner must opine whether it is as likely as not that each back and left knee disability is etiologically related to active service or any event, disease, or injury during service, including whether any back or left knee disability (1) began during active service, (2) manifested as arthritis within one year after separation from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.  Please cite to any evidence to support a finding of arthritis within one year following separation from service.  The examiner must consider and discuss the lay statements of symptoms during and since service.  The examiner should specifically discuss any significance of the report a knee injury during service and the report of recurrent back pain at separation from service.  The examiner is specifically asked to address whether it is as likely as not that the ordinary wear and tear, to include marching and heavy lifting, of active service contributed to or caused any back and left knee disabilities.  A clearly stated rationale for each opinion must be provided and cannot be based on the lack of a record of the claimed disability in service.  In writing the report, the?examiner should refer the service medical records indicating treatment in service for back or left knee complaints.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mondesir, Eric

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.