Citation Nr: A25031368
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 241028-485916
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for basal cell carcinoma is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1964 to February 1966.      

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request form opting into AMA and selecting the Direct Review lane, which means the Board's decision must be based solely on the evidence already of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing request.  As such, the Board has considered only the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 decision.

Service Connection Claim

The Veteran contends that his basal cell carcinoma is causally related to his active duty.  In a February 2024 correspondence, the Veteran stated that he wore a wide brimmed hat when in the sun.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA skin disease examination in March 2024.  A diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma was provided.  The VA examiner opined that regarding Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA), it was less likely than not that the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma was caused by his VA conceded in-service exposure to herbicide agent 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (Agent Orange) considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The VA examiner stated that there were no known, established pathophysiologic (direct cause/effect) relationship between fuels, oils, solvents, lubricants, exhausts, asbestos and development of basal cell carcinoma.  Reference to an article was included.  

Based on the forgoing, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to assist in fully and fairly evaluating the Veteran's claim.  A pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred in that VA did not afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine whether his diagnosed basal cell carcinoma is causally related to his active-duty service, to include in-service exposure to toxins, by way of direct service connection.  The March 2024 VA examiner only addressed the Veteran's exposure to Agent Orange.  The examiner did not consider service connection for basal cell carcinoma on a direct basis.

There is evidence of a current disability and conceded in-service exposure to toxins.  As this is a complex medical issue, an examination and opinion considering direct service connection should be performed.  Accordingly, this matter is remanded.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination by an appropriate medical professional to determine the nature and etiology of the diagnosed basal cell carcinoma.  The entire claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.  The examiner is to conduct all necessary tests and studies.

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed condition is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active service, to include herbicide exposure therein.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.