Citation Nr: A25031294
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-441603
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2004 to November 2005. 

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss most recently addressed in a March 2023 rating decision.  In June 2023, VA issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received but denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by VA in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded. 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the June 2023 rating decision on appeal. 

VA obtained an examination and medical opinion in December 2022.  The Veteran met the VA definition of impaired hearing in the left ear based on auditory thresholds and speech recognition scores, and in the right ear based on speech recognition scores only.  While in-service hazardous noise exposure is conceded, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hearing loss was less likely than not caused by or a result of service, citing to normal audiology testing in October 2005 and June 2009 and a lack of complaints of or treatment for decreased hearing during service or at separation from service.  On review, however, it appears that the examiner failed to consider that in-service audiology testing did not include speech recognition scores when rendering a negative etiological opinion when the Veteran's right ear hearing loss upon examination in December 2022 presented only through speech recognition testing.  Furthermore, the examiner failed to consider whether the Veteran experienced delayed onset hearing loss due to his in-service hazardous noise exposure.  Finally, while a June 15, 2009, audiogram is normal, it does not appear that the examiner considered a June 14, 2009, audiogram which shows hearing loss for VA purposes at 500 Hertz bilaterally when rendering a negative etiological opinion.  

VA obtained an examination and medical opinion in May 2023.  The Veteran met the VA definition of impaired hearing in the both the left and right ear based on auditory thresholds and speech recognition scores.  While in-service hazardous noise exposure is conceded, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hearing loss was less likely than not caused by or a result of service, citing to normal audiology testing in October 2005 and a lack of complaints of or treatment for decreased hearing during service or at separation from service.  On review, however, it appears that the examiner failed to consider that in-service audiology testing did not include speech recognition scores when rendering a negative etiological opinion.  Furthermore, the examiner failed to consider whether the Veteran experienced delayed onset hearing loss due to his in-service hazardous noise exposure.

Finally, it does not appear that the December 2022 or May 2023 VA examiners considered a July 2004 service treatment record which noted difficulty hearing in the right ear.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss disability.  The examiner must review the claims file.  An in-person examination is not required unless deemed so by the examiner. 

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hearing loss (1) began during, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include conceded in-service hazardous noise exposure, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

Provide a rationale to support the opinion(s).  In doing so, the examiner must discuss a July 2004 service treatment record which noted difficulty hearing in the right ear; a June 14, 2009, audiogram showing hearing loss for VA purposes at 500 Hertz bilaterally; and lay statements pertaining to onset of hearing loss, including an April 2023 buddy statement.  The examiner must discuss whether the Veteran had delayed onset of hearing loss after in-service hazardous noise exposure.  The examiner is advised that the etiology of a veteran's hearing loss cannot be based solely on a veteran's "normal" hearing at entrance to and separation from service.  The examiner's rationale should address whether the absence of speech recognition testing during service affects the opinion. 

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Owen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.