Citation Nr: A25031016
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240820-466495
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1961 to January 1964. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In an August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the hearing docket.  The Veteran testified at a hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in December 2024.  A transcript of the hearing is of record. 

Based on the Veteran's election of the hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R.  § 20.302

While the Board regrets the additional delay, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

1. Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

The Board finds that remand is required for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  Specifically, medical examinations and opinions considering the Veteran's exposure to potential toxic substances are needed. 

The Veteran asserts that prostate cancer and hypothyroidism are related to potential toxic substances exposure during active duty. 

The Veteran served as a missile crewman and mechanic on active duty.  The Veteran provided lay statements regarding toxic exposure activities, to include specific substances.  The Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memo contained in the Veteran's file does not address the Veteran's lay statements or any information regarding the Veteran's specific military occupational specialty of missile crewman and mechanic. 

The Board finds that the July 2024 Toxic Risk Exposure Activity (TERA) Memorandum is inadequate as it does not include all the Veteran's hazardous exposures during service.  Additionally, the Board finds that the radiation dosimetry memorandum is inadequate as provided by the Army. Specifically, the TERA and the Army dosimetry memoranda failed to consider the potential toxic exposures due to the Veteran's military occupational specialty of a missile crewman and missile mechanic, to include exposure to red fuming nitric acid and/or potential ionizing radiation.  As such, the Board finds a that there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error in the preparation of the dosimetry memo and the July 2024 TERA memo.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Moreover, development must be conducted in accordance with 38 C.F.R. §3.311. Under 38 C.F.R. §3.311, after an appropriate dose estimate is obtained, this case must be submitted to the Under Secretary for Benefits for an opinion by the Under Secretary for Benefits.  See 38 C.F.R. §3.311(b)(1). If the Under Secretary for Benefits, after considering any opinion of the Under Secretary for Health, is unable to conclude whether it is at least as likely as not, or that there is no reasonable possibility, the Under Secretary for Benefits shall refer the matter to an outside consultant in accordance with paragraph 38 C.F.R. §3.311(d). As this was not complied with, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that during service he was exposed to ionizing radiation, red fuming nitric acid, high explosives, and rocket propellant while working as a missile mechanic.  The Board finds the Veteran's account to be competent and credible.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an estimated exposure report from the U.S. Army Dosimetry Center based upon the Veteran's MOS, dates of service, and duty locations. Specifically, consider the potential toxic exposures due to the Veteran's military occupational specialty of a missile crewman and missile technician, to include any exposure to potential ionizing radiation.  

2. After the dose estimate is obtained, submit this case to the Under Secretary for Benefits for opinions, by the Under Secretary for Benefits, as to:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that the Veteran's prostate cancer and/or hypothyroidism resulted from radiation exposure in service.  See 38 C.F.R. §3.311(b)(1). An opinion as to both the prostate cancer and hypothyroidism must be furnished.

In formulating the requested opinions, the Under Secretary for Benefits must review the claims file and consider the factors listed at 38 C.F.R. §3.311(e). See 38 C.F.R. §3.311(c)(1). 

(b)	If the Under Secretary for Benefits, after considering any opinion of the Under Secretary for Health, is unable to conclude whether it is at least as likely as not (at least approximately balanced), or that there is no reasonable possibility, that this Veteran's prostate cancer and/or hypothyroidism is related to the exposure, the Under Secretary for Benefits shall refer the matter to an outside consultant in accordance with paragraph 38 C.F.R. §3.311(d). An opinion as to both the prostate cancer and hypothyroidism must be furnished.

In formulating the requested opinions, the outside consultant must review the claims file and consider the factors listed at 38 C.F.R. §3.311(e).  See 38 C.F.R. §3.311(c)(1). 

3. Thereafter, prepare an updated TERA memorandum that considers toxic exposures, to include any exposure to potential ionizing radiation and/or red fuming nitric acid and/or rocket propellant, in connection with the Veteran's MOS as missile crewman and mechanic as well as the specific missile systems the Veteran reports working with.  

4. Thereafter, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to obtain opinions, including a TERA opinion, from a medical toxicologist, or a medical doctor with experience in exposure to toxic substances, to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's prostate cancer and hypothyroidism.  The examiner must review the claims file, including this Remand, the updated TERA memorandum, and the lay evidence of record, and should indicate that review in the examination report.  The examiner should elicit from the Veteran a full history of all potential exposures and identify each toxin to which the Veteran claims exposure.  The examiner should:

(a.) Confirm the examiner is a medical toxicologist or medical doctor with experience in exposure to toxic substances, who has not previously provided an opinion in conjunction with this claim.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that prostate cancer is etiologically related to active service, or any event, disease, or injury during service. 

(c.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that hypothyroidism is etiologically related to active service or any event, disease, or injury during service. 

(d.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that the Veteran's prostate cancer is etiologically related to exposure to any Toxic Exposure Risk Activities including red fuming nitric acid, rocket propellant, or high explosives.

(e.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least in approximate balance) that the Veteran's hypothyroidism is etiologically related to exposure to Toxic Exposure Risk Activities including red fuming nitric acid, rocket propellant, or high explosives.

(f.) State whether the Veteran's reported symptoms align with how any disabilities linked to Toxic Exposure Risk Activities are known to develop or whether the Veteran's reports are generally inconsistent with medical knowledge, or implausible.  Explain why or why not.

(g.) Reconcile the opinion with the findings and conclusions in all prior medical opinions, and all relevant VA and private treatment records.

Any opinion expressed should be accompanied by a complete rationale with references to the record.  The examiner cannot base any opinion solely on any lack of any treatment or complaints in service.  The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements in the record regarding symptoms during and since service.

For any opinion provided, the VA examiner must consider and address the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; and the "synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran." See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Linney, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.