Citation Nr: A25031387
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240718-456513
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 7, 2021 for service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), secondary to service-connected bilateral pes planus with metatarsalgia (foot disability), is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for service-connected GERD is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder secondary to the service-connected GERD is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that VA previously denied a claim of entitlement to service connection GERD in a final September 2015 decision.

2. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding the Veteran submitted an Intent to File on May 7, 2021, within one year of the January 2022 Supplemental Claim for service connection for GERD.

3. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that the GERD symptoms did not manifest as two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 7, 2021 for service-connected GERD, secondary to service-connected foot disability, have been met. 8 U.S.C. §§ 5110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155, 3157, 3.400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for service-connected GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.31, 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7346.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2002 to June 2006. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2022 decision. In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2022 decision. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the GERD claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the psychiatric and TDIU claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Finally, the Board notes that during the appeal period, the Veteran raised the possibility that the service-connected disabilities rendered him unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment. A claim for a TDIU rating is part of an increased rating claim when such claim is raised by the record. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453 (2009). And while the Veteran is now in receipt of a 100 percent rating effective May 20, 2024, that does not bifurcate the appeal from the underlying disability appeal because it only serves as a partial grant; thus, when the AOJ fails to grant the benefit in full (i.e., entitlement to a TDIU for the entire period on appeal), that portion of the claim that remains unresolved is still on appeal. Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356, 360-62 (2018). Accordingly, a claim of entitlement to a TDIU prior to May 20, 2024 remains on appeal.

1. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for service-connected GERD 

Generally, the effective date of an award of disability compensation based on an original claim shall be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. Unless otherwise provided, the effective date of compensation will be fixed in accordance with the facts found but will not be earlier than the date of receipt of the claimant's application. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a). If a claim is filed within one year after separation from service, service connection will be effective as of the day after separation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2).  

With regard to the date of entitlement, the term date entitlement arose is the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought, on a facts found basis. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); McGrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000). These facts found include the date the disability first manifested and the date entitlement to benefits was authorized by law and regulation. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  For instance, if a claimant filed a claim for benefits for a disability before he actually had the disability, the effective date for benefits can be no earlier than the date the disability first manifested. Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008). However, the date entitlement arose is not the date that the RO receives the evidence, but the date to which that evidence refers. McGrath, 14 Vet. App. at 35.

With regarding to the date of entitlement, a claimant may submit an intent to file a claim. VA may recognize the date of receipt of an intent to file as the date of claim so long as VA receives the properly completed claim form within a year. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b). An intent to file a claim must identify the general benefit but need not identify the specific benefit claimed or any medical condition on which the claim is based. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b)(2). An intent to file a claim received from a service organization, an attorney, or agent indicating a claimant's intent to file a claim may not be accepted if a power of attorney was not executed at the time the communication was written. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b)(3).

Discussion

By way of history, the Veteran first filed a claim of entitlement to GERD in March 2015, which the AOJ denied in a September 2015 rating decision. The Veteran did not file a notice of disagreement or submit new evidence within one year of that decision. The rating decision is thus final based on the evidence then of record. See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.

On May 7, 2021, the Veteran submitted an Intent to File. On January 19, 2022, less than one year later, he submitted a Supplemental Claim and requested to reopen the GERD claim. The AOJ granted service connection in a May 2022 rating decision, effective January 19, 2022, the date of the Supplemental Claim.

In a July 2024 brief which accompanied the Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran's former representative contested that the AOJ erred in addressing the May 2023 HLR as an initial increased rating claim, which a claim of entitlement to service connection as secondary to the service-connected foot disability was the more accurate issue, and requested a grant of service connection, the assignment of an initial 60 percent evaluation, and an effective date of January 19, 2022, the date of the Supplemental Claim.

Analysis

Based on the aforementioned, the Board finds that an earlier effective date of May 7, 2021, is warranted for the service-connected GERD based on the submission of the Intent to File within less than one year of the subsequent Supplemental Claim. An even earlier effective date is not warranted as there were no earlier pending claims. The March 2015 claim resulted in the September 2015 decision which is final. Although the evidence shows that the Veteran had a diagnosis of GERD for many years, VA regulation dictates that an effective date is the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. Here, the date of receipt of the claim is later, so that date is the appropriate effective date.

The Board acknowledges the July 2024 brief's argument the May 2023 HLR was not a request for an increased rating, but rather one for reconsideration of service connection as secondary to the service-connected foot disability. However, the May 2022 rating decision which granted service connection did so based on that very same rationale. They argued that the AOJ committed a duty to assist error in failing to address this as a separate service connection claim rather than disagreement with the initial evaluation. It is unclear what other benefit the Veteran is seeking, of which is the benefit that he is already in receipt, service connection for GERD as secondary to the service-connected foot disability. The Veteran's current representative also raised this argument in their August 2024 brief, without any additional explanation. As the Veteran is already in receipt of the benefits sought, the issue of entitlement to service connection is moot. The initial assigned rating will be addressed below.

As the evidence of record is in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the claim of entitlement to an earlier effective date of May 7, 2021, for the service-connected GERD have been met, and the appeal is granted.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for service-connected GERD

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of any disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Although the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings, the Board is to consider the Veteran's medical history in determining the applicability of a higher rating for the entire period in which the appeal has been pending. Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31, 34 (1999).

Where entitlement to compensation has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Where an appeal is based on an initial rating for a disability, however, evidence contemporaneous with the claim and the initial rating decision are most probative of the degree of disability existing when the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an original rating on appeal was erroneous." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). In either case, if later evidence indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time. Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (noting that staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct time periods in which a disability exhibits symptoms that warrant different ratings). When adjudicating a claim for an increased initial evaluation, the relevant time period is from the date of the claim.  Moore v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 211, 215 (2007), rev'd in irrelevant part, Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (2009).  

Per above, the Veteran submitted an Intent to File in May 2021, followed by a Supplemental Claim in January 2022. Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence from May 2021 until the May 2022 rating decision on appeal which was subject to an HLR.

The Board notes that that VA recently amended the Rating Schedule for evaluating digestive system disabilities effective May 19, 2024. See 89 Fed. Reg. 19375. The revised rating criteria apply to all claims received by VA or that are pending before the AOJ on or after May 19, 2024. The Federal Circuit has held that the Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. See Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). Here the record closed before the new regulations went into effect, therefore they may not be considered.

Under the pre-amended rating criteria, there was no specific DC for GERD. The RO rated the Veteran's GERD by analogy under Diagnostic Codes 7399-7346, for hiatal hernia. Hyphenated Diagnostic Codes are used when a rating under one Diagnostic Code (7399) requires the use of an additional Diagnostic Code to identify the basis for the rating assigned (7346). The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.27 provide that when an unlisted disability requires rating by analogy, the code will be "built-up" as follows: the first two digits will be selected from that part of the schedule most closely identifying the body part or system involved, and the last two digits will be "99." Here, the hyphenated Diagnostic Code indicates that an unlisted gastrointestinal condition (DC 7399) is rated under the criteria for hiatal hernia (DC 7346). See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20.

Under DC 7346, a 10 percent rating is assigned with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity; a 30 percent rating is assigned for persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; and, a 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veteran's Claims has held, "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria." Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). DC 7346 does not contemplate the effects of relief provided by medication, thus entitlement to a higher rating based on such relief may not be denied in this instance.

Evidence

August 2021 VA treatment records noted no unexplained weight loss of anorexia.

December 2021 VA treatment records indicated the Veteran's report of GERD, which he described as a burning sensation that radiated up into the chest, sometimes associated with nausea or sour taste, and often happened at night, after drinking alcohol, or eating tomatoes. He denied any symptoms such as difficulty swallowing or drinking. The provider there indicated that they discussed lifestyle modifications with the Veteran, such as avoiding alcohol, elevating his head in bed, and Prilosec, and wrote that if these symptoms did not resolve, they would consider referral to a Gastrointestinal specialist in the future.

In a January 2022 statement, the Veteran asserted that the GERD manifested as heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation, sore throat with painful swallowing, difficulty swallowing, a lump in the throat, chest pain which radiated into shoulder, upper abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, frequent coughing, nighttime choking due to regurgitation, voice hoarseness, weight loss, dark colored stool, and tooth enamel damage. He reported that his treatment plan included over the counter and prescription medication, and dietary supplementals, and that he had to avoid certain foods, and large or late-night meals. The Veteran stated that he had to lie down after eating, required multiple pillows during sleep, and that he did not have uninterrupted sleep. He alleged that this caused a number of psychiatric symptoms, to include daytime fatigue, and difficulty thinking, among others.

January 2022 VA treatment records noted that the Veteran had reported that the GERD had resolved.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2022 where he reported heartburn which woke him during the night due to reflux, and nausea. He indicated that he was on prescription medication, which did not help, and that the condition had stayed the same since its onset. On examination, the Veteran endorsed reflux, sleep disturbances more than 4 times per year, and nausea more than 4 times per year. The examiner noted that there was no esophageal structure, spasm, acquired diverticulum of the esophagus, or any other signs or symptoms. They opined that there was no functional impact.

Analysis

Based on the aforementioned, the Board finds that the initial assignment of a noncompensable evaluation for the service-connected GERD is appropriate as there no objective evidence of two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity, as required by a higher 10 percent evaluation. A careful review of the VA treatment records, and the VA examination does not show any evidence that the Veteran has reported to his treating providers that he had any dysphagia, regurgitation, or substernal, arm, or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. The same also does not show any symptoms pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. The only symptom that he reported that is in the rating criteria is pyrosis, also known as burning pain or discomfort in the chest.

Indeed, the Veteran did assert that he had difficulty swallowing on the January 2022 statement; however, he specifically denied any swallowing issues in December 2021, and did not report that complaint at the VA examination. He also stated that he had regurgitation and vomiting on that statement, but again the record does not show that he has shared those concerns with his treating providers, or at the VA examination. This is the same finding for his report of radiating chest pain to the shoulder, weight loss, dark stool, and damaged tooth enamel. VA treatment records not only show that there was no unexplained weight loss, that his weight during this period remained around 170 pounds at his regular VA medical appointments.

Indeed, Courts have held that a veteran's testimony may provide competent evidence of symptoms where no medical expertise is required, and, in those circumstances, lay evidence may suffice by itself (Faizone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 406 (1995). However, based on the VA treatment records, the Veteran sought regular treatment for the GERD during this period. The Board would expect to have some medical record which would reflect these symptoms as he sought treatment, or that he would have reported them at the VA examination. Even on the same day that the Veteran submitted that statement, he reported that the GERD had resolved. Given that the Veteran continued to report heartburn at the VA examination, this would suggest that the relief he reported there was only temporary, but the evidence still does not show that a higher 10 percent evaluation is warranted.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's lay statements that the disability is worse than currently evaluated and those statements have been considered. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability have been provided by the medical personnel who have examined the Veteran during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which the disability is evaluated. The medical and lay evidence has been assessed by the Board in determining the overall disability rating. Ultimately, the Board finds the objective medical evidence to be of more probative value.

Additionally, regarding the medication, in a recent decision, the Court determined that the Board is obligated to discount the beneficial effects of the medications taken for each disability and evaluate the baseline severity of those disabilities. Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327. Here, however, the Veteran reported at the VA examination that the medication did not help the GERD symptoms. The Veteran has not described any benefit of the medication. The evidence does not show that without the medication, the GERD would be severe enough to warrant a compensable evaluation.

As the criteria for the claim of entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for service-connected GERD have not been met, the appeal is denied.

In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt. In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). Here, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. Id.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder secondary to the service-connected GERD is remanded.

In addition to considering entitlement to increased benefits, VA must consider entitlement to any additional benefits due to complications from a claimed disability, and it is not necessary that the Veteran file a formal claim for service connection for such additional disability. Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021).

As noted above, in the January 2022 statement, the Veteran asserted that the service-connected GERD caused a number of psychiatric symptoms, to include insomnia, daytime fatigue, difficulty thinking, mood changes, weight gain, low libido, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, difficulty avoiding social events, clumsiness, difficulty with concentration, memory trouble, self-neglect in personal care, depression, and difficulty with complex commands. While VA has addressed prior claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, VA has never developed the theory of entitlement that the condition is secondary to the service-connected GERD. Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified, and remand is required.

2. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

Remand is required because entitlement to TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the pending claim. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that issues are inextricably intertwined and must be considered together when a decision concerning one could have a significant impact on the other).

By this remand the Board makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with an appropriate examination to determine the etiology of the psychiatric disorder. The entire claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished, and all clinical findings must be reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis. An explanation for all opinions expressed must be provided.

NOTE (1): An adequate medical opinion may not be predicated solely on the absence of an in-service diagnosis or documented complaints.

NOTE (2): If any medical history is rejected, a complete explanation is required.  

(a)	The examiner must also provide an opinion whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the psychiatric disorder is caused by the service-connected GERD.

(b)	The examiner must also provide an opinion whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the psychiatric disorder is aggravated by the service-connected GERD.

(c)	The examiner should consider the January 2022 statement where the Veteran asserted that the GERD causes various psychiatric symptoms.

2. Readjudicate the issue of entitlement to a TDIU.

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rogos, John M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.