Citation Nr: A25031046
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 200129-63481
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The service-connected disabilities alone did not make the Veteran permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1971 to September 1973.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a November 2019 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In the January 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2019 AOJ decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

An October 2023 Board decision denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance.  In October 2024, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims granted a Joint Motion for Partial Remand and remanded the claim to the Board.  The Court concluded that the Board did not consider relevant favorable evidence.  The claim now returns to the Board for further consideration. 

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance.

Special monthly compensation (SMC) is payable under 38 U.S.C. §1114(l) if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

Need for aid and attendance means being so helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  The criteria for establishing that need include whether the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance as determined under criteria enumerated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  The following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person:  (1) inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) physical or mental incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the Veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid  and attendance, not that there is a constant need for aid and attendance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a); Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).

Bedridden will be a proper basis for the determination of whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  Bedridden will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed.  The fact that claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

In order for the Veteran to prevail in the claim, the evidence must show that the service-connected disability or disabilities resulted in the need for regular aid and attendance.  Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000).

The Veteran has established service connection for PTSD with anxiety, rated 100 percent: tinnitus, rated 10?percent; onychodystrophy of the right great toe, rated 0 percent; left ear hearing loss, rated 0 percent; and erectile dysfunction, rated 0 percent.  The combined service-connected disability rating is 100 percent, effective January 27, 2012.

The Board finds that a review of the record does not show that the Veteran meets the criteria for regular aid and attendance.  The evidence shows that he is able to maintain minimal personal hygiene.  There is no indication of an inability to feed or dress himself, an inability to attend to the wants of nature, or physical or mental incapacity that requires the care or assistance of another on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

The Veteran's wife submitted a statement received by VA in September 2012 explaining that when she and the Veteran were out of the house, the Veteran constantly watched his surroundings and that they were never out of the house longer than a few hours.  The Veteran's wife stated that the longer they stayed out, the more agitated the Veteran became, and that the Veteran had anxiety attacks and blackouts, which caused him to pass out cold.  She explained that they often had to leave functions and that she had to talk to him to calm him down, and that the anxiety attacks occurred multiples times every day.

Social Security Administration (SSA) records indicate that the Veteran was able to maintain substantially gainful employment until March 20, 2014.  During SSA assessment, the Veteran was found capable of lifting 20 pounds, standing for 6 hours, climbing stairs, using ladders, balancing, bending at the waist, kneeling, crouching, and crawling.  He was explicitly noted as able to drive, manage funds, and engage in activities of daily living.  

At a January 2015 psychiatric evaluation for SSA benefits, the Veteran reported difficulty falling and staying asleep, anxiety, restlessness, nightmares, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, hypervigilance, and daily panic attacks with palpitations, sweating, dizziness, and breathing difficulties.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's memory and concentration were impaired.  The Veteran reported not driving or seeing family, but spent most of his days watching television.  The Veteran was noted to have trouble maintaining a regular schedule, learning, performing complex tasks independently, adequately relating with others, and dealing with stress.  The Veteran stated that he did not care for other people or animals and that his friend does everything.  The Veteran stated that he was not able to work, be in crowds, handle stressful situations, go shopping, or be with other people.  He also stated that his friends prepared his food and meals.  He needed someone to remind him to take his medications.  The Veteran stated that he did not get along with others or spend time with others, that he quit his job due to anxiety symptoms, and that he had trouble remembering things.  

At an August 2013 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran noted that his marriage was up and down and described himself as antisocial.  The Veteran stated that his current hobbies were working out, after work, five days per week.  He reported difficulty in participating in social activities.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran was a trucking dispatcher for a construction company.  He stated that he functioned well in that role, but the business itself was doing poorly.

At an April 2014 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran was explicitly noted as not having any difficulty maintaining personal hygiene, or managing finances, diet, or other activities of daily living.

At a January 2016 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran was living alone in a basement apartment.  The Veteran reported working as a truck driver for the last 20 years, but stopped 3 years prior to the examination.

In a July 2016 statement, the Veteran asserted that he could no longer hold a job and that he had attacks whenever anything changed.

In a January 2017 statement, the Veteran explained that his PTSD was worsening by the day, he could no longer work, and that he required daily medication for PTSD.  He could not sleep, had no short-term memory, and could not go out in public or to family gatherings due to panic attacks.

At a March 2017 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran described himself as a loner with no friends.  The Veteran noted that he shopped for food, drove, and managed his own funds.  He also walked around the neighborhood to clear his head at times.

In a June 2019 statement, the Veteran's spouse explained that she did everything for her husband including preparing his meals, cooking, cleaning, laundry, reminding him to take medication, brush his teeth, shave, and cut his nails.

In a July 2019 statement, the Veteran explained that he stopped working in 2013 because he had anxiety every day on the job, fought with his bosses and co-workers, and often got reprimanded.  His wife reminded him to take his medications and without her help, he stated he would forget to take any medication.  His wife reminded him to shower, shave, prepare meals, and do laundry.  He stated that without her, he would not be able to remember where anything is.  

In a private July 2019 opinion, the Veteran's psychologist noted that the Veteran's symptoms included nightmares, flashbacks, avoidance, diminished interests, alienation, irritability, hypervigilance, concentration difficulties, suspiciousness, panic attacks occurring more than once a week, near-continuous depression affecting the ability to function independently, impairment of short- and long-term memory, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals, impaired impulse control, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The Veteran's psychologist included the Veteran's assertions that the Veteran's wife prepared all of the meals for the Veteran and ensured that he ate, required reminders for his personal hygiene, and that his wife managed his medications.  The Veteran's psychologist also noted that the Veteran lived in near total isolation and interacted only with his wife due to the severity of his psychiatric symptoms.  

In a private September 2019 examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, the Veteran was noted as able to feed himself and manage his own funds.  The Veteran required assistance with medication management, food preparation, and required reminders to perform personal hygiene.

The October 2024 Joint Motion for Remand agreed that the Board did not consider relevant favorable evidence in the form of the September 2012 Veteran's spouse's statement, a 2015 SSA psychiatric examination, a July 2016 Veteran statement, a January 2017 Veteran statement, a July 2019 Veteran statement, and a July 2019 private opinion.  That evidence has now been fully considered.  

The Board finds that the additional evidence still does not demonstrate that the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance.  At minimum, one of the criteria from 38 C.F.R. 3.352(a) must be met before a Veteran may be awarded entitlement to regular aid and attendance.  Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996) (at least one factor listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) must be present to grant special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance).  

The first factor is the inability of the claimant to dress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable.  There has been no such showing.  The mere fact that the Veteran's wife reminds the Veteran to maintain personal hygiene, or assists him with getting dressed due to his psychiatric disability, does not make him unable to dress or conduct personal hygiene.  The Veteran is shown to capable of dressing himself and keeping himself clean and presentable.

Second, the Board finds that there is no frequent need to adjust prosthetic or orthopedic appliances because the Veteran lacks a relevant service connected disability.  

Third, the Board finds that the Veteran is not unable to feed himself.  The mere fact that the Veteran's wife prepares the Veteran's meals for him is insufficient to meet this standard.  The regulation states that, for this factor to be met, the Veteran must be unable to feed himself "through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness."  38 C.F.R. 3.352(a).  There has been no such showing, nor has any argument or evidence been advanced that the Veteran has lost coordination of his upper extremities or has extreme weakness.  

Fourth, there is not contention or finding of record that the Veteran is unable to attend to the wants of nature.  

Fifth, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  There has been little evidence or argument advanced that the Veteran would be in danger from his daily environment, but for the care he receives from his spouse.  To the extent that any such evidence, including the Veteran's wife's 2012 statement that the Veteran has blackouts, carries weight, it is outweighed by the other evidence of record that does not show blackouts or other daily dangers faced by the Veteran.  The evidence of record shows that while the Veteran seems to prefer to remain at home, that there is not care or assistance required protect the Veteran from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

Sixth, there has been no evidence or argument advanced, or any objective finding, that the Veteran is permanently bedridden.

The Board finds that while the service-connected disabilities impact the Veteran's life significantly, he is not entitled to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person as a result of the service-connected disabilities.  The evidence of record does not show that the Veteran is permanently bedridden, that he is unable to dress or undress himself consistently or keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable, that he requires assistance adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances, that he is unable to feed himself, that he is unable to attend to the wants of nature, or that he requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect him from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment as a result of the service-connected connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).

The record of evidence suggests that the Veteran is able to take care of himself and is not incapable of performing activities of daily living independently due solely to service-connected disabilities.  While the Veteran may need some reminders and some assistance, the record indicates that the Veteran is capable of independently performing all activities of daily living.

The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service to our country.  However, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and entitlement to?SMC?based on the need for the regular aid and attendance of another person is not warranted.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim is denied.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?49?(1990). 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gernand, Timothy A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.