Citation Nr: A25031723
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-410296
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent for facial scarring is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for pelvic floor dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disorder is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, her IBS is proximately due to or the result of her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for IBS as secondary to service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1986 to December 1992.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023, October 2023, and November 2023 rating decisions.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA 10182 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023, October 2023, and November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued this decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, she may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims decided herein, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  However, as the Board is remanding some issues, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of those claims.  C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Law and Analysis

The Veteran and her representative have not raised any pre-decisional issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist with regard to the issue decided herein.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in the active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 U.S.C. § 1110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding that secondary service connection is warranted under the causation standard of 38 U.S.C. § 1110 where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the nonservice-connected disability).  The Federal Circuit has held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) is inconsistent with 38 U.S.C. § 1110.

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits.  VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

In considering the evidenced of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for IBS as secondary to her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.

The Veteran has claimed that she has IBS that is secondary to her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  In the alternative, she has asserted that the disorder is due to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) during service.  

In June 2023, Dr. T.F. (initials used to protect privacy), a psychologist, provided a medical opinion in support of the Veteran's claim.  He noted that the records reflected a diagnosis of mixed IBS and stated that her psychiatric disabilities, including anxiety, both cause and substantially aggravate her IBS.  He explained that medical literature shows that psychological concerns are associated with an increased likelihood of IBS; that psychological factors are important moderators of symptom severity and persistence, decisions to seek treatment, and response to treatment; and that self-reported anxiety and depression provide a two-fold risk for IBS onset.  Dr. T.F. found that the medical literature and the Veteran's medical records support a link between psychiatric difficulties and IBS and opined that it is at least as likely as not that her psychiatric difficulties, including PTSD, both cause and substantially aggravate her IBS. 

A July 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's IBS was less likely than not caused by her indicated TERA.  However, in so finding, she noted that studies show that IBS can be triggered by chronological psychological stress and bacterial contamination.

The Board does acknowledge that the July 2023 VA examiner separately opined that the Veteran's IBS was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  She noted that the Veteran has lactose intolerance and hemorrhoids and that a colonoscopy in 2017 revealed an inflammatory polyp that can cause symptoms such as diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain.  The examiner further found that there was no documentation of IBS until 2023 or complaints of constipation until 2018.  However, the examiner did not reconcile her conclusion with her statement in the TERA opinion that studies show that IBS can be triggered by chronological psychological stress.  Nor did she address whether the service-connected disability could have aggravated or worsened the Veteran's IBS.  Moreover, even if the Veteran has a polyp and hemorrhoids that cause overlapping symptoms, the fact remains that she has been separately diagnosed with IBS.  Therefore, the Board finds that this opinion has limited probative value.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that there is at least a reasonable doubt that the Veteran has IBS that is proximately due to or the result of her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  Accordingly, resolving any reasonable doubt in her favor, the Board concludes that service connection is warranted for IBS on a secondary basis.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors for the other issues on appeal.

Regarding the Veteran's service-connected facial scarring, a November 2023 VA examiner indicated that she had gross distortion or asymmetry of facial features or visible or palpable tissue loss involving the eyes, but he did not specify whether the Veteran had tissue loss or distortion of the eyelid or eye or anatomical loss of the eye.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional examination was needed.

The Board also notes that July 2023 and October 2023 VA examiners diagnosed the Veteran with hypothyroidism and provided negative nexus opinions.  The July 2023 VA examiner concluded that the disorder was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA) of the Veteran, and the October 2023 VA examiner found that the disorder was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  However, the examiners did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder may have caused any worsening of functionality.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Moreover, earlier treatment records documented hyperthyroidism rather than hypothyroidism, which was not addressed in the VA examination reports. See e.g., June 2003 private medical record.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional VA examination and medical opinion were needed.

In addition, a July 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tricuspid valve insufficiency, but she opined that the disorder claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  She found that the tricuspid valve insufficiency, a right bundle branch block, hypertension, and atypical chest pain were diagnosed years after service in 2021 and that a diagnosis of high blood pressure had been noted in 2006.  However, she did not provide a rationale addressing why the delayed-onset of a heart disorder was not related to TERA.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

Moreover, a July 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  She explained that medical literature failed to show a causal relationship between the disorders.  However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder may have caused any worsening of functionality.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  She also did not discuss direct service connection.  In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records documented complaints of pelvic pain in 1991.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

The Board further notes that a July 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with kidney stones and urge incontinence of the urine, but she opined that the disorders were less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected hypertension.  She explained that studies show that urinary leakage, frequency, and incontinence can happen for many reasons, including urinary tract infections, vaginal infection or irritation, or constipation, and that medications can also cause bladder control problems that last a short or long time, including a weak bladder or pelvic floor muscles.  However, she did not discuss whether the Veteran's service-connected hypertension may have aggravated or worsened any kidney disorder.  Nor did she address the Veteran's claim that the disorder may be secondary to her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

In remanding this matter, the Board does acknowledge that Dr. T.F. opined in June 2023 that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's anxiety both caused and substantially aggravated her urge incontinence.  However, he did not discuss or account for other relevant facts in this case, including the diagnoses of kidney stones and diabetic nephropathy with renal dysfunction. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (finding that a medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning); Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (the value of a physician's statement is dependent, in part, upon the extent to which it reflects "clinical data or other rationale to support his opinion.").

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to ascertain the severity and manifestations of her service-connected facial scarring.  

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for rating the disability under the rating criteria.  In particular, the examiner should provide a description of the Veteran's facial scars, including the size and location.  He or she should also indicate whether they are unstable or painful; deep or superficial; and linear or nonlinear.  The examiner should further address whether the Veteran has any characteristics of disfigurement and whether there is visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion or asymmetry of one feature or paired set of features (nose, chin, forehead, eyes (including eyelids), ears (auricles), cheeks, lips).

In addition, the examiner should state whether the resulting scar causes any functional loss.

The examiner should identify any other manifestations and symptoms of the facial scarring.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

2. The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any thyroid disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

It should be noted that the evidence shows that the Veteran has been previously diagnosed with hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, and a thyroid nodule.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a thyroid disorder that is causally or etiologically related to her military service, to include any exposures or pregnancy therein. See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic and combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).

The examiner should also opine as to whether any thyroid disorder is caused by or resulted from the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  He or she should address whether the Veteran's thyroid condition would have been less severe but-for her service-connected PTSD, to include any worsening of functionality.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

3.  The AOJ Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any heart disorder, to include tricuspid valve insufficiency, that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a heart disorder that is causally or etiologically related to her military service, to include any exposures therein. 

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic and combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

4.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her pelvic floor dysfunction.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction is causally or etiologically related to her military service, to include any symptomatology therein.  He or she should specifically address the service treatment records documenting pelvic pain in 1991.

The examiner should also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has pelvic floor dysfunction that is caused by or resulted from her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  He or she should address whether the Veteran's pelvic floor dysfunction would have been less severe but-for her service-connected PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder, to include any worsening of functionality.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider the medical literature submitted by the Veteran.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

5.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any kidney disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has any kidney disorder that is caused by or resulted from her service-connected hypertension and PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder.  He or she should address whether any kidney disorder would have been less severe but-for her service-connected hypertension and PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder, to include any worsening of functionality.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's report urinary incontinence, the June 2023 private medical opinion provided by Dr. T.F, and the prior diagnoses of kidney stones and diabetic nephropathy with renal dysfunction.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deverter, Rebecca M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.