Citation Nr: A25031182
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-428362
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a low back condition is granted.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a neck condition is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a testicular condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, he has a low back condition incurred in service that is manifested by pain productive of a functional impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a low back condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309; Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from June 2017 to June 2022.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran filed an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Service connection for a low back condition.

The Veteran asserts that he has a low back condition caused by an in-service event or injury. Specifically, he contends that he was required to hike and run with heavy equipment on his back. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Service connection may be granted for a current disability arising from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service treatment records (STRs) show that the Veteran completed a Report of Medical History in January 2017, reported being in good health, and denied then or previously having recurrent back pain or any back problems. An evaluating physician completed a corresponding Report of Medical Examination and noted normal findings for the spine and musculoskeletal areas in a clinical examination.

STRs show that in April 2021 the Veteran reported having low back pain since an 18-kilometer hike/ruck run in March 2021. The medical provider noted slight swelling and tenderness. The medical assessment was muscle spasm of the left lumbar paraspinal muscles. An X-ray report for the lumbosacral spine indicated normal findings with no significant degenerative changes. The Veteran had treatment with an athletic trainer/therapist from May to August 2021.

October 2021 STRs show that the Veteran was seen in primary care with a complaint of ongoing low back pain since March 2021. He received outpatient physical therapy in November 2021. The medical assessment was low back pain. December 2021 STRs show that the Veteran was seen at a clinic with a complaint of continuing low back pain.

In April 2022, the Veteran completed a Report of Medical History for separation and reported continuing low back pain and tingling in the left leg. An evaluating physician commented that the Veteran should follow-up with a provider or VA upon discharge. The evaluating physician completed a Report of Medical Examination in May 2022 for separation and noted abnormal findings for the spine and musculoskeletal areas, specifically left lower paraspinal muscle range of motion slightly limited, secondary to pain. The diagnosis was back muscle strain. It was recommended that the Veteran restart physical therapy.

The Veteran had a March 2024 VA examination. The Veteran reported that he had constant achy, sharp lower back pain. He reported the onset in 2021 after years of hiking and carrying hundreds of pounds on his back and sitting in uncomfortable positions in vehicles. The examiner noted abnormal range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine, that active and passive motion caused pain, and that pain caused functional loss. The examiner noted that factors contributing to disability included interference with sitting and standing, and disturbance of locomotion. The examiner noted that prolonged ambulation increased the pain and extended sitting aggravated the pain. The examiner provided no diagnosis in the diagnosis section of the examination report. The examiner opined that the Veteran's low back condition impacted the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks, commenting that the Veteran stated that the condition impacted his ability to stand, walk, or sit for extended periods due to pain. In the remarks section of the examination report, the examiner stated that no diagnosis of thoracolumbar spine condition was confirmed and that the symptoms were subjective. The examiner further commented that there was no objective evidence for a chronic low back condition in the claims file. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in service. The rationale provided was that the symptoms were subjective, no diagnosis could be rendered without speculation, the back condition was treated in service, there was no chronicity post-service, and the Veteran needed further evaluation and treatment. In her review of the evidence in the claims file, the examiner noted the Veteran's October 2021 back treatment, the April 2021 back X-ray report, and the April 2021 medical assessment of lumbar muscle spasm. The examiner did not note in the examination report the diagnosis of back muscle strain provided by the evaluating physician at separation or the Veteran's report of continuing low back pain at separation. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was that of Rifleman who served with the 1st Marine Division. The Veteran's assertion of incurring injury to his back while carrying heavy a load when engaged in hiking and running is consistent with his MOS. The AOJ stated as a favorable finding that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, noting that STRs showed that the Veteran reported low back pain while in service. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that service connection for a low back condition is warranted. 

The March 2024 examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms included sharp low back pain, and that he had abnormal range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine, that active and passive motion caused pain, and that pain caused functional loss. The examiner noted that factors contributing to disability included interference with sitting and standing, and disturbance of locomotion. The examiner noted that prolonged ambulation increased the pain and extended sitting aggravated the pain. The examiner opined that the conditions impacted the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks, commenting that the Veteran stated that the condition impacted his ability to stand, walk, or sit for extended periods due to pain. The Board notes that the examination report indicates objective findings of a low back condition shown by abnormal range of motion, in addition to subjective evidence of low back pain.

The Federal Circuit had held that pain that is productive of a functional impairment can constitute a current disability for VA compensation purposes. Pain is an impairment because it diminishes the body's ability to function, and that pain need not be diagnosed as connected to a current underlying condition to function as an impairment. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Although the VA examiner opined that a current diagnosis could not be made, the Board finds that the Veteran's low back pain is productive of a functional impairment and constitutes a current disability for VA compensation purposes under Saunders, based on the abnormal findings and the VA examiner's opinion that the Veteran's low back condition impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks.

Although the VA examiner has provided a negative nexus opinion, competent and credible lay evidence of chronicity and continuity of symptomology may also establish etiology. In this case, chronicity and continuity of symptomology have been established by the Veteran's competent and credible lay evidence that he has had chronic low back pain since service, as reported in his VA Form 21-526 and at the VA examination. It is significant in this case that the Veteran's low back pain was reported in service, that he had continuing complaints of low back pain for over a year while in service and at the time of discharge, and the evaluating physician at separation noted the low back condition and provided a diagnosis of back muscle strain.

The Board concludes that there is sufficient evidence to resolve reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor. The Board has considered the places, types and circumstances of the Veteran's service as shown by service records, his medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence. The determination as to service connection has been based on review of the entire evidence of record, with due consideration to the policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs to administer the law under a broad and liberal interpretation consistent with the facts in this case. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). 

The evidence is at least in approximate balance, and service connection for the Veteran's low back condition is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board will remand the issues of entitlement to service connection for a headache condition, right and left knee conditions, a neck condition, and a testicular condition. 

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

This is a remand under VA's duty to assist to provide medical examinations and/or opinions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) and McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). A duty to assist error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal in failing to obtain examinations with fully explained medical opinions. 

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in March 2024 for his headache condition, right and left knee conditions, a neck condition, and a testicular condition. For these claimed conditions, the examiner provided negative nexus opinions. The rationales provided were that symptoms were subjective, that a diagnosis could not be rendered without speculation, and that there was no objective evidence for the claimed condition in the claims file. The examiner noted that further evaluation and treatment was needed for each condition, but without any explanation. It seems if no condition was shown, there would be no need for further evaluation or treatment, and the fact the examiner stated such was needed certainly implies the Veteran had some type of symptoms or impairment despite the conclusion no diagnosis was warranted. The VA examination reports are inadequate for adjudication.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer this matter for a VA examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed headache condition. 

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical questions:

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a headache condition in service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a headache condition that manifested within a year of separation from service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Does the Veteran have a headache condition that produces a functional impairment or impacts his ability to perform occupational tasks? Why or why not?

The examiner is advised that the lack of medical evidence in the Veteran's medical records is not fatal to the claim and cannot be relied upon alone as a rationale for a negative medical opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete explanation for any opinion (i.e., a summary conclusion without a comprehensive explanation is not sufficient under the law). The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

2. Refer this matter for a VA examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed right and left knee conditions. 

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical questions:

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a right and/or left knee condition in service? Why or why not? 

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a right and/or knee condition that manifested within a year of separation from service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Does the Veteran have right and/or left knee pain that produce a functional impairment or impact his ability to perform occupational tasks? Why or why not?

The examiner is advised that the lack of medical evidence in the Veteran's medical records is not fatal to the claim and cannot be relied upon alone as a rationale for a negative medical opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete explanation for any opinion (i.e., a summary conclusion without a comprehensive explanation is not sufficient under the law). The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

3. Refer this matter for a VA examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed neck condition. 

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical questions:

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a neck condition in service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a neck condition that manifested within a year of separation from service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Does the Veteran have neck pain that produces a functional impairment or impacts his ability to perform occupational tasks? Why or why not?

The examiner is advised that the lack of medical evidence in the Veteran's medical records is not fatal to the claim and cannot be relied upon alone as a rationale for a negative medical opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete explanation for any opinion (i.e., a summary conclusion without a comprehensive explanation is not sufficient under the law). The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

4. Refer this matter for a VA examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed testicular condition.

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical questions:

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a testicular condition in service? Why or why not? See STRs showing treatment for testicular pain in July 2018 (with normal testicular ultrasound) and in October 2021 (following STD).

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have a testicular condition that manifested within a year of separation from service? Why or why not?

QUESTION:  Does the Veteran have testicular pain that produces a functional impairment or impacts his ability to perform occupational tasks? Why or why not?

The examiner is advised that the AOJ stated as a favorable finding that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, noting that STRs showed that the Veteran reported left testicular pain while in service. 

The examiner is advised that the lack of medical evidence in the Veteran's medical records is not fatal to the claim and cannot be relied upon alone as a rationale for a negative medical opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete explanation for any opinion (i.e., a summary conclusion without a comprehensive explanation is not sufficient under the law). The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lawrence Hubert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.