Citation Nr: A25031997
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240724-457152
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low middle back pain scoliosis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from September 2019 to September 2023.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which, in pertinent part, denied service connection for middle back pain scoliosis.  

In July 2024, VA received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), from the Veteran identifying the December 2023 rating decision denying service connection for low middle back pain scoliosis and electing the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for low middle back pain scoliosis.

The Veteran contends that he developed low middle back pain and scoliosis in service. See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Veteran's service treatment records document complaints of back pain on multiple occasions.  In July 2022, he reported a five month history of chronic back pain.  The clinician indicated that the Veteran's history and examination suggested mechanical back pain with minimal concern for disc pathology given negative radicular symptoms and straight test.  Imaging in August 2022 showed rightward curvature of the thoracic spine but the remaining bone and soft tissues were unremarkable.   The assessment was back pain consistent with muscular pain.  

At his April 2023 separation examination, the Veteran endorsed a history of recurrent back pain.  He reported that he had previously been on light duty "for my lower back."  His spine, however, was examined and determined to be normal.  A May 2023 Separation Health Assessment also notes the Veteran's report that he had experienced back pain in service which was treated with physical therapy.  He also indicated that "Told me I had a curvature on my spine."  

In connection with his claim, the Veteran was scheduled for a VA medical examination but, as best the Board can discern from the available record, he failed to report.  This is because on November 8, 2023, the Veteran telephoned VA and requested that the examination be rescheduled.  He explained that he had missed it because it had conflicted with his schedule.  He indicated that he would make the rescheduled examination.  See November 2023 VA Form 27-0820.  

The record then contains an Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation which indicated that an examination for the Veteran's back had been "Cancelled at Veteran/Servicemember's request" on December 6, 2023.  It is unclear whether the examination itself was scheduled for December 6th or whether the Veteran cancelled the examination on that day.  

On December 8, 2023, the Veteran called to reschedule the examination.  He indicated that he could not attend the examination as he was going to be out of town.   

That same day, the RO issued the rating decision now on appeal.  The RO found that the Veteran missed his scheduled VA examination without good cause and that the record therefore contained no evidence of a current back diagnosis.   

After reviewing the available record, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a predecisional duty to assist error.  The RO determined that an examination or opinion was necessary but failed to obtain it.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, when entitlement or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination, or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with paragraph (b) or (c) of this section as appropriate.  Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, death of an immediate family member, etc.  

In this case, as best the Board can determine from the available record, in advance of the rescheduled examination, the Veteran requested that it be rescheduled as he would be out of town.  Affording him the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's unavailability due to being out of town constituted good cause, particularly as it is unclear how much notice of the examination he was given.  

Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist error on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duty under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination in connection with the claim of service connection for low middle back pain scoliosis.  After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed low back condition had its inception during service or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury. 

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Matthews, Jessica L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.