Citation Nr: A25031874
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-465382
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle strain, including as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2001 to May 2005.  For his meritorious service, he was awarded the Army Commendation Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, and the Army Achievement Medal, among other awards and decorations.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024.  Therefore, the modernized review system, known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Under the Direct Review docket, the Board is authorized to review only the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the August 2024 rating decision.  The Board may not consider evidence presented outside of the timeframes discussed above.  Therefore, evidence provided following the August 2024 rating decision has not been considered by the Board in its decision on the claim.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that a Veteran is now generally entitled to a one year window within which the Veteran may elect to switch Board review dockets if desired by submitting a new, completed VA Form 10182.  A Veteran may also waive this docket switch window.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 205 (2024).  As noted above, the Veteran's rating decision and VA Form 10182 were both received in August 2024; thus, he currently has time pending within which he may switch dockets.  However, as the Board can remand this claim based on the evidence of record, the Board will proceed with adjudication as the remand will result in no prejudice to the Veteran.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle strain, including as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his conceded left ankle strain is due to his service or, in the alternative, is due to his service-connected right ankle disabilities.  See December 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran is currently service-connected for his right ankle disability rated at 20 percent effective December 2023.  See August 2024 Codesheet.

Establishing direct service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Shedden v. Principi, 381, F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that: (1) a current disability exists and (2) the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disability was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted).  Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability.  Id.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.  When a Veteran seeks benefits and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the Veteran prevails.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

As an initial matter, the August 2024 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis, an in-service event, and that the Veteran's right ankle disability is service-connected.  These favorable findings are binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  Therefore, the first and second elements of direct and the first element of secondary service connection are met.  As such, the questions pending before the Board are regarding the third element of direct service connection and the second element of secondary service connection.

The Board also notes that during the pendency of this claim, the AOJ found a duty to assist error requiring a new direct service connection medical opinion and an initial secondary service connection medical opinion.  See February 2024 VA Form 20-0999.  This finding by the AOJ was based on the original medical provider's dismissal of "the presence of disability because this is an absence of accompanying medical treatment records."  Additionally, the AOJ noted that the Veteran's lay testimony had not be taken into account.  Id.

The only VA ankle examination was provided in February 2024.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of left ankle strain.  In the evidence section, the examiner notes the Veteran's report of left ankle pain due to overcompensating for right ankle pain.  The examiner did not include a medical history that includes a specific discussion of the left ankle.  That said, the examiner does note that the condition, without specifying either right or left ankle, began during service as the result of a training injury in 2003.

Based on this February 2024 examination, the examiner provided a February 2024 medical opinion.  No secondary service connection medical opinion was provided.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left ankle condition was less likely than not related to the Veteran's service.  As rationale, the examiner noted review of multiple medical records which the examiner indicated found no diagnosis or treatment while in-service.

The Board finds the February 2024 VA medical opinion regarding direct service connection inadequate.  First, as noted by the AOJ, the examiner impermissibly equated the lack on continuous treatment with the continuous symptomology.  Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997) ("symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology").  

Second, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements of record or the indication within the VA examination of onset during service.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (when an examiner fails to address the Veteran's lay evidence, and the Board does not find the Veteran not credible or not competent to offer that lay evidence, a new exam is needed); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a Veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  

Third, the examiner's medical opinion is impermissibly conclusory such that that examiner provided no medical basis or citation to medical literature for his conclusion that the Veteran's left ankle is not related to service.  A mere recitation of the dates of the medical records reviewed is not sufficient for adjudicative purposes.  Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (medical examination reports are adequate "when they sufficiently inform the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion"); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory and lacks supporting analysis); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240-42 (2012) (stating that under caselaw "an unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context").  As this medical opinion is based on conclusory opinions, fails to address the Veteran's lay statements, and does not provide a medical basis or medical literature for the conclusory opinions, the Board finds the February 2024 medical opinion regarding direct service connection to be inadequate.

Following the AOJ's determination of a duty to assist error, a second VA left ankle medical opinion was provided by a new examiner in March 2024 specifically regarding direct service connection.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left ankle was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's service.  As rationale, the examiner noted there were no treatment records to include physical therapy, prescriptions, or referral to specialists "to establish chronicity of the condition."

The Board also finds the March 2024 VA medical opinion regarding direct service connection inadequate.  First, the examiner impermissibly equated the lack of continuous treatment with the continuous symptomology.  Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997) ("symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology").  

Second, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements of record or the indication within the VA examination of onset during service.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (when an examiner fails to address the Veteran's lay evidence, and the Board does not find the Veteran not credible or not competent to offer that lay evidence, a new exam is needed); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a Veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  

Third, the examiner's medical opinion is impermissibly conclusory such that the examiner provided no medical basis or citation to medical literature for his conclusion that the Veteran's left ankle is not related to service.  Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (medical examination reports are adequate "when they sufficiently inform the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion"); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory and lacks supporting analysis); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240-42 (2012) (stating that under caselaw "an unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context").  As this medical opinion is based on conclusory opinions, fails to address the Veteran's lay statements, and does not provide a medical basis or medical literature for the conclusory opinions, the Board finds the March 2024 medical opinion regarding direct service connection to be inadequate.

The Veteran was also provided a March 2024 medical opinion based on secondary service connection.  The examiner opined that the left ankle condition was less likely than not due to or the result of the service-connected right ankle.  As rationale, the examiner noted that there is no clear evidence from orthopedic medical literature that an injury to one joint would have a significant impact on the opposite joint.  Despite this, the examiner stated that "there is definitely symptoms of this now."  However, the examiner stated there is no evidence to support a primary causal association between the left and right ankle conditions.

The Board finds this March 2024 medical opinion based on secondary service connection inadequate.  First, this medical opinion relied on the conclusory determination that there is no evidence of a causal association.  The examiner cited to no medical literature upon which the Board can review this determination.  Additionally, the examiner did not provide an explanation of his statement that "there is definitely symptoms of this now" or how it impacted this determination.  Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (medical examination reports are adequate "when they sufficiently inform the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion"); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory and lacks supporting analysis); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240-42 (2012) (stating that under caselaw "an unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context").  

Second, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements of record.  Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (when an examiner fails to address the Veteran's lay evidence, and the Board does not find the Veteran not credible or not competent to offer that lay evidence, a new exam is needed); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a Veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  

Third, the examiner did not address the aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected condition.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion is inadequate when it fails to adequately address the question of aggravation); Jeffries v. McDonough, No 23-1339, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1503 (September 19, 2024) (when an examiner opines on secondary service connection, the examiner must directly address aggravation, separately from wither a service-connected disability caused the disability at issue.  In particular, the opinion must address whether the service-connected disability or disabilities aggravated any functional impairment associated with the non-service-connected disability); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252 (1992) (single-judge memorandum decisions may be cited or relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  As this medical opinion is based on conclusory opinions, fails to address the Veteran's lay statements, does not provide a medical basis or medical literature for the conclusory opinions, and does not address aggravation, the Board finds the March 2024 VA medical opinion regarding secondary service connection to be inadequate.

There are no other private or VA examinations or medical opinions of record.

While the Board regrets the additional delay this remand brings, there is no adequate medical opinion of record regarding direct or secondary service connection and the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate direct or secondary service connection medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  The Board finds this claim must be remanded to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error and to obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinion regarding direct and secondary service connection.

In providing this remand, the Board makes no determination, express or implied, regarding the credibility of any statements within the record.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination and medical opinion with a NEW clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle condition as it relates to direct and secondary service connection and as it relates to aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected disability.  The claims file, including this remand, must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner must document that a full and thorough review of the record, to include this remand, has been completed.

For the purpose of providing the opinion requested, please acknowledge, and discuss: 

(a.) Whether the Veteran's left ankle condition was incurred in or caused by active service.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's left ankle condition was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and injuries, as well as diagnoses provided to him by physicians, and that his reports (lay observations) must be considered in formulating the requested opinion.

If the Veteran's statements are discounted, the examiner should provide a full, medically explained reason for doing so.  The Veteran's statements or lay statements may not be discounted solely on the basis of the lack of confirmation in the medical or service records.

The examiner may not mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.?

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any and all opinions expressed.  If the examiner finds that the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and should indicate whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given the state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or that the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training.

When responding, regardless of whether favorably or unfavorably, it is essential the examiner provide rationale preferably citing to evidence in the file and/or accepted medical authority in order to support the conclusions asserted.  An unsupported medical opinion will carry negligible probative weight.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Daniel Stephens, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.