Citation Nr: A25031844
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231204-405553
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from an October 2023 rating decision that established eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits effective from April 16, 2023; the appeal is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's July 2016 appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated fee agreement, are valid.

2. In a rating decision issued in May 2020, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) awarded service connection for the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy, assigning initial disability ratings of 10 percent for each lower extremity, and 20 percent for each upper extremity, all of which were effective from February 20, 2015. No Notice of Disagreement with the May 2020 rating decision, nor any other request for review of this decision was filed, and it became final. 

3. Due to a special file review triggered by a change in Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regulations, an October 2023 rating decision determined that "Basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance based on permanent and total disability status is established from April 16, 2023." This determination was based on a regulatory change regarding application of the bilateral factor in determining disability ratings, and the increased rating became effective as of the date of the regulation change. The increased disability rating that resulted in the award of DEA benefits did not occur as part of a pending rating claim or appeal involving the bilateral upper and lower extremities. 

4. The October 2023 rating decision was the initial decision with respect to the case involving higher disability ratings for the Veteran's service-connected peripheral neuropathy of all extremities for the relevant period. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have not been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the October 2023 rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from January 1973 to December 1976. 

The appellant is the Veteran's former attorney, appointed to represent him in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from the October 2023 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the AOJ. The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's December 2023 Notice of Disagreement in January 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal. 

The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the October 2023; the attorney's appeal is denied.

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

Agents and attorneys may not charge fees for services provided before the date on which a claimant or appellant is provided notice of the AOJ's initial decision with respect to the case. This limitation does not apply to fees charged, allowed, or paid for services provided with respect to proceedings before a court. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). An attorney or agent may charge fees when past-due benefits are awarded after a Veteran has filed a supplemental claim because the decision after the supplemental claim is not the initial decision with respect to the case. See Military Veterans Advocacy v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 7 F.4th 1110, 1138-1141 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (MVA). A case, for fees purposes, encompasses all potential claims raised by the evidence, applying all relevant laws and regulations. See, e.g., Perciavalle v. McDonough, 74 F.4th 1374, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2023). 

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

The "benefit-of-the-doubt" rule is not for application in a contested claim such as this case because the benefit of the doubt cannot be given to both parties who have competing interests. See Elias v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 259, 263 (1997).

Analysis & Conclusion

The relevant factual timeline is as described in the findings of fact above. 

The Board finds that the attorney is not eligible for attorney fees based on the past-due benefits awarded by the October 2023 rating decision because this rating decision was the initial decision with respect to the matter of increased disability ratings for the Veteran's bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  

The Board notes for the record that a later June 2024 rating decision, not related to the present appeal, assigned a 100 percent disability rating for the Veteran's PTSD with substance use disorder, which in turn allowed the ancillary DEA benefits to be assigned from the much earlier effective date of March 5, 2015. In September 2024, the attorney was paid an attorney fee of approximately $34,000 based on that June 2024 rating decision and the past-due benefits that it awarded. See Fee decision (also called Summary of the Case), July 2024. However, the matter presently perfected for the Board's adjudication is only the matter of whether the appellant is eligible to receive an attorney fee based upon the past-due benefits from the October 2023 rating decision that established DEA benefits effective from the April 16, 2023, date of a regulation change regarding the bilateral factor's application in the calculation of disability ratings. The Board now turns to the analysis of that question alone.  

First, the Board finds that the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the October 2023 rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision increased the Veteran's combined rate of disability compensation from 90 percent to 100 percent, based on application of the bilateral factor, effective from the April 16, 2023, date of the change in the regulation governing how the bilateral factor was to be applied. 

As a matter of clarification, the Board notes that the October 2023 rating decision at the center of this fee appeal facially purports to merely adjudicate the Veteran's basic eligibility to receive certain educational benefits. However, basic eligibility for DEA benefits is predicated on the establishment of a permanent and total disability rating, and could not have been granted without the increase in an underlying disability to reach a 100 percent permanent and total rating. Therefore, although the October 2023 rating decision does not explicitly describe the award of an increased disability rating for the bilateral upper and lower peripheral neuropathy disabilities, these are the only of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to which the bilateral factor could apply warranting an increase based on the date of the regulation change pertinent to the bilateral factor. (The only other service-connected disabilities are an acquired psychiatric disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and diabetes mellitus, none of which could involve application of the bilateral factor as they do not involve paired or bilateral extremities.) Also, most notably in terms of an attorney fee eligibility determination, eligibility for DEA benefits itself does not produce past-due benefits that may be subject to fees. Instead, the implicit increased rating matter within the October 2024 rating decision, underlying the DEA eligibility matter, is the ultimate basis of the retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits, and thus, the matter upon which this fee appeal is also based. 

In that regard, the question remaining before the Board is when the October 2023 rating decision is considered to be an increased rating determination for the Veteran's service-connected peripheral neuropathy disabilities (as the basis for the DEA eligibility that was explicitly awarded), would the past-due benefits derived from that increased rating decision qualify for the payment of an attorney fee. The Board finds that it does not. 

The attorney argues that fees based on the October 2023 rating decision are warranted because the attorney had represented the Veteran in his other claims for service connection for sleep apnea, tinnitus, and bilateral hearing loss, and for an increased rating for PTSD. Attorney's statement accompanying VA Form 10182, December 2023. The attorney also states that the appeal and argument advanced in support of the Veteran's July 2020 appeal for an increased rating for PTSD, including TDIU, were "encompassed" in the eventual award of a permanent and total disability rating as assigned by the October 2023 rating decision. Id.  The Board concedes that the permanent and total disability rating assigned, by definition, is based on a combined disability rating that includes all of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. However, the attorney misconstrues that to mean that an attorney fee may then be charged merely because a claim in which the attorney provided services, later combines with other disabilities to ultimately reach a total disability rating. 

Instead, the governing statutory and regulatory authorities make clear that in VA disability claims adjudications, attorney fees are not warranted when past-due monetary benefits arise from the AOJ's initial adjudication with respect to the particular case (claim or benefit involved). See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). In plain terms, Congress established this system because "Congress doesn't want veterans to pay fees before VA denies them a benefit. But once VA denies a claim, attorneys can be compensated for helping veterans get the benefits they deserve." Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336, *10 (Mar. 13, 2025). One might also think of this as VA having the first opportunity to reach a grant of the benefit sought on their own, without attorney or representative costs to the Veteran, and then, only if VA denies the claim, a fee may be charged in correcting that denial.

In this instance, the disability ratings were assigned for the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy disabilities in a May 2020 rating decision. The Veteran did not appeal the propriety of those assigned ratings, nor was an increased rating claim later filed to seek a higher disability rating based on a worsening of the effects of the Veteran's service-connected peripheral neuropathies. Rather, the October 2023 rating decision awarded higher ratings for these conditions, without any claim or other action by the Veteran or his attorney to trigger the review, but rather based on an automatic review necessitated by a change in regulations as to how the bilateral factor is applied in determining certain disability ratings. As such, the October 2023 rating decision was the first decision to adjudicate the proper rating for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathies following the regulation change of April 16, 2023, and the AOJ granted that benefit in the first instance. The October 2023 rating decision was, therefore, the initial decision with respect to the case, and an attorney fee may not be charged, allowed, or paid for services provided before the date of notice of the initial decision with respect to the case. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). 

Given these facts, the attorney's appeal for eligibility to the payment of fees based on past-due benefits derived from the October 2023 rating decision must be denied.   

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.