Citation Nr: A25031600
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231212-401891
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an extraschedular rating in excess of 10 percent before April 4, 2017, for bilateral hearing loss is denied. 

Entitlement to an extraschedular rating in excess of 50 percent since April 4, 2017, for bilateral hearing loss is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to a TDIU on an extraschedular basis prior to April 4, 2017, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The symptomatology and manifestations caused by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss before April 4, 2017, does not present an exceptional or unusual disability picture productive of marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization. 

2. The symptomatology and manifestations caused by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss since April4, 2017, does not present an exceptional or unusual disability picture productive of marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an extraschedular rating in excess of 10 percent before April 4, 2017 for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38U.S.C. §§1155, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§3.102, 3.321 (b)(1).

2. The criteria for an extraschedular rating in excess of 50 percent since April 4, 2017 for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38U.S.C. §§1155, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§3.102, 3.321 (b)(1).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in active-duty service from July 1968 to July 1974.  The Veteran served in Vietnam and has been awarded a Combat Infantry Badge and a Bronze Star.

The Board denied these claims in an April 2021 decision, which the Veteran appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (Court). An October 2022 Memorandum Decision issued by that Court vacated the Board's decision and remanded the matter to the Board, which in turn remanded the matter for additional development in May 2023.

Pursuant to that development, the Veteran was service-connected for an acquired psychiatric disability secondary to bilateral hearing loss. The claims for entitlement to extraschedular evaluations for bilateral hearing loss for the two periods herein on appeal were again before the Board in March 2024, at which time the Board denied the claims. The Veteran again appealed to the Court which, pursuant to a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR), vacated the Board decision on the basis of the Board's failure to consider a TDIU claim prior to April 4, 2017, and has returned the matter to the Board for action consistent with the JMR. 

1. Entitlement to an extraschedular rating in excess of 10 percent before April 4, 2017, for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

2. Entitlement to an extraschedular rating in excess of 50 percent since April 4, 2017, for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based, as far as can practically be determined, on the average impairment of earning capacity.?38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §?4.1. Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by Diagnostic Codes.?38?C.F.R. §?4.27. When rating the Veteran's service-connected disability, the entire medical history must be borne in mind. Schafrath v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?589?(1991). The Court has held that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Hart v. Mansfield,?21?Vet. App.?505?(2007). Separate compensable evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. See Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119, 126?(1999).?

Regulations require that where there is a question as to which of two evaluations is to be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.?38?C.F.R. §?4.7.

As an initial matter, the Veteran has not argued, and the evidence does not demonstrate, that the Veteran's hearing loss as reflected in VA audiological examinations warrants increased evaluations on a schedular basis. The instant claim, for disability ratings on an extraschedular basis, involves a separate set of criteria. 

The Court has set out a three-part test, based on the language of38C.F.R. §3.321(b)(1), for determining whether a Veteran is entitled to an extraschedular rating: (1) the established schedular criteria must be inadequate to describe the severity and symptoms of the claimant's disability (and if so, the inquiry ends there); (2) if the established schedular criteria are inadequate to describe the severity and symptoms of the claimant's disability, then, the case must present other indicia of an exceptional or unusual disability picture, such as marked interference with employment or frequent periods of hospitalization; and (3) the award of an extraschedular disability rating must be in the interest of justice. Thun v. Peake,22 Vet. App. 111(2008), aff'd, Thun v. Shinseki,572 F.3d 1366(Fed. Cir. 2009). Therefore, initially, there must be a comparison between the level of severity and symptomatology of the claimant's service-connected disability with the established criteria found in the rating schedule for that disability.

The Veteran is in receipt of a 50 percent evaluation for bilateral hearing loss from April 4, 2017, and a 10 percent evaluation prior to that date. The instant claim for increase was filed February 6, 2006, and the Veteran avers he is entitled to higher evaluations on an extraschedular basis for both periods therefrom. 

The Board acknowledges the March 2020 private vocational assessment wherein the vocational expert indicates the Veteran's capacity to function in an occupational setting is limited due to his hearing loss, manifesting as difficulty hearing speech and communicating. The Board also notes the VA examinations of record which reflect similar complaints; for instance, the Veteran has indicated on several occasions that even with use of his prescribed hearing aids, he is unable to hear most speech. A July 2018 VA examiner noted the Veteran's complaint that even with his hearing aid, he has difficulty hearing television programs. However, the Board observes that neither any VA examiner nor the private vocational expert recorded symptoms related to the Veteran's hearing disability that did not involve the loss of hearing ability.

Critically, functional impairment due to hearing loss causing difficulty conducting conversations, or difficulty hearing others/hearing the television, is the type of impairment specifically considered in the schedular rating criteria. Doucette v. Shulkin,28 Vet. App. 366, 371-72(2017) (difficulty in distinguishing sounds in a crowded environment, locating the source of sounds, understanding conversational speech, hearing the television, and using the telephone are each a manifestation of difficulty hearing or understanding speech, which is contemplated by the schedular rating criteria for hearing loss). Moreover, the Veteran has not suggested, nor does the record show, that the Veteran experiences some other type of impairment not contemplated by the applicable rating criteria, separate from his already service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the evaluation of which condition is not herein on appeal. In sum, as explained above, the manifestations of hearing loss of which the Veteran complains all concern his inability to hear, which symptom is contemplated by the rating criteria. In other words, the occupational impacts of hearing loss, inasmuch as they concern inability to hear speech and difficulty with communication, are already contemplated by the schedular criteria for hearing loss and do not warrant extraschedular evaluation.

On that basis, the claim for increased evaluations for bilateral hearing loss on an extraschedular basis must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a TDIU on an extraschedular basis prior to April 4, 2017, is remanded.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), remand is proper for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

While the Veteran in this case does not meet the schedular threshold for TDIU entitlement prior to April 4, 2017, where evidence exists tending to show that service-connected disability renders a given Veteran incapable of securing and maintaining gainful employment, TDIU entitlement may be available on an extraschedular basis. In such cases, the Board is not at liberty to adjudicate the matter in the first instance, but must refer it to the Director of Compensation Services for an advisory opinion. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b). 

Because the Veteran has introduced competent evidence tending to indicate his bilateral hearing loss affected his capacity to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment prior to April 4, 2017, the Board finds it necessary to refer the matter to the Director of Compensation Services for an advisory opinion on extraschedular TDIU entitlement in order to satisfy this regulatory duty. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer the claims file to the Director of Compensation Services for an advisory opinion on the Veteran's claim for TDIU entitlement on an extraschedular basis prior to April 4, 2017. 

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Z. Sahraie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.