Citation Nr: A25031108
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240823-468585
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis to include as secondary to service-connected asthma, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1987 to December 1993. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of dermatitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for dermatitis is remanded.

The Veteran filed a VA 21-526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim in September 2023, seeking service connection for a skin condition and for asthma.  The Veteran asserted that he suffers "from a constant skin condition that covers my hands in painful blisters/sores.  These started shortly after my separation and continue to flare up several times per year." Notably, the Veteran did not limit his claim to presumptive Gulf War exposures.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024. The VA examiner found that there was no chronic skin condition mentioned in the Veteran's claim file. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with dermatitis, unspecified. The examiner listed the risk factors of atopic dermatitis which included hay fever or asthma. The examiner noted in the Medical History section that the Veteran noticed rashes to both his hands shortly after service and that his primary care physician treated the rashes with a high potency steroid cream. The VA examiner provided a medical opinion only for toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), opining that "dermatitis is not considered a presumptive condition to Gulf War exposures, and I was unable to find conclusive research stating a causal relationship between TERA Gulf War and dermatitis." The VA examiner did not address direct service connection.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) document a history of seasonal allergies, one of the risk factors mentioned by the VA examiner in the March 2024 examination. 

Based on the lay statements of the Veteran and the potential risk factors for dermatitis mention in the Veteran's STRs, the Board finds that the March 2024 VA examination was inadequate, because it did not address direct service connection. Where VA provides the Veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Generally, a medical opinion should address the appropriate theories of entitlement. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123-24 (2007).  A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

Because the March 2024 Rating Decision relied on an inadequate examination, there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected through remand. 

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The Veteran must be afforded a VA examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed skin disability. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations that are deemed necessary by the VA examiner should be performed. The claims folder, including a copy of this remand, the Veteran's lay statements, and private medical records, should be made available and be reviewed by the examiner.

Following a complete review of the record, the examiner is asked to:

a. Confirm a current diagnosis as to the Veteran's claimed skin disability.

b. Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed skin disability originated during, or is etiologically related to, active-duty service.

c. The examiner is also asked to specifically address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and symptoms associated with the claimed skin disability.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered. In doing so, the examiner is specifically asked to address the Veteran's lay reports of onset for his skin disability, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards in Southwest Asia. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to mere speculation.

 

 

I. Cannaday

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Newton, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.