Citation Nr: A25031065
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-448138
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran has active service from January 2007 to May 2009.  

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA was implemented effective February 19, 2019 and automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019.  See 38 C.F.R. §3.2400(a)(1).

The rating decision was issued after the implementation of AMA. A May 2024 VA Form 10182 was received. Thus, this decision is drafted in accordance with AMA. 

The Veteran elected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge (05/23/2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement).    

Under the AMA, when a claimant seeks appellate review through the Board's Direct Review docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

In general, the Board is bound by favorable findings in the Rating Decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801 (a). Here, the Veteran's diagnosis of sleep apnea is a favorable finding. Additionally, the Veteran is service connected for the primary disability of unspecified anxiety disorder.

Additionally, the RO found that new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudication of the Veteran's claim for sleep apnea, originally denied in August 2018, with the denial subsequently confirmed and continued (10/07/2023 Rating Decision - Narrative, pg. 2). The Board is bound by this favorable finding and will not further address the matter of whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for sleep apnea in July 2021, and December 2021. Accompanying both examinations are negative nexus opinions, that for reasons set forth below are not adequate and require remand.  

After reviewing medical records and performing a physical exam, the July 2021 examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, noting that there are no medical records showing diagnosis or treatment for sleep apnea during active duty (07/14/2021	C&P Exam, pg. 2). 

This examination did not consider the Veteran's in-service complaints of sleep disturbances. The Veteran was recommended for sleep disorder in September 2007, seen for sleep complaints in April 2008, and May 2008, and prescribed sleep medication during service (04/24/2009 STR - Medical, pgs. 4, 27, 33, and 63). 

As these encounters were not addressed, the July 2021 opinion is not grounded in an accurate review of the Veteran's medical history and cannot be relied upon in making a decision in this case. 

The December 2021 examiner addressed secondary service connection, finding no association between the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disorder and sleep apnea. The examiner explained sleep apnea is due to a physical tissue collapse, and not related to a mental condition.  The examiner noted the Veteran's report that his sleep apnea began in 2008, but did not address in-service complaints of sleep issues. Here too, this omission prevents the Board from relying on the December 2021 in making a decision in this case. 

As a separate issue, the Veteran's VA exam for anxiety reveals the Veteran also has a diagnosis of cannabis use disorder caused by his unspecified anxiety disorder (12/19/2021 C&P Exam, pg. 2). 

In a September 2018 VA exam for mental health notes the Veteran's report of fluctuations in sleep and depressed mood/irritability are consistent with cannabis withdrawal (09/25/2018 C&P Exam, pg. 1). Whether or not the Veteran's cannabis use, associated with his anxiety has resulted in sleep disability, to include sleep apnea was a question suggested by the record, not addressed by the examiners or the RO in making its decision. 

The Board must remand AMA appeals to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a)). In this case, while the examinations in question were conducted prior to the claim on appeal, the AOJ's failure to identify and correct the deficiencies in such examinations constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Thus, remand is required for a new examination, so that the foregoing aspects of the Veteran's medical history may be addressed. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any existing sleep disorder, to include diagnosed sleep apnea. The examiner should review the entire claims file and this remand in conjunction with the examination.

The examiner should render an opinion as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (i.e., a likelihood of at least close to 50 percent or more) that any currently diagnosed sleep disability is a result of service or any incident occurring during service. 

The examiner must opine whether any existing sleep disability, to include diagnosed sleep apnea, is at least as likely as not related to in-service treatment from September 2007, April 2008, and May 2008, and/or prescribed sleep medication during service (04/24/2009 STR - Medical, pgs. 4, 27, 33, and 63).  

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is at least as likely as not proximately due to service-connected mental health disabilities as contended. In this regard, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's cannabis use disorder noted in the December 2021 VA examination for mental health as being secondary to the service-connected anxiety disorder. 

The examiner should address whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected mental health disability, to include cannabis use disorder, has aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea beyond its natural progression. If aggravation is found, the examiner should identify baseline level of disability prior to such aggravation.   

The examiner should reconcile any conflicting medical evidence of record to the extent possible.

The examiner is reminded to consider the Veteran's lay reports, and a reason must be provided if the Veteran's lay reports are rejected. Lay statements cannot be rejected solely due to a lack of medical documentation. If there is a medical reason to accept or not accept the Veteran's contentions, the examiner should provide them.  If the absence of medical documentation is relevant, the relevance must be explained because the absence of evidence is not positive evidence of the existence or non-existence of an event.

The examiner must provide all findings, along with a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and explain why this is so, (e.g., whether an opinion is beyond what any medical practitioner might be able to provide, based on the evidence of record and current medical knowledge).

If the examiner is able to gather additional understanding or information regarding the circumstances surrounding any inservice injury or event, the examiner should include that information in his remarks.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Myers, Pamella

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.