Citation Nr: A25031770
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240417-433463
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied. 

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to service connection for alcohol, opioid, stimulant, and cannabis use disorders (acquired psychiatric condition) is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a right-hand fracture is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for chronic hemorrhoids is remanded. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record does not show a current diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from June 1995 to August 1996. 

This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from November 2023, December 2023, and February 2024 rating decisions from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  In April 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, residuals of a right-hand fracture, chronic hemorrhoids, and ED, any evidence the Board could not consider regarding these conditions will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may also be granted for any disability diagnosed after discharge from service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

In general, service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Secondary service connection may also be established for a disability which is aggravated by a service-connected disability.  In order to prevail on secondary service connection, the record must show (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) competent evidence establishing that the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the nonservice-connected disability.  See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis or etiology when: (1) a lay person is competent to identify a medical condition; (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

A layperson, such as the Veteran, is competent to report on matters observed or within his or her personal knowledge, to include the occurrence of injury, and as to the nature, onset, and continuity of symptoms experienced or observed.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The Board, however, retains the discretion to determine the credibility and probative value of all evidence of record, including lay evidence.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another.  38?C.F.R. § 4.3.  When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b).  When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits.  38?U.S.C. §?5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from bilateral hearing loss due to his military service.  The claim must be denied, as the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current condition.

A VA examination was provided in October 2023.  There, it was found that the Veteran's left ear hearing was normal.  The Veteran's right ear was shown to have hearing loss; however, it did not meet the VA criteria to be considered a disability.  See October 2023 C&P Exam. 

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §3.385, impaired hearing is considered to be a VA disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.

Upon examination, the pure tone threshold, in decibels, was reported as follows:

 	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

Right Ear 	5	15	10	10	30

Left Ear 	10	10	20	15	20

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 96 percent in the right ear and 94 percent in the left ear.  See October 2023 C&P Exam.  Therefore, the Board finds that the VA examiner correctly found that the Veteran's right and left ear auditory thresholds did not establish hearing loss as defined by VA criteria.  A review of the record does not show any medical evidence that contradicts the findings of the examination. 

The Board thus finds that entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss must be denied.  The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (holding that interpretation of sections 1110 and 1131 of the statute as requiring the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary).  Evidence must show that the Veteran currently has the disability for which benefits are being claimed.

As there is no medical evidence of record showing a current diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss, the evidence persuasively favors against the claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim and the claim must be denied.  Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition. 

While the Board regrets the delay, a remand is required.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board is to remand an issue for further development if the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In the present case, the Veteran submitted a claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition.  In doing so, he identified psychiatric symptoms that began following a deployment.  He noted the symptoms were caused by "anger at the [United States Navy (USN)] for mandating long working hours and calling him to work on his day off."  The Veteran "blamed the USN for his problems, stating that if it weren't for the Navy, he would not be having any difficulties with his marriage or mood."  He went on to state that he did not have substance abuse problems in service, but that his substance abuse issues began shortly after leaving his service.  See December 2023 C&P Exam. 

A VA examination was provided in December 2023, where the Veteran was diagnosed with an alcohol use disorder, opiod use disorder, stimulant use disorder, and cannabis use disorder.  It was found that the symptoms of these conditions overlapped and could not be distinguished from one another.  The VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, stating that these conditions arose after service and thus were not caused by service.  Id.  The Board finds that this opinion is inadequate, as it did not address the Veteran's argument that mental health conditions began in service, and that it was only after leaving service that he began using stimulants due to his experience in service.  An opinion is inadequate if it does not consider all relevant evidence of record, including lay evidence.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Furthermore, the nexus opinion relied on lack of evidence of a condition in service; the lack of evidence alone is not enough to deny a claim for benefits.  See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2000).

The Board finds that this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, as, when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). As such, a remand is required to obtain an adequate opinion.

2. Service connection for residuals of a right-hand fracture.

The Veteran contends that, due to his acquired psychiatric condition, he punched a door and fractured his hand.  See July 2023 VA 21-4138.  A VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's residuals of a right-hand fracture were secondary to a mental health condition, as the mechanical reason for fractures were physical injuries and as such there was no direct relationship between a fractured hand and a mental health condition.  See October 2023 C&P Exam.

The Board finds that this opinion is inadequate, as it did not address the Veteran's argument that his acquired psychiatric condition caused the action which led to his hand fracture, rather that there was a mechanical connection between his right-hand fracture and his mental health symptoms.  As in the present case, an opinion is inadequate if it does not consider all relevant evidence of record, including lay evidence.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  The Board finds that this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, as when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Additionally, while the Board notes that the Veteran is not service connected for the underlying condition, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service-connection for an acquired psychiatric condition has been remanded.  Given that the medical opinion provided by VA was inadequate, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service-connection for residuals of a right-hand fracture remains inextricably intertwined with the pending claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition.  See Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 177 (2009) (en banc) (explaining that claims are inextricably intertwined where the adjudication of one claim could have a significant impact on the adjudication of another claim).  Consideration of this issue must therefore be deferred pending the outcome of the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (where a claim is inextricably intertwined with another claim, the claims must be adjudicated together in order to enter a final decision on the matter).

3. Service connection for chronic hemorrhoids.

The Veteran contends that, while his hemorrhoids predated his entrance into military service, this condition was aggravated by his acquired psychiatric condition.  See July 2023 VA 21-4138; see also August 2024 Appellate Brief. 

The AOJ denied the claim, without providing an examination, purely on the grounds of the condition predating service.  The Board finds that there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, as the AOJ did not consider the Veteran's theory of entitlement in its decision. 

The Board further finds that a remand is required because the claim is inextricably intertwined with the pending claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that issues are inextricably intertwined and must be considered together when a decision concerning one could have a significant impact on the other).

4. Service connection for ED.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from ED due to his military service.  In this, a VA examination was scheduled.  In doing so, VA determined that the Veteran did not need to report for the examination, and that the examiner should determine whether or not the Veteran had ED, and if so whether or not it was caused by Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERA).  See December 2023 Exam Request.  VA then informed the Veteran that the examination was cancelled, as he did not attend.  See February 2024 Exam Request.  The claim was subsequently denied, and the Veteran indicated that, not only did he not receive notification of the examination, but that he was willing to attend an examination if provided.  See August 2024 Appellate Brief.  A review of the record does not show evidence that the Veteran was notified of the examination. 

The Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred. First, because the examination request indicated that the Veteran did not need to report for the examination, and that an opinion could have been furnished in place of an examination based on a review of the claims file, it was in error to adjudicate the claim without first obtaining an adequate medical advisory opinion. Secondly, and in contradiction to the examination request, the AOJ indicated that an in-person examination was required, given that the claim was denied following the Veteran not appearing at the scheduled examination. However, the record does not show an examination notification letter or other documentation informing the Veteran of the examination date. 

As the Veteran has indicated his willingness to attend an in-person examination and the record does not show he was notified of a scheduled hearing, the Board concludes that the appeal should be remanded to provide the Veteran with another opportunity to attend a VA examination to evaluate his ED.  After being provided with notification of the time and place of an examination, should the Veteran fail to attend, then a medical advisory opinion should be provided. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Arrange for a VA addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric condition.  The examiner should opine about whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed physiatric condition is related to any aspect of the Veteran's military service.  Should the examiner determine that an examination is necessary to provide this opinion, such should be arranged.  

2. Arrange for a VA addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right-hand condition.  The examiner should opine about whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed hand condition is related to his diagnosed mental health conditions or to any service-connected condition.  Should the examiner determine that an examination is necessary to provide this opinion, such should be arranged.  

3. Arrange for a VA examination from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hemorrhoids.  The examiner should opine about whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hemorrhoids are related to his military service, to include whether any such condition was aggravated beyond the natural scope of its progression by any of the Veteran's service-connected conditions. 

4. Arrange for a VA examination from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's ED. The examiner should opine about whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed ED is related to the Veteran's military service, to include any TERA exposure. 

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Abels, Associate Counsel.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.