Citation Nr: A25031206
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240429-436333
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for migraine headaches is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

Although the Veteran has been diagnosed with a migraine headache disability, and has reported an in-service head injury, the headaches he has experienced since service have mostly (all but one or two cases) been medically attributed to non-service causes (e.g. the flu, post-concussive syndrome after a motor vehicle accident, muscular tension, dental problems, obstructive sleep apnea, and blood pressure issues, including the medication Amlodipine to treat the blood pressure issues); in addition, a November 2023 VA medical examiner provided a negative causal linkage opinion, explaining that "_____."

 CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria have not been met for service connection for migraine headaches.

REASONS OR BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2002 to March 2005. The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is petroleum supply specialist. See DD Form 214.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), appealing the February 2024 denial to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) via the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot, by law, be considered as evidence by the Board in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.   

Service Connection for Migraine Headaches    

Legal Criteria

In general, service connection is warranted for a disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Lay testimony is competent to establish the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of a disability or symptoms of a disability subject to lay observation. 38 U.S.C. § 1153 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d a1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When VA provides a medical examination and opinion, it must ensure that these are legally adequate to rely on to adjudicate the claim. Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 311 (2007). An adequate medical opinion must be based on an accurate factual premise and "must support its conclusions with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions." See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008) ("most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning").

Whenever there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the veteran will receive the benefit of the doubt. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). When the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) 

Factual Background

In September 2001, the Veteran underwent an enlistment examination. In the Report of Medical Examination, there was no indication of any head or neurological abnormalities. During service, he was "prechecking his vehicle and fell off it and landed on [his] head" (as reported in his later July 2023 initial claim). In August 2004, the Veteran underwent a medical assessment related to separation. There was no indication of any head or neurological abnormalities.

The Veteran reported that he was treated in April 2005 (that is, eight months after service) for migraine headaches, although there is no medical evidence in the record reflecting this treatment. See July 2023 Initial Claim.

The Veteran was treated for headaches was in March 2012 when he was reported to be experiencing flu-like symptoms. He was treated for headaches again in April 2016. 

In September 2016, the Veteran was involved in a motor vehicle accident where he hit his head on the steering wheel of his car. He reported that he felt fine immediately after the accident but then developed a headache. A CT scan of the head showed no acute findings. He was diagnosed with post-concussive syndrome (mild traumatic brain injury). 

In February 2018, he was treated for headache, fever, general malaise and other symptoms. He was diagnosed with influenza B and hypertension. 

In March 2018, he presented to the emergency room due to elevated blood pressure and chest pain. He noted that he had started developing high blood pressure several months before and was taking Amlodipine. The treatment notes diagnosed hypertension and noted that the veteran had been "getting headaches intermittently since b[lood ]p[ressure] issues started." The physician assessed that the intermittent headaches might have been caused by the medication Amlodipine and that the headaches might improve with a lower dose of that medication.

In October 2018, the Veteran again presented to the emergency room with lightheadedness, chest pain, dizziness and headaches. The physician noted that it "seems to be a muscular headache, very mild at this time." 

In January 2020, the Veteran presented to the emergency department for a right sided headache behind his eye that started out mild and had increased in severity. He reported sensitivity to light and sound. A CT scan of the brain indicated no acute intracranial hemorrhage. The headache resolved with Tylenol.

The Veteran returned to the emergency room in February 2020 with a dull right retro-orbital pressure with fluctuating intensity that he had been experiencing for two weeks. He described the pain as continuous pressure in his head, without radiating pain. The physician assessed him with a migraine. 

In May 2020, the Veteran underwent a neurology consultation. The neurologist noted that the Veteran believed the headaches were triggered by lack of sleep and had improved with more rest. The Veteran also noted that the headache was relieved after a tooth extraction. The neurologist also noted that the Veteran "had a onetime headache with photophobia referred to as a 'migraine' at 12 to 13 years old but cannot recall trigger then or medical evaluation." The plan included a possible MRI of the brain if the headaches continued. The neurologist assessed "headaches with [right] periorbital location and autonomic neuralgiform features lasting 3 to 5 minutes twice a day for around 3 months now gone." The working diagnosis was "trigeminal/autonomic headache: cluster vs. SUNCT."

At a September 2020 neurological follow up appointment, the Veteran reported that the headache had resolved since the tooth extraction in February 2020. 

In December 2020, the Veteran underwent a consultation to rule out sleep apnea. The examiner noted that "he has been having headaches and [was] evaluated by neurology after eliciting a history of witnessed snoring and apnea." 

In June 2021, the Veteran presented for treatment of a mild headache, dizziness, and lightheadedness. He reported that he had not taken his antihypertensive medication that day. The Veteran reported he had been experiencing these symptoms for a week. In July 2021, he presented again to the primary care doctor with the same symptoms. The primary care physician noted "concern for hypoglycemia episodes." A note indicated: "Patient believes his headaches occur with poor sleep." 

In July 2023, the Veteran again reported headaches to his primary care physician, who noted that the Veteran "was experiencing [headaches] a while back but now recently they have returned." A clinician recommended cutting back on Sumatriptan to avoid overuse and also starting daily supplements. 

Also in July 2023, the Veteran submitted an initial claim for service connection for migraine headaches, in which he reported an in-service injury, explaining that, during service, he was "prechecking his vehicle and fell off it and landed on my head[,] not knowing the impact it would cause."

In November 2023, a VA examination was completed via "acceptable clinical evidence" (ACE) and a telephone interview with the Veteran, to address toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) as a possible cause for the Veteran's headaches. The examiner diagnosed "migraine including migraine variants." The Veteran reported that the onset of his migraines was 2019 (that is, 15 years after service), and that the headaches persisted and stayed the same. His treatment plan included over the counter medications and sumatriptan. The Veteran reported headache pain localized to the right side of his head with light and sound sensitivity. The headaches typically lasted less than one day. The Veteran reported characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-headache pain, but "with less frequent attacks." He also reported completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain "with less frequent attacks." The examiner noted that with the prostrating attacks the Veteran had "to go into a dark room and rest which impacts their ability to work." The examiner did not identify the evidence reviewed, only noting "HA" in the evidence comments.  

The November 2023 examiner provided a medical causal linkage opinion that the Veteran's migraine headaches were less likely than not caused by TERA because the examiner "[saw] no exposures in the records that would cause chronic headaches." However, when asked to specify the reported activity resulting in exposure, the examiner indicated the Veteran's MOS in "petroleum supply." 

In December 2023, the examiner clarified why a negative opinion was provided despite acknowledging the Veteran had petroleum exposure. The examiner explained: "Per available literature, petroleum exposure has not been shown to cause chronic headaches[.]"

On January 13, 2024, the Veteran presented to the emergency room with a headache. The clinician noted that the overall presentation was consistent with a tension headache. The diagnosis of "Cluster headaches, migraine headaches" was also considered. On January 26, 2024, the Veteran presented again to the emergency department reporting an intermittent headache that had worsened in the past 24 hours. The emergency room clinician diagnosed "acute on chronic headache, orthostatic dizziness." 

In February 2024, the AOJ denied service connection for migraines. The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had a diagnosis of migraine headaches but found no evidence of an in-service injury that could be linked to the current migraine headache diagnosis. The AOJ also conceded TERA based on the Veteran's MOS of petroleum specialist. 

In April 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement appealing the February 2024 rating decision, noting that he was "still experiencing the symptoms and didn't get evaluated in person." 

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that he has a migraine disability that is the result of his military service. In his July 2023 initial claim, he stated that, during service, he was "prechecking his vehicle and fell off it and landed on my head not knowing the impact it would cause." In his April 2024 Notice of Disagreement, he asserted that he was still experiencing symptoms. He believed he should have an in-person evaluation, but he only received a telephone interview.

As for a current disability, the rating decision on appeal included a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of a migraine disability. Therefore, the first element of service connection (a current disability) is established.

As for an in-service injury, the rating decision on appeal conceded that the Veteran had toxic exposures based on his MOS as petroleum specialist. In addition, in his initial claim, the Veteran provided competent and credible statements describing a head injury caused by a fall from a vehicle during service. Therefore, the second element of service connection (an in-service injury) is established in two ways: first, the Veteran's head injury and, second, his petroleum exposure.

The crux of the issue in this appeal is whether there is a causal link (nexus) between the Veteran's migraine disability and either his in-service head injury or his in-service petroleum exposure.

As for the head injury from falling off his vehicle during service, the medical evidence does not indicate that migraine (or other types of) headaches were at least as likely as not caused by or related to this in-service injury. Although the Veteran reported several headaches after service, in almost all cases, these headaches were medically attributed to a specific cause that was not related to service, such as the flu (March 2012, February 2018), hitting his head on the steering wheel of his car during a motor vehicle accident (September 2016), blood pressure medication (March 2018), muscle tension (October 2018), tooth extraction (February 2020, May 2020, September 2020), snoring and sleep apnea (December 2020), and hypoglycemia and poor sleep (June 2021, July 2021).

There are some reports of headaches (including migraine headaches) that do not have specific causes attributed, however, the related medical evidence and the context in which these reports appear also fail to indicate that these represent a headache condition or a pattern of headache symptoms that might be attributed to a service-related cause. For example, in April 2016, when the Veteran was treated for a headache that resolved with Tylenol, it was in the context of seeking emergency department treatment for the primary complaint of "[two] days of epigastric pain with fever/chills and myalgias." The Veteran tested positive for influenza and was released from the emergency department and advised to follow up with a primary care physician.

As for the Veteran's in-service petroleum exposure, the November 2023 opinion and December 2023 addendum are the only evidence that address this issue. 

The examiner reviewed the relevant evidence and interviewed the Veteran by telephone. Although the Veteran asserts that he should have been examined or interviewed in person, he has not explained how this would have changed the situation. Given that there was no visible injury or injury residuals to observe, the Board cannot infer how the lack of an in-person examination was harmful to the Veteran's claim. To put it another way: in this situation, the medical professional's role was to obtain information from the Veteran, not to make visual observations. Furthermore, there is no indication that the examiner discounted the Veteran's statements about the history of his headache condition or the severity of his symptoms based on the fact that it was a telephone interview and not an in-person interview or examination.

The November 2023 examiner provided a negative causal linkage opinion and a December 2023 clarification, in which the examiner explained that medical literature did not support the conclusion that petroleum exposure could be a cause for headaches. The November 2023 opinion initially appears to be contradictory, because the examiner stated that they "[saw] no exposures in the records that would cause chronic headaches" while also acknowledging that the Veteran worked in "petroleum supply." However, the December 2023 addendum provided clarification, when the examiner explained: "Per available literature, petroleum exposure has not been shown to cause chronic headaches[.]" In other words, in the November 2023 opinion, the examiner was not stating that there was no toxic exposure; rather, the examiner was stating that there was no toxic exposure that would cause headaches. This is not the clearest statement, to be sure, but the addendum clarifies what the examiner meant, that is, that there is no medical evidence that petroleum exposure causes headaches. Taken together, the negative causal linkage opinion provided in November 2023 and clarified in December 2023 are supported by an adequate explanation (rationale).

Furthermore, at the November 2023 examination, the Veteran himself reported the onset of his migraine headaches as 2019, which is 15 years after service.

The Board understands that the Veteran has experienced numerous headaches (both migraine and non-migraine) in the years since he left service, and does not question that fact, or the facts that he injured his head after falling off a vehicle and was exposed to petroleum during service. However, as explained above, the evidence - both medical and non-medical - does not indicate that it is not at least as likely as not that these in-service injuries caused any of the Veteran's current migraine headaches and, therefore, the appeal must be denied.

 

Victoria Moshiashwili

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	De Angelis, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.