Citation Nr: A25031422
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-456594
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for B cell lymphocytic leukemia is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from August 1986 to August 1990, and his military occupational specialty was machine gunner in the United States Marine Corps.

This matter stems from a December 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for B cell lymphocytic leukemia. The Veteran timely appealed the December 2023 rating decision by filing a VA Form 10182, wherein he selected the direct review docket within the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act (AMA) review system.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision.  By operation of law, the Board is precluded from considering evidence submitted during a period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. ยง?20.303. However, because the claim is being remanded, any evidence that was not considered will be considered by the AOJ.

In its decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran was diagnosed with a disability, however denied the Veteran's claims because they found he did not participate in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA). The AOJ also stated that the Veteran did not reply to a letter dated September 2023 asking him to provide information regarding exposure to radiation.

The Veteran's STRs show that he was stationed aboard the USS Cleveland and the USS Peleliu, but do not show any treatment for or diagnosis of B cell lymphocytic leukemia. 

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement in which he stated he was exposed to jet fuel from the AFFF firefighter foam, and that vapors in jet fuel have been proven to cause blood disorders such as leukemia. He stated that while aboard the USS Cleveland and USS Peleliu, he was exposed to this fuel while performing ship cleanup and while using firefighting foam on fires that broke out on the helipads and decks.

Here, the AOJ based their decision off of the VA memo that found the Veteran had not participated in a TERA. However, the Veteran submitted a statement in which he described being exposed to various chemicals including jet fuel and firefighting foam. His statement is further supported by his MOS, which suggests that he may have been exposed to jet fuels while working aboard the USS Cleveland and USS Peleliu. Therefore, the Board finds that it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not at the very least, obtain an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's B cell leukemia. As such, one will be obtained on remand.

Additionally, the AOJ noted that the Veteran did not respond to an inquiry regarding radiation exposure. However, he has never contended that he was exposed to radiation, only that he was exposed to jet fuels and firefighting foam. The Board finds that using the lack of response to a letter asking for the incorrect information as a basis to deny service connection is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  On remand, the Veteran will be given the opportunity to expand on his exposure to toxic chemicals during service. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's representative submitted an independent hearing presentation with evidence from the Mayo clinic that was not previously submitted. Unfortunately, the Board may not consider this evidence in this decision, nor can it be the basis for a remand under the AMA, as it was submitted after the rating decision on appeal. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Request that the Veteran provide additional information regarding his exposures to toxic chemicals during service, including jet fuel and firefighting foam. If the Veteran provides the additional information, make a TERA determination.

2. Obtain an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's B cell lymphocytic leukemia. If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be schedule. The VA examiner should answer the following question:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's B cell lymphocytic leukemia either began in or was otherwise caused by his active service, to include exposure to jet fuels and/or firefighting foam? Why or why not?

The VA examiner should address the Veteran's lay statement regarding his exposure to jet fuel and firefighting foam. See "VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim", date added 9/22/2023. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elizabeth A. Gadson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.