Citation Nr: A25031497
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240611-450117
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the evaluation of posttraumatic stress disorder is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to July 3, 2021, it was not factually ascertainable that the Veteran's PTSD warranted an increased rating.

2. During the period on appeal, the evidence shows occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity; total impairment as required for the higher rating is not shown.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date for the evaluation of posttraumatic stress disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the Marine Corps from September 1994 to May 1998.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 2023 and October 2023 Regional Office (RO) rating decisions.

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Earlier Effective Date 

In general, the effective date for the grant of service connection based upon an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance is either the day following separation from active service, or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, it will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b).

For effective date purposes, a claim is a formal or informal written communication identifying and requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p). Any communication or action, indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, from a claimant, his or her duly authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of a claimant who is not sui juris, may be considered an informal claim.  Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution.  If received within one year after the date it was sent to the claimant, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155; Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1999).

1. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the evaluation of posttraumatic stress disorder 

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an earlier effective date for the grant of a 70 percent rating for PTSD. Specifically, he contends that his effective date should be March 16, 2010. 

By way of history, the Veteran filed an original claim for major depressive disorder which was denied in a September 15, 2010, rating decision. The Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement in March 2010 and a statement of the case continuing the denial for service connection was issued in August 2012. A May 5, 2022, Board decision remanded the Veterans claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD. In a December 2022 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD rated at 30 percent disabling effective March 16, 2010, and rated as 70 percent disabling from July 3, 2021. 

The effective date of the 70 percent rating was the date of the exam demonstrating a worsening of the Veterans PTSD symptoms. 

The Veteran argues that his PTSD symptoms have amounted to a 70 percent disability rating for the entire appeal period.

In this case, the evidence does not show a worsened PTSD disability picture until the July 2021 examination. Specifically, the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder in March 2016 and the examiner noted that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for PTSD at that time. Further, the Veterans PTSD screen was noted as negative in a March 2018 treatment record. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2), the severity of his PTSD symptoms found in the July 2021 VA examination can be used to establish an effective date up to one year earlier if there is evidence supporting a finding that it was factually ascertainable that his service-connected disability increased in severity one year earlier. Here, however, that simply is not the case as the evidence of record does not show a worsening of his PTSD symptoms. 

For these reasons, the Board finds an effective date earlier than July 3, 2021, for the grant of an increased rating of 70 percent for PTSD, is not warranted.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. While the Board typically considers only those factors outside the specific rating criteria when appropriate in order to best determine the level of occupational and social impairment.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204, 208 (1994). 

When there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Nevertheless, in cases where the Veteran's claim arises from a disagreement with the initial evaluation following the grant of service connection, the Board shall consider the entire period of claim to see if the evidence warrants the assignment of different ratings for different periods of time during these claims a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). 

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

The Veteran is seeking an increased rating for his service-connected PTSD.

The Veteran's PTSD is rated as 70 percent disabling under diagnostic code 9411, under the General Formula for Mental Disorders. 

Under the  applicable criteria, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideations; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of the veteran's personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including in work or work like settings); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when the evidence shows total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place; and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board determines that a 70 percent rating adequately addresses the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms. Indeed, the record indicates that the Veteran's symptoms do not rise to the level of total occupational and social impairment.

A May 2021 mental status examination revealed that the Veteran was alert and oriented x 4. His mood was noted as good and his affect was in the normal range. The treating physician noted that the Veteran's thought process was organized, his thought content was relevant, his judgment was fair, and he denied suicidal and/or homicidal ideation. Further, the Veteran denied aggressive thoughts and hallucinations. 

During a July 2021 disability benefits questionnaire, the Veteran reported a couple of incidents of domestic violence that occurred after several days with out sleep. He confirmed passive suicidal ideation without plan or intent. The Veteran stated that he has persistent issues with anger and emotional regulation which contribute to verbal and physical outbursts. The examiner found that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The Veteran reported that he was receiving mental health treatment through the VA. The examiner noted the Veterans symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or worklike setting, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. 

On examination, the Veteran presented with appropriate dress and grooming, was oriented x 4, and presented with a neutral mood and congruent affect. Cognitive deficits were not observed, and motor functioning could not be assessed due to remote interaction. The Veteran denied homicidal ideation and A/V hallucinations. He appeared to be a reliable informant and historian. 

The Veteran underwent an examination in October 2022. The examiner found that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported delusional thoughts resulting in accusations of spouse cheating.  The examiner noted the Veterans symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. On examination, the Veteran displayed no problems with memory or concentration. Thinking was organized and logical. Insight and judgment appeared adequate. The Veteran presented as mildly irritable and anxious. Psychotic symptoms and suicidal ideation were denied. 

During an August 2023 examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The Veteran reported that he was in mental health treatment at the VA. He reported having attempted suicide 2-3 times, last at the end of March 2023. The Veteran stated that his current symptoms include hearing voices but describes paranoid thinking rather than AV. He further reported that he was angry due to paranoia. The examiner noted the Veterans symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. 

On examination, the Veteran was casually dressed, neatly groomed. Posture, speech and eye contact were healthy. Affect was broad and appropriately reactive. The Veteran denied current suicidal and homicidal ideation. His stream of thought was logical and coherent. The Veteran reported that he was hearing voices but, upon questioning, he described paranoid thinking but not hallucinations. Stream of thought was logical and coherent. 

Finally, the Veteran underwent a disability benefits questionnaire in November 2023. The examiner found that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner noted the Veterans symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  

On examination, the Veteran was adequately dressed and groomed and arrived on time for his appointment. The Veteran was extremely agitated at the beginning of the evaluation but appeared to relax as rapport was developed. Eye contact was established and maintained, his mood was depressed, and his affect was congruent with mood.  The Veteran's thought process was logical, linear, and goal-directed with appropriate attention and no evidence of impairment. Insight and judgment were fair; impulse control fair; no overt obsessions, delusions, hallucinations or paranoid ideation. His energy level appropriate to situation; no current or recent suicidal or homicidal ideation; no disorientation; intact planning/organizational skills; normal rate/rhythm/volume/wealth of speech; language, memory and IQ not formally assessed but appeared within normal limits.

In view of these clinical evaluations, the Board finds that the Veteran does not exhibit objective symptomatology that would be sufficient to warrant a rating in excess of 70 percent for the period on appeal. The evidence does not show that the Veteran exhibits gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place; and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. As such, there is insufficient evidence that the Veteran's symptoms were of the severity and frequency to cause the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Next, the Board has also considered the extent to which there are other indications of total occupational and social impairment, such as gross impairment of the thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, and/or disorientation to time or place. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 444 (2002).

In this regard, while the Veteran's disorder reflected a moderately severe overall impact on his social and occupational functioning, he did not have total occupational and social impairment. Specifically, the Veterans treatment records reflect that he is close to his maternal half-sister, has been married to his wife for 11 years and has been getting along with her fairly well since she returned to their home in August 2023. Further, he reported that in his free time he enjoys riding his motorcycle and lifting weights. He also keeps in touch with fellow Veterans via telephone calls and social media. The Veteran did not display total social and occupational impairment even when factoring in other relevant criteria outside of the rating code.

In considering the appropriate disability rating, the Board has also considered the statements from the Veteran that his service-connected psychiatric disability is worse than the ratings he currently receives. In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994)

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. While the Veteran was competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he was not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his psychiatric disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) ("although interest may affect the credibility of testimony, it does not affect competency to testify").

(Continued on the next page)

?

Other competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's psychiatric disability have been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports) directly address the criteria under which his psychiatric disability is evaluated. The Board finds the evidence in the medical examinations, opinions and records to be highly persuasive.

The Board has considered the competent medical and lay evidence within the record. Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; "Put differently, if the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). As explained above, the evidence of record persuasively weighs in favor of a continued rating of 70 percent but not higher for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability. Therefore, the Board determines that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Vample, Erica

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.