Citation Nr: A25031519
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-426742
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to nonservice-connected (NSC) survivor's (death) pension benefits is denied.

Entitlement to accrued benefits is denied.

Entitlement to Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

Entitlement to DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran did not have the requisite wartime service to establish basic eligibility for survivor's pension benefits.

2. The Veteran did not have a claim or appeal for benefits pending at the time of his death. 

3. The Veteran was not in receipt of a total disability rating for 10 continuous years prior to his death, was not rated as totally disabled continuously since his release from active duty and for at least 5 years preceding death, and he was not a prisoner of war (POW).

4. The Veteran died in February 2022; however, evidence as to his cause of death has not been associated with the claims file, and at the time of his death, service connection had not been established for any disability, and the weight of the probative evidence of record weighs against a finding that his cause of death was otherwise etiologically related to his active service or any event, injury, or disease therein.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for basic eligibility for NSC survivor's pension benefits have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 503, 1501, 1521, 1541; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2, 3.3, 3.6.

2. The criteria for entitlement to accrued benefits have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5121; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.1000.

3. The criteria for entitlement to DIC under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1318; 38 C.F.R. § 3.22.

4. The criteria for DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 1310; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active-duty service from August 1984 to May 1988.  Unfortunately, he passed away in February 2022.  The appellant is his surviving spouse.  

This current appeal before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from a March 2023 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) which denied the appellant's claims of entitlement to survivor's pension benefits, accrued benefits, and DIC.  In February 2024, the appellant filed a Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement [NOD]) as to the February 2024 decision.  The AOJ requested clarification of the issues which the appellant's desired to appeal, and in March 2024, she provided an updated NOD indicating that she wished to appeal the denial of her DIC, survivor's pension and accrued benefits claims.  The appellant elected the direct review option to have her appeal directly reviewed by a Veterans Law Judge.  

In light of the appellant's selection, the Board may only consider evidence dated through the date of the March 2023 AOJ decision.  Any evidence submitted after the December 2023 AOJ decision may not be considered by the Board.  Notably, while service treatment records (STRs) and service personnel records (SPRs) were associated with the claims file and appear to have possibly been scanned to the electronic claims file after issuance of the February 2024 decision on appeal, there is no clear indication as to when the STRs and SPRs were actually received by VA.  Thus, affording the appellant the benefit of the doubt, the Board is herein considering the STRs and SPRs.  No evidence was submitted by the appellant following issuance of the February 2024 AOJ decision.  

Survivor's pension benefits

Survivor's pension is a benefit payable in certain circumstances to a veteran's surviving spouse because of the veteran's nonservice-connected death.  Basic entitlement exists if (i) a veteran served in the active military, naval, air, or space service for 90 days or more during a period of war; or (ii) was, at the time of death, receiving or entitled to receive compensation or retirement pay for a service-connected disability based on service during a period of war; and (iii) the surviving spouse meets the net worth requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.274 and has an annual income not in excess of the maximum annual pension rate specified in 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.23 and 3.24.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(8), 1521(j), 1541(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.3(b)(4), 3.23(a)(5), (d)(5). 

VA presently recognizes the following as periods of war: January 1, 1817, through December 31, 1898, inclusive; April 21, 1898, through July 4, 1902, inclusive; May 9, 1916, through April 5, 1917; April 6, 1917, through November 11, 1918, inclusive; December 7, 1941, through December 31, 1946, inclusive; June 27, 1950, through January 31, 1955, inclusive; August 5, 1964, through May 7, 1975, inclusive; and August 2, 1990, through a date to be prescribed by Presidential proclamation or law.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2.

In this case, the record confirms that the late Veteran had only one period of active-duty service, from August 1984 to May 1988.  Thus, his only period of active service began subsequent to the Vietnam Era, which ended on May 7, 1975; and he was discharged from active service prior to the beginning of the Persian Gulf Era, which commenced on August 2, 1990.  There is no indication or allegation in the record that the Veteran had additional active service, to include active service during a period of war.  

Based on the foregoing, there is no indication in the record that the Veteran had the requisite active service during a period of war for the appellant to qualify for survivor's pension benefits; nor has the appellant specifically contended that he had such service.  Accordingly, while the Board graciously recognizes the late-Veteran's service and commitment to his country, it is bound by the law and is without authority to grant benefits on an equitable basis.  38 U.S.C. §§ 503, 7104; Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 416, 425 (1994).  As periods of war are defined by statute, the Board does not have jurisdiction to extend those periods for equitable reasons.  Therefore, the appellant's claim for entitlement to NSC survivor's pension benefits must be denied.

Accrued benefits

Accrued benefits are defined as periodic monetary benefits authorized under a law administered by VA, to which a payee was entitled at death under existing ratings or decisions or those based on evidence in the file at the date of death, and due and unpaid.  38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000; Zevalkink v. Brown, 102 F.3d 1236 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  For a claimant to prevail on an accrued benefits claim, the record must show that: (i) the individual has standing to file a claim for accrued benefits; (ii) the VA payee had a claim pending at the time of death; (iii) the VA payee would have prevailed on the claim if he or she had not died; and (iv) the claim for accrued benefits was filed within one year of the VA payee's death.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5101(a), 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000; Jones v. West, 136 F.3d 1299 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

In the instant case, the record is devoid of any indication that the late Veteran had a claim or appeal for VA benefits pending at the time of his death.  The appellant has not identified any pending claim or appeal and has not made any specific contention or pointed to evidence indicating that such claim or appeal existed at the time of the Veteran's death.  Based on the absence of any indication in the record that the Veteran had a pending claim or appeal at the time of his death, the present claim for accrued benefits must be denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994) (where the law, not the evidence, is dispositive, the appeal should be terminated for lack of legal merit or entitlement).

DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318

A surviving spouse may establish entitlement to DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 in the same manner as if a veteran's death were service-connected where it is shown that the veteran's death was not the result of willful misconduct, and the veteran was (1) continuously rated totally disabled for the 10 years immediately preceding death; (2) was rated totally disabled upon separation from service, was continuously so rated, and died more than five but less than ten years after separation from service; or (3) the veteran was a former prisoner of war (POW) who died after September 30, 1999, and the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding death.  38 U.S.C. § 1318(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.22(a). 

In this case, the record reveals that service connection was not in effect for any disability for the Veteran at the time of his death.  Thus, he was not in receipt of a total disability rating at any point in time preceding his death and he had not been rated by VA as totally disabled for a continuous period of at least 10 years immediately preceding his death and he had not been rated totally disabled continuously since his release from active duty and for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding his death.  Additionally, there is no evidence establishing that the late Veteran was a former POW. 

Accordingly, under these undisputed facts, the legal criteria for entitlement to DIC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1318 are simply not met.  Therefore, this claim must be denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis, 6 Vet. App.  at 429.

DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death

In order to establish service connection for the cause of a veteran's death, the evidence must show that a disability incurred in or aggravated by service either caused or contributed substantially or materially to death.  38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(a).  A service-connected disability will be considered the principal cause of death when the disability singly or jointly with some other condition was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(b).

A contributory cause of death is inherently one not related to the principal cause.  In determining whether a service-connected disability contributed to death, it must be shown that it contributed substantially or materially, that it combined to cause death, or that it aided or lent assistance to the production of death.  It is not sufficient to show that such disability casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(c).

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, or from aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may be granted for a disability diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability is due to disease or injury that was incurred or aggravated in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

While sympathetic to the general assertions of record that the Veteran's death was related to his active service, after carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that there is no evidence of record, apart from general assertions, to support the claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  Specifically, there is no evidence showing that the cause of the Veteran's death was at least as likely as not in any way related to his active service, to include any event, injury, or disease therein.

As noted above, the Veteran died in February 2022.  His death certificate reveals that he died at home and that his causes of death were grand mal seizure, epilepsy, and over exertion or sleep deprivation.  The appellant has not submitted medical records or identified any outstanding medical records for VA to obtain, pertaining to the Veteran's cause of death.  No additional evidence pertaining to the Veteran's cause of death has been associated with the claims file, other than the appellant's lay assertions noted in the February 2024 NOD that the Veteran had a heart condition present from birth, that he suffered from PTSD, and that he had several health issues such as "UC," which the Board presumes to mean ulcerative colitis.  Notably, the Veteran was not service-connected for these disabilities, and there is no indication in the Veteran's STRs, to include in his August 1984 enlistment examination report or his May 1988 separation examination report, with respect to any in-service symptoms, diagnoses, or assertions pertaining to these disabilities.  There is additional no post-service evidence addressing either of the disabilities, to include, most importantly in the instant case, evidence of any relationship between these alleged disabilities and the Veteran's cause of death.  Moreover, there is no indication in the Veteran's STRs of complaints, diagnoses, or of any noted or reported symptoms of grand mal seizure, epilepsy, or over exertion or sleep deprivation, which were the contributory causes of the Veteran's death.  Accordingly, there is simply no evidence of competent evidence of record of any association between the Veteran's cause of death and his active service. 

Thus, the STRs associated with the claims file reveal no indication of an event, injury, or disease during service that might have led to the Veteran's cause of death nearly 38 years later, and the Veteran did not have service during such time or in such location as to warrant consideration of possible presumptive service connection provisions.  Moreover, the appellant has not proffered any specific argument, contention, or evidence as to how the Veteran's death may have been related to his active service.  

While VA has not obtained a medical opinion with respect to whether the Veteran's death was etiologically linked to his active service, the Board again notes that there is simply no medical evidence appearing to support an association between the Veteran's cause of death and any event, injury, or disease during service.  There is simply no argument or contention of record indicating how the Veteran's death may have been etiologically related to his active service.  Therefore, the Board finds that remand to obtain a VA opinion on this matter is not required.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The holding of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in McLendon provides that in disability compensation claims, VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim.  Here, the standard under McLendon has not been met as there is no evidence of record suggesting that the Veteran's death was specifically linked to any event, injury, or disease during service.  

Finally, where there is no evidence, aside from speculative assertions, as to an etiological relationship between the Veteran's active service and his later cause of death, the Board finds that the evidence simply does not support a claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  Service connection cannot be granted based on a bare speculative assertion offered by a claimant, where such evidence does not reach the required "at least as likely as not" evidentiary standard for VA claims.  Cf. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In this regard, the term "at least as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility."  Rather, it means that the weight of medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is so evenly divided that there is at least a nearly equal probability to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as there is to find against the conclusion.  Cf. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83 (an opinion that something "is possible" and "within the realm of medical possibility" is too speculative to establish medical nexus). 

The Board does not doubt the appellant's sincerity in her belief that the Veteran's death was somehow related to his active service.  While sympathetic to such assertions, there is simply no evidence of record tending to support the claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  A bare assertion constitutes, at most, merely speculative evidence.  The appellant is not competent to provide an etiology opinion associating the Veteran's cause of death with his active service, as she lacks medical training or credentials.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994) (a lay person is competent to report information of which he or she has personal knowledge, i.e., information that he or she can gather through the senses).

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the weight of the probative evidence of record is against the appellant's claim for entitlement to DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, as there is simply no medical evidence or competent and clear lay assertion indicating that the Veteran's death was at least as likely as not related to his active service or to any event, injury, or disease therein.  Accordingly, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the appellant's claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael Wilson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.