Citation Nr: A25031088
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231202-397532
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle strain with arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for low testosterone treatment is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for vitamin deficiency is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from May 2003 to July 2003 and from August 2004 to January 2005. In April of 2024, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement (NOD) in which he requested the direct review lane under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) review system in response to a rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board of Veterans' Appeals considers the same record as the RO in rendering a decision. The only exception is if, as here, the Board finds that there was pre-decisional error by the RO.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle strain with arthritis is remanded.

In this case, the Board observes that the VA clinician who authored the November 2022 VA opinion stated that, "it is less likely than not that the currently diagnosed bilateral ankle strain related to the veteran's claimed ankle condition, bilateral, incurred in or was caused by the ankle conditions, bilateral during service. Per the medical record and relevant evidence, the veteran's documented ankle condition occurred after separation from military service. A nexus is not established."

Unfortunately, even if "the veteran's documented ankle condition occurred after separation from military service" as was asserted by this clinician, this does not negate the possibility of this condition being related to the Veteran's military service. Additionally, the Board notes that a VA examiner must offer a full rationale for all opinions given and should not rely solely on the absence of documentary evidence of in-service treatment or injury in the Veteran's service treatment records as a basis for any given opinion. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner's rationale solely relied on the lack of notation of an injury in service to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's current disability and his military service). As such, an additional VA opinion should have authored and this represents a pre-decisional error that must be corrected on remand. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for low testosterone treatment is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for vitamin deficiency is remanded.

The Veteran's service medical records are negative for refences for these claimed disabilities.  For the right and left knee disabilities and the right hip, the Veteran asserts that he was born with knee and hip disabilities which were aggravated by running and marching in service, and also aggravated by his service-connected ankle fracture.  Regarding the low testosterone and vitamin deficiency disorders, he asserts that they resulted from steroid use during service.  

The Board notes that a record dated in June 2022 from the Mantachie Rural Health Care indicates that the Veteran takes a testosterone injections as well as vitamins. The diagnoses included low serum testosterone, Vitamin D deficiency and Iron deficiency.  A record from the same facility dated in April 2021 notes that the Veteran was having problems with his left knee after getting cortisone injection.  The diagnoses included left medial knee pain and strain of the left knee.  A record from the Premier Family and Urgent care dated in April 2021 notes an impression of pain in the right knee.  A record from the North Mississippi Medical Center dated in July 2017 notes that the Veteran had a foreign body removed from the right hip.  A record from Mantachie Rural Health Care dated in October 2021 notes the Veteran received an injection in the right hip of dexamethasone sodium phosphate.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in regard to any of the foregoing issues on appeal. Given the history provided by the Veteran along with the medical evidence of current disabilities, these issues must be remanded so that VA examinations may be afforded and so that correlating opinions may be authored.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for examinations with an appropriate VA clinician(s) in regard to the claimed (i) left knee condition, (ii) right knee condition, (iii) low testosterone treatment condition, (iv) right hip condition and (v) vitamin deficiency condition, who should be a different individual than any who has previously provided an opinion in this case. The necessity of an additional right ankle examination is at the discretion of the clinician and should be afforded only if such is necessary to provide the requested opinions. Each clinician must be provided with and review the entire claims file, to include a copy of this remand and it should be confirmed that this review occurred. Following a review of the evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements, each clinician should answer the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed condition manifested in service or is otherwise related to his active service?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed condition is (i) proximately due to or (ii) aggravated by his service-connected right foot s/p fracture and/or any other service-connected condition?

In addressing each of the above-outlined questions, the clinician is asked to address and reconcile to the extent possible the Veteran's documented history and lay assertions of record. He or she is asked to consider, where applicable, the Veteran's description of any in-service injuries and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions. Rationale cannot be solely predicated solely on the absence of in-service documentary evidence but must consider the broader evidentiary picture, including lay evidence. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician in question should provide a fully reasoned explanation, and each clinician is additionally asked to reconcile to the extent possible any conflicting evidence or opinions of record. A clear basis for all opinions should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If any clinician is unable to provide any of the requested information without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and further explain why it is not feasible to provide a medical opinion.

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the claims after consideration of the pertinent evidence.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.