Citation Nr: A25031627
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 241101-487462
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from November 1952 to September 1954. His awards and decorations include the Purple Heart and the Combat Infantryman Badge, among others. He passed away in October 2007, and the appellant is his surviving spouse. 

An October 2024 rating decision denied the appellant's claim. In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the appellant elected the Direct Review docket. In January 2025, the appellant waived her right to select a different Board review option. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. However, as a remand of this matter is required, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is remanded.

The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802. This claim must be remanded for correction of the following pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The appellant asserts that the Veteran's cause of death, listed as ischemic cardiomyopathy and atherosclerotic coronary disease, was caused by his service-connected disabilities. Specifically, the appellant asserts that the Veteran's service-connected residuals of a shrapnel wound to the skull contributed directly to his heart conditions or caused him to become obese, which then caused the disabilities that led to his death. 

The appellant submitted a private physician's opinion in support of the claim in May 2024. The physician noted she had reviewed the Veteran's medical records. She stated the record showed he had limited mobility because of his service-connected encephalitis and noted that individuals with mobility disorders have a higher mean BMI than those without them. She noted the Veteran's BMI was "around 29.6," but did not state at what time that was the case. The physician noted that obesity is associated with a greater prevalence and incidence of multiple causative atherosclerosis risk factors and may also directly contribute to atherogenesis and atherosclerosis progression, independent of comorbidities. She concluded that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities led to his obesity, which is a major risk factor for atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease. As a result, she concluded that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities at least as likely as not contributed to cause his death.

The Board finds this private opinion is not probative, as the physician did not explain what evidence led her to conclude that the Veteran lacked mobility due to his service-connected disabilities. Notably, in September 2001 the Veteran was documented to weigh 223.5 pounds but was noted to be exercising and eating right in an attempt to lose weight, suggesting his mobility was not limited. See CAPRI records (received May 23, 2023). In 1997, he was noted to be "active with farming." See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility (received April 20, 1998). In October 1988, at which time the Veteran was already taking Lasix, was undergoing workup for heart-related symptoms, and was scheduled for heart catheterization, he was noted to be working as a cement mason, which is suggestive of physical labor. There was no discussion of limited mobility at that time. Notably, he also reported having smoked two packs of cigarettes per day until two weeks prior, at which time he quit because he had been getting short of breath. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility (received October 3, 1994). The private physician acknowledged tobacco abuse as a risk factor for heart disease but did not address the significance of the Veteran's smoking history, or even acknowledge that the Veteran smoked. 

In short, the private opinion is not accompanied by sufficient rationale in light of the medical evidence of record, including evidence suggesting other significant risk factors for heart disease and suggesting that the Veteran was, in fact, mobile for decades, including after he had diagnosed heart conditions, to rely on it as the basis for granting this claim.

In October 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's cause of death was less likely than not related to his service-connected disabilities. The examiner acknowledged the May 2024 private opinion but attributed the Veteran's obesity in part to his heart condition rather than the other way around. The examiner noted evidence of weight gain from fluid status related to the Veteran's heart conditions when the Veteran was not taking Lasix and noted that other treatment records also documented fluctuations in weight based on fluid status. The examiner stated that the record contained no evidence of mobility issues related to the Veteran's service-connected conditions. The examiner stated that the conditions that were noted to have an impact on the Veteran's exercise tolerance were his congestive heart failure and ischemic cardiomyopathy, as well as a back problem. The examiner also noted the Veteran's significant smoking history and various other risk factors for heart disease that were not related to a service-connected disability. The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's service-connected conditions did not have any impact on his cause of death, mobility, or weight, and "less likely than not contributed substantially or materially to the Veteran's death." The examiner further concluded that the Veteran's service-connected conditions did not have debilitating effects and generally impair his health to an extent that rendered him materially less capable of resisting the effects of other disease or injury, did not contribute substantially or materially to death, and did not aid or lend assistance to the production of death. 

The Board finds this opinion is also inadequate for decision-making purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). The VA examiner provided no explanation for her conclusions that the Veteran's service-connected conditions did not have debilitating effects and generally impair his health, that they did not contribute substantially or materially to death, and that they did not aid or lend assistance to the production of death. While medical evidence of limited mobility may be sparse in the record, the evidence does establish that the Veteran had "significant brain dysfunction." See June 1998 VA Neuropsychological Evaluation (received June 29, 1998). The Veteran reported headaches, memory loss, blackouts, and fainting spells, see March 1998 VA Form 21-8940, and the appellant has asserted that his surgical procedures to address his head wound affected his heart.

In short, the VA examiner focused on obesity and limited mobility when issuing a negative opinion in connection with this claim, and sufficient rationale was not provided to address whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were a contributory cause of death for other reasons. The AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion prior to adjudicating this claim, and this pre-decisional duty to assist error must be corrected on remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record and a copy of this remand to a suitably qualified clinician for completion of an addendum opinion. The clinician must review the record and is asked to respond to the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities contributed substantially or materially; combined to cause; and/or aided or lent assistance to the production of his death? Please explain why or why not.

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic encephalopathy resulted in debilitating effects and general impairment of health to an extent that would have rendered him materially less capable of resisting the effects of the disease or injury primarily causing his death? Please explain why or why not.

In responding to the above questions, please specifically discuss 1) the appellant's assertion that surgeries to address the Veteran's in-service head trauma affected his heart; 2) a May 1993 VA discharge summary noting a past medical history of three craniotomies; 3) the Veteran's report in his March 1998 TDIU application that he experienced headaches, memory loss, blackouts, and fainting spells; 4) the June 1998 VA neuropsychological evaluation that found significant brain dysfunction; and 5) the VA treatment records documenting the nature and progression of the Veteran's final illness in October 2007.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Please include a complete rationale for the opinions provided. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions without speculation, please state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts); a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required); or is because you do not have the requisite knowledge or training.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Baker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.