Citation Nr: A25031819
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-431535
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

As the claim for entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis) has been withdrawn, the appeal as to this issue is dismissed.

As the claim for entitlement to service connection for migraines has been withdrawn, the appeal as to this issue is dismissed.

As the claim for entitlement to service connection for limited flexion status post total knee replacement of the right knee (claimed as right knee condition) has been withdrawn, the appeal as to this issue is dismissed.

As the claim for entitlement to service connection for lumbar strain status post microdiscectomy with lumbar fusion (L3/L4) (claimed back condition) has been withdrawn, the appeal as to this issue is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

In June 2024, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Board received notification from the Veteran that he wished to withdraw his pending appeal for the issues of entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, migraines, limited flexion status post total knee replacement of the right knee, and lumbar strain status post microdiscectomy with lumbar fusion, the appeal as to these issues is dismissed.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of the Veteran's April 10, 2024, VA Form 10182 notice of disagreement (appeal) to the Board by the Veteran have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1974 to November 1977.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that rating decision, the RO, inter alia, denied service connection for migraines, allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis), limited flexion status post total knee replacement of the right knee (claimed as right knee condition), and lumbar strain status post microdiscectomy with lumbar fusion (L3/L4) (claimed back condition).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Withdrawn Claims

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision; and withdrawal may be made by the Veteran or by his or her authorized representative.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  

In the present case, the Veteran submitted a signed VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim in which he stated that he wished to withdraw the pending appeal for the issues of entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, migraines, limited flexion status post total knee replacement of the right knee, and lumbar strain status post microdiscectomy with lumbar fusion.

Therefore, the appellant has withdrawn this appeal as to the issues stated above and there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration as to the appeal for:  (i) entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis); (ii) entitlement to service connection for migraines; (iii) entitlement to service connection for limited flexion status post total knee replacement of the right knee (claimed as right knee condition); and (iv) entitlement to service connection for lumbar strain status post microdiscectomy with lumbar fusion (L3/L4) (claimed back condition).  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal as to these issues and it is dismissed.

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ardalan, Nina

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.