Citation Nr: A25031338
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-441606
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) related to personal trauma) is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 2005 to November 2006. She had additional service in the United States Army Reserve from February 2011 to March 2014. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (hereinafter Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ)) in the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Given evidence of an anxiety diagnosis in the record, the Veteran's claim of service connection for PTSD has been recharacterized to more broadly include all psychiatric disorders reasonably raised by the record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 6 (2009) (holding that the Board must consider any disability that "may reasonably be encompassed by" the description of the claim and symptoms and other submitted information).

The Veteran has a separate pending appeal for entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism and right wrist tendonitis that will be adjudicated by the Board in a separate decision.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder 

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to service connection for PTSD related to her ex-husband physically assaulting her in March 2011, which, the Veteran stated, was the third time he had tried to kill her. See Veteran's June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD Secondary to Personal Assault. 

Unfortunately, the Board finds that before this issue can be adjudicated a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist and notify errors. 

First, prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not correctly request the Veteran's Army Reserve personnel records. As noted above, the Veteran's active duty service in the Army was from November 2005 to November 2006. In her June 2023 statement, the Veteran identified March 2011 as the date of the personal assault related to her PTSD, which would have been a period of time during her service in the Army Reserve. Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Active military, naval, air, or space service includes any period of active duty for training during which the individual concerned was disabled from a disease or injury incurred in the line of duty. 38 U.S.C. § 101 (21), (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6 (a). Active military, naval, air, or space service also includes any period of inactive duty training during which the individual concerned was disabled from an injury incurred in the line of duty. Id. Accordingly, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated while performing active duty for training or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing inactive duty for training. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 106, 1110.    

In this case, VA submitted a November 2023 request for information pertaining to the Veteran's Army Reserve service records, but the request listed the Veteran's maiden name and incorrectly stated that she did not serve under another name. In fact, the Veteran did serve under another name, which she used in her June 2023 claim application. It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ not to have adequately attempted to obtain the Veteran's Army Reserve personnel records prior to the rating decision on appeal so that her periods of active service could be verified for purposes of considering entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 

Second, the AOJ should have attempted to assist the Veteran in obtaining a copy of the police report related to the personal assault that the Veteran referenced in her June 2023 statement. The VA Adjudication Manual (M-21-1) at VIII.iv.1.B.2.f states that, in claims based on personal trauma in which the Veteran identifies a police report as a relevant source of evidence and that report is not already part of the available records, the AOJ should obtain the report from civilian law enforcement offices. Here, in the Veteran's June 2023 statement, she identified the specific date of a personal assault as well as the contact information for the civilian law enforcement department that presumably would have a record of the assault. In a January 2024 letter to the Veteran, the AOJ requested that the Veteran submit a copy of the police report but apparently did not attempt to obtain a copy on behalf of the Veteran. It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ not to have attempted to obtain a copy of the police report from the civilian police department to aid the Veteran in verifying her claimed personal trauma prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal. 

Third, a remand is required because the claims file does not indicate that the Veteran was provided with the special notice requirements for cases involving personal assault. A PTSD claim based on in-service personal assault may not be denied without first advising the Veteran that evidence from sources other than the Veteran's service records or evidence of behavioral changes may constitute credible supporting evidence of the stressor incident and allowing the Veteran the opportunity to furnish this type of evidence or to advise VA of potential sources of such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(5). 

In sum, due to several pre-decisional duty to assist and notify errors, a remand is required for VA to conduct additional development of the Veteran's claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain all available documents pertaining to the Veteran's service in the United States Army Reserve. Please note that the Veteran served under a different last name than her current or maiden last names. Verify all active duty for training and inactive duty training dates for service in the Army Reserve from February 2011 to March 2014. If necessary, a request should be made to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS). Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

2. Send the Veteran the notice required for PTSD claims based on an in-service personal assault.

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. Request a copy of the March 8, 2011, police report from the civilian police department that the Veteran identified in her June 2023 statement in support of claim for PTSD secondary to personal assault. Per the M-21 at VIII.iv.1.B.2.f, requests may be submitted via phone, fax, e-mail, or written correspondence, as long as the request is properly documented in the claims file.

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eisenstatt, R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.