Citation Nr: A25031463
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 241217-494038
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

An initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for colon cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lung cancer is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran is in receipt of a 10 percent rating, the schedular maximum under Diagnostic Code (DC) 6260, for his tinnitus, and there are no manifestations of such disability that are not contemplated by the currently assigned schedular rating.

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran had no worse than Level I hearing in the right ear and Level I hearing in the left ear.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.87, DC 6260; Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.85, 4.86, DC 6100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1965 to October 1968. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in December 2023 (tinnitus), January 2024 (hearing loss, headache disorder, sinusitis, obstructive sleep apnea, COPD, and colon cancer), and May 2024 (lung cancer) by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In December 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decisions to the Board by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) in which he elected the evidence submission lane. Consequently, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decisions, and any evidence submitted within 90 days of the receipt of his Notice of Disagreement on December 17, 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.

As the December 28, 2023 (tinnitus) and May 22, 2024 (lung cancer) rating decisions were higher level review decisions, the Board's review for those issues is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the September 19, 2022 (tinnitus) and February 24, 2023 (lung cancer) rating decisions which were the subject of the December 2023 and May 2024, respectively, higher level reviews, as well as any evidence submitted during the evidence window outlined above. 

Increased Rating Claims

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 ; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.

As noted above, the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus is assigned a 10 percent rating, effective March 24, 2022, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, DC 6260. In this regard, such DC was revised effective June 13, 2003, to codify existing VA practice of assigning a single 10 percent rating for recurrent tinnitus, whether the sound is perceived as being in one ear, both ears, or in the head. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260, Note (2). As the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, DC 6260, and as there is no legal basis upon which to award separate schedular evaluations for tinnitus in each ear, there is no legal basis upon which to award a higher schedular rating. Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). Additionally, the Veteran has not reported, and the evidence does not demonstrate, manifestations of his tinnitus that are not contemplated by the currently assigned schedular rating.

Therefore, a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is not warranted.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.

For the entire appeal period, stemming from August 29, 2023, the date of service-connection, the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss has been assigned a noncompensable rating pursuant to DC 6100. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85.

Ratings of hearing loss range from noncompensable to 100 percent based on organic impairment of hearing acuity as measured by the results of speech discrimination tests combined with the average hearing threshold levels as measured by pure tone audiometry tests in the frequencies 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 cycles per second. To rate the degree of disability for service-connected hearing loss, the Rating Schedule has established eleven auditory acuity levels, designated from level I, for essentially normal acuity, through level XI, for profound deafness. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85 (h), Table VI. In order to establish entitlement to a compensable rating for hearing loss, it must be shown that certain minimum levels of the combination of the percentage of speech discrimination loss and average pure tone decibel loss are met. The assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment is derived by a mechanical application of the Rating Schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered. Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992).

The criteria for rating hearing impairment use controlled speech discrimination tests (Maryland CNC) together with the results of pure tone audiometry tests. These results are then charted on Table VI, Table VIA, in exceptional cases as described in 38 C.F.R. § 4.86, and Table VII, as set out in the Rating Schedule. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85. An exceptional pattern of hearing loss occurs when the pure tone threshold at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 55 decibels or more, or when the pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86.

VA treatment records reflect audiological testing conducted in January 2023. However, such tests did not contain Maryland CNC speech discrimination testing and, therefore, are inadequate for rating purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85 (a).

At a VA audiological examination in September 2023, the pure tone thresholds in decibels at the tested frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hz were 20, 30, 35, and 45, respectively, in the right ear, and were 20, 35, 40, and 55, respectively, in the left ear. The examiner noted that the pure tone threshold average in the right ear was 33 decibels and the average in the left ear was 38 decibels. Speech discrimination was 98 percent in both ears. No exceptional pattern of hearing loss was shown. These audiometric test results equate to Level I hearing in the right ear and Level I hearing in the left ear, which equates to a noncompensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a compensable rating for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not warranted. In this regard, the aforementioned VA audiometric results reveal that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss resulted in, at most, Level I hearing acuity in both ears, which equates to a noncompensable rating. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of the difficulties associated with his bilateral hearing loss, to include not being able to hear people speaking to him. However, even after considering such contentions as to the effects of the disability on his daily life, the Board finds that the criteria for a higher rating are not met. See Lendenmann, supra. In this regard, in Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate the functional effects of decreased hearing and difficulty understanding speech in an everyday work environment as these are the effects that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure. The Veteran has not otherwise described functional effects that are considered exceptional, or that are not otherwise contemplated by the assigned evaluation. Id. Thus, his complete disability picture is compensated under the rating schedule.

Other Considerations

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus; however, the Board finds that his symptomology has been stable throughout each period on appeal. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disabilities is not warranted. Further, neither he nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, in regard to the initial and increased rating claims adjudicated herein. Doucette, supra.

Therefore, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss and increased initial rating for tinnitus are not warranted. In reaching such determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claims. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and such claims must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder. 

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), a disability examination which considers service connection as due to a toxic exposure is now required in situations where there is (a) evidence of a disability, (b) evidence of a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and (c) not enough evidence to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

A TERA is any activity that requires a corresponding entry in an exposure tracking record system; or that the Secretary determines qualifies for purposes of this subsection when taking into account what is reasonably prudent to protect the health of Veterans. 38 U.S.C. § 1710 (e)(4)(C).

Here, the Veteran has documented service in the coastal waters of the Republic of Vietnam, and an April 2022 memorandum confirmed his participation in a TERA and exposure to herbicides. Further, the Veteran's arguments throughout the claims file indicate he believes his disabilities are due to his service, including exposure to herbicides and/or asbestos. Therefore, a remand is required for a new VA examination that considers the TERA.

Additionally, a December 2023 VA examination determined the Veteran has a diagnosis of migraine, including migraine variants. 

As such, a remand is necessary for a TERA examination to be scheduled, and an opinion obtained as to whether his current disabilities are related to such exposures or whether his headache disability began during service.

2. Service connection for sinusitis.

The Veteran underwent a VA sinusitis examination in October 2023. At that time, he was noted to have a diagnosis of ethmoid sinusitis. The Veteran reported having had sinus issues for 40 years and undergoing several nasal surgeries in his lifetime. The examiner found his sinusitis was less likely than not related to his military service, to include toxic exposures. As rationale, she stated that the Veteran had a deviated septum, and there was no current evidence that toxic exposures caused a deviated septum. A deviated septum is noted in the Veteran's VA treatment records. 

However, the Veteran's medical records reflect his contentions that his asbestos exposure aboard Navy ships has caused respiratory problems. Thus, while the examiner states that toxic exposures do not cause a deviated septum, she discounts any other reason for the Veteran's long standing sinus issues. Thus, her opinion is conclusory and inadequate to decide the claim. 

The April 2022 memorandum confirmed exposure to herbicides as a result of the Veteran's service, however, an adequate TERA opinion for his claimed sinusitis has not been obtained. Thus, a remand is warranted in order to obtain the appropriate opinion. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

VA and private treatment records reflect a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, and an August 2012 sleep study diagnosed the Veteran with obstructive sleep apnea (positional). In October 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA sleep apnea examination. The examiner determined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not due to his military service as it was "positional," in that his sleep apnea was mostly related to "laying on his back," and in these cases the apneas would be reduced or go away when the person sleeps on their side. However, the August 2012 sleep study, although noting the Veteran had less apneas when on his side, noted that his snoring was unchanged no matter what sleeping position he maintained. The October 2023 examiner then stated that "therefore, the claim of sleep apnea related to toxic exposure is irrelevant." No direct service connection opinion was provided. As the October 2023 examiner's opinion is essentially a non-opinion, the Board finds it is inadequate to decide the claim.

January 2019 and January 2021 private medical records detail office visits to a sleep disorder center, and reflect a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, but does not state such was positional as found by the October 2023 examiner and August 2012 sleep study. See Reid health records. 

In December 2024, the Veteran submitted a private sleep apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) and opinion from Dr. M.B. Dr. M.B. opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was due to his military service. As rationale she found that the Veteran's obesity resulted in the development of his sleep apnea, and his COPD has contributed to his weight gain and obesity. This is because his COPD leaves him unable to engage in exercise or any activity that results in shortness of breath. His sleep is further disrupted by his service-connected tinnitus. Therefore, he does not get restorative sleep. The resulting obesity then resulted in the development of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The Board notes that the Veteran is not service connected for COPD. His September 2023 VA audiology examination does reflect he stated his tinnitus impacts his sleeping.

However, the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in August 2012, and VA treatment records dated February 2013 note the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of COPD. In fact, he was diagnosed with COPD in December 2023. (See December 2023 VA respiratory examination). Thus, as the Veteran's sleep apnea predates his COPD, his COPD did not cause his sleep apnea, and Dr. M.B.'s opinion is afforded no probative weight.

Although the Board finds Dr. M.B.'s opinion to be inadequate, the Board may only remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. For the error to be pre-decisional, it must be based on the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. A pre-decisional duty to assist error cannot be based on evidence received subsequent to the AOJ decision on appeal, even if it was received during an applicable evidence window. However, as the Board also found the pre-decisional October 2023 opinion to be inadequate, a remand for an adequate TERA opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.

4. Entitlement to service connection for COPD.

5. Entitlement to service connection for colon cancer.

6. Entitlement to service connection for lung cancer.

As noted above, the April 2022 memorandum confirmed the Veteran's participation in a TERA and exposure to herbicides during the Veteran's service.

The Veteran underwent a VA respiratory examination in July 2022. At that time COPD was not diagnosed, but the Veteran was diagnosed with a malignant neoplasm of the right lung. In October 2022, a different examiner reviewed the record and offered a negative nexus opinion for the Veteran's claimed lung cancer.

In December 2023, the Veteran underwent VA examination for his COPD. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's COPD was due to his military service. As rationale, the examiner wrote, "Veteran with diagnosis of COPD and receiving medical treatment for management. Veteran was exposed to herbacide [sic] while in service which is known to cause COPD but also has a history of smoking." The Board finds this opinion inadequate to decide the claim. First, the examiner offered no support for her opinion except to note the Veteran has a history of smoking, although VA treatment records reflect the Veteran quit smoking about 1985. Further, while noting that herbicides can cause COPD, the examiner did not offer a TERA opinion, or consider such contention in her opinion. Additionally, while VA treatment records reflect the Veteran's contentions of asbestos exposure, the examiner did not consider such in her opinion either. 

In December 2023, the Veteran also underwent VA examination for his colon cancer. The same examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's colon cancer was due to his military service. The examiner provided no rationale except to say that colon cancer was not noted upon entry into the military and the Veteran was diagnosed with colon cancer in 2020. Thus, in the absence of a rationale, the Board finds such opinion inadequate to decide the claim. 

Specific to his lung cancer claim, the Board notes that lung cancer is a presumptive condition related to herbicide exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). However, the January 2024 rating decision denied Veteran's claim for service connection for lung cancer based on the October 2022 VA examiner's finding that the Veteran's lung cancer was not primary, but a metastasis of his non-service-connected colon cancer. 

In December 2024, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion regarding the etiology of his COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer from Dr. M.B., along with several medical articles. Dr. M.B. determined it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer were related to his exposure to asbestos and Agent Orange while serving in the Navy. However, her rationale contains general statements like "the Veteran was exposed to Agent Orange," and that studies on Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) show an increase in the occurrence of lung, prostrate, and colon cancer." The articles submitted also note that "exposure to asbestos is a risk factor for colorectal cancer," discuss the long-term effects of dioxin on victims of an industrial accident in Italy, and note the presence of asbestos on Naval ships. However, Dr. M.B. does not relate the statements in her rationale or the articles' findings to this particular Veteran's etiology of COPD, colon cancer, or lung cancer. 

Further, similar to the October 2022 VA examiner, Dr. M.B. opined that the "Veteran's exposure to asbestos and Agent Orange contributed to the development of his COPD and his colon cancer, which metastasized and resulted in lung cancer," thus determining his lung cancer was a result of his non-service-connected colon cancer. She went on to say that the Veteran also has non-service-connected risk factors for his colon cancer, lung cancer, and COPD, including a remote history of smoking, and "there is no acceptable methodology for quantifying risk factors proportionally against one another in a manner that would allow for an accurate prioritization of individual risk factors. The most accurate assessment that can be made about the involvement of these risk factors is that they have all contributed to the development of the conditions." In other words, she could not assess whether a condition is "as likely as not" related to the Veteran's military service as required by the VA standard of proof.

Therefore, the Board finds Dr. M.B.'s opinions to be inadequate. The terminology used by Dr. M.B. does not provide a sufficient basis for an award of service connection, as the term "contributed" is too broad in nature, and thus does not meet VA's standard of "as likely as not."  See Hodges v. Sec'y of Dep't of Health and Human Servs., 9 F. 3d 958, 965 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (Newman, J. dissenting); Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 388 n.1 (2016). Further, while relating the Veteran's toxic exposures to his COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer, she also states there are a number of other factors that contributed to the Veteran's conditions. 

Additionally, colon cancer is not presumptively linked to Agent Orange. As Dr. M.B.'s opinion does not establish service connection for colon cancer, which she says is the cause of his lung cancer, service connection for lung cancer cannot be established either. 

Although the Board finds Dr. M.B.'s opinions to be inadequate, as noted above, the Board may only remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors. However, as the Board also found the pre-decisional October 2022 and December 2023 opinions inadequate, a remand for adequate opinions as to the etiology of the Veteran's COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer is warranted.

Specific to the Veteran's claim for service connection for lung cancer, an August 2023 VA treatment record states, "at this time it is not clear if metastasis is from patient's colonic primary or a new lung primary." Therefore, it is not clear that the Veteran's lung cancer is a metastasis of his non-service-connected colon cancer. Therefore, as lung cancer is a presumptive condition related to herbicide exposure, a medical opinion determining whether the Veteran's lung cancer was a primary site of cancer, or whether it metastasized from his colon cancer, is warranted.

Finally, although the April 2022 memorandum confirmed exposure to herbicides as a result of the Veteran's service, he has not been afforded a TERA examination for his claimed COPD, colon cancer, or lung cancer. Thus, a remand is warranted in order to schedule the appropriate TERA examinations. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his headache disorder. The examiner must review the claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the examiner.

The clinician must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's headache disorder is related to his TERA exposure.

In answering this question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

2. Forward the record, to include a copy of this remand, to an appropriate medical professional to obtain an addendum TERA opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sinusitis. The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the opinion. 

The clinician must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sinusitis is related to his TERA exposure.

In answering this question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

3. Forward the record, to include a copy of this remand, to an appropriate medical professional to obtain an addendum TERA opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the opinion. 

The clinician must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to his TERA exposure.

In answering this question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer. The examiner must review the claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the examiner.

(A) The clinician must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's COPD, colon cancer, and lung cancer are related to his TERA exposure.

In answering this question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(B) Separately, the clinician must address whether the Veteran's lung cancer is a metastasis of his colon cancer or a new primary cancer.

(continued on next page)

?

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.M. Kelly, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.