Citation Nr: A25031774
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240215-417666
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1976 to October 1979.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran asserts that his bilateral hearing loss is the result of his time in active service.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2024. The VA examiner diagnosed him with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. The Veteran asserted that he used his right hand to fire weapons and that he was exposed to weapons, infantry, and artillery. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was less likely than not caused by or a result of an event in military service. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's military records did not report hearing loss while in service. The Veteran's hearing evaluations in 1977 and 1979 revealed results within normal limits. 

The Board finds the January 2024 VA examination to be inadequate. The VA examiner relies solely on the Veteran's hearing evaluations from 1977 and 1979 in forming the medical opinion. The VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he suffered from hearing loss caused by his time in active service. As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service injury and symptoms thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate).

As such, there is no adequate medical opinion of record regarding the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. Thus, a remand is necessary. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral hearing loss. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.  

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay statements.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the appellant, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.