Citation Nr: A25031810
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-470860
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army from August 1979 to April 1991. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for tinnitus.

The Board finds remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Specifically, pursuant the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act (PACT Act), VA's duty to assist requires VA provide an examination and medical opinion when there is evidence of a disability, exists that a claimant engaged in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection of that disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a). 

When providing an opinion, VA has a duty to ensure that the opinion it provides is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). 

Turning to the evidence of record, in the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ identified favorable findings that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus and that he engaged in a TERA due to his Military Occupation Specialty. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The AOJ obtained a medical opinion in August 2023. In the opinion, the examiner found that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA. In support thereof, the examiner reasoned that the Veteran did not experience permanent auditory damage while on active duty because his service treatment records indicate no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds between entrance examination and separation examination. Additionally, the examiner said an audiological evaluation completed three months after the Veteran separated from service revealed hearing within normal limits. The examiner also noted that the Veteran reported that his tinnitus began after his medical discharge from service. The examiner concluded his rationale by again stating the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. See August 2023 VA Medical Opinion.      

The Board finds the August 2023 opinion to be inadequate. The examiner's rationale focuses on when the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset, rather than the relationship between the Veteran's tinnitus and his in-service exposure to toxins, including the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. While the examiner did check the box indicating the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, the examiner provided no discussion regarding this opinion or support for it. Consequently, this opinion is insufficient because it was too conclusory. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (a mere conclusion by an examiner is insufficient to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision as to the probative value of the opinion). 

Therefore, a remand is warranted to obtain a VA opinion regarding the relationship between the Veteran's tinnitus and his in-service exposure to toxins, including the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's tinnitus is caused by his indicated TERA. A physical examination is only needed if deemed necessary by the VA examiner.  

The clinician is reminded that VA has conceded that the Veteran has participated in a TERA during his service.

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welch, Joshua H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.