Citation Nr: A25031336
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240509-439343
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for nerve damage of the left foot is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for nerve damage of the right foot is denied.

3. Entitlement to an initial 20 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis is granted.

4. Entitlement to an initial 20 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record does not show the presence of a currently diagnosed condition, claimed as nerve damage of the left foot, that is at least as likely as not related to service.

2. The evidence of record does not show the presence of a currently diagnosed condition, claimed as nerve damage of the right foot, that is at least as likely as not related to service.

3. The Veteran's service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis more nearly approximates a moderately-severe level of impairment of the foot; a severe level of impairment has not been demonstrated.

4. The Veteran's service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis more nearly approximates a moderately-severe level of impairment of the foot; a severe level of impairment has not been demonstrated.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing service connection for nerve damage of the left foot have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for establishing service connection for nerve damage of the right foot have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

3. Throughout the entire period on appeal, the criteria for an initial 20 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

4. Throughout the entire period on appeal, the criteria for an initial 20 percent disability rating, but no higher, for the service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2015 to April 2019.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The decision was issued on April 3, 2024.

In response to the April 2024 rating decision, in May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) where he selected the Direct Review docket.  Under that docket, the Board considers the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the April 2024 rating decision.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection 

1. Service connection for nerve damage of the left foot is denied.

2. Service connection for nerve damage of the right foot is denied.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

If there is no showing of a resulting chronic condition during service, then a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required to support a finding of chronicity.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); see Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (holding that the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) apply only for the specific chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a)).  

Service connection may also be established for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  

"Congress specifically limits entitlement to service-connected disease or injury where such cases have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of a proof of present disability there can be no claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The requirement of a "current disability" is satisfied if a disorder is diagnosed at the time a claim is filed or at any time during the pendency of the appeal; service connection may be awarded even though the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  The standard is whether a disability exists at the time the claim was filed.  See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).  In cases where there is no diagnosed disorder, the current disability requirement can be met where there are symptoms of a disorder that cause functional impairment.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another.  38?C.F.R. § 4.3.  When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b).  When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits.  38?U.S.C. §?5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran claimed he developed nerve damage to his feet as a result of his service or alternatively, as secondary to his service-connected cellulitis of the bilateral great toes.

In this case, the Board finds that there was no indication that the Veteran was diagnosed with a peripheral nerve condition throughout the period on appeal.  In this regard, the medical evidence of record does not contain a diagnosis of such condition.  Indeed, the Veteran underwent VA peripheral nerve examination in January 2024 and denied having a peripheral nerve condition.  Moreover, he did not report any symptoms attributable to a peripheral nerve condition and no abnormal findings were reported upon examination.  The January 2024 VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a currently diagnosed peripheral nerve condition. 

Therefore, the Board finds that there is no current diagnosis of a nerve condition of affecting the bilateral feet which would meet the currently diagnosed disorder element of service connection.  See Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356; Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225. 

Further, while the Veteran is competent to report his current symptoms, he does not have the expertise to render a diagnosis or provide a medical opinion as to the etiology of such.  See Clyburn v. West, 12 Vet. App. 296, 301 (1999) ("Although the veteran is competent to testify to the pain he has experienced since his tour in the Persian Gulf, he is not competent to testify to the fact that what he experienced in service and since service is the same condition he is currently diagnosed with."); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis).  As a result, even if there were a currently diagnosed condition, the Board is unable to find, on the basis of the Veteran's lay statements alone, that service connection is warranted.  

As a final matter, though not claimed by the Veteran, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military service and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the toxic exposure risk activity.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  However, given that the Board has found that there is no evidence of a current disability of a nerve condition affecting the bilateral feet, the requirement for a VA examination and nexus opinion requirement of the PACT Act is not for application. 

Therefore, as there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for nerve damage of the left and/or right foot must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

Increased Rating Claims

3. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis is granted.

4. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis is granted.

Service connection for the Veteran's cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis was originally granted in the April 2024 rating decision, which is the subject of this appeal, and 10 percent disability ratings were assigned for the left and right great toes, effective from November 28, 2023 (the date VA received the Veteran's original claim for service connection).  The Veteran contends that initial disability ratings in excess of 10 percent are warranted for his service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Other applicable general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating many accurately reflect the elements of disability; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant; where there is a questions as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability pictures more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10; see also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). 

A claimant may also experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. 

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.  It is essential that the examination upon which ratings are based adequately portray the anatomical damage, and the functional loss, with respect to all these elements.  The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervations, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.  Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.  A little used part of the musculoskeletal system may be expected to show evidence of disuse, either through atrophy, the condition of the skin, absence of normal callosity or the like. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

Evidence of pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination must be considered in determining the level of associated functional loss, taking into account any part of the musculoskeletal system that becomes painful on use.  The provisions regarding the avoidance of pyramiding, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, do not forbid consideration of a higher rating based on greater limitation of motion due to pain on use, including flare-ups.  However, those provisions should only be considered in conjunction with the Diagnostic Codes predicated on limitation of motion.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45.  The intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. Painful motion is an important factor of joint disability, which is entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

The Veteran's cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284 for "other foot injuries."

Under Diagnostic Code 5284, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate other foot injuries.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe other foot injuries.  Id.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe other foot injuries.  Id.  A Note to Diagnostic Code 5284 instructs that with actual loss of use of the foot rate as a maximum 40 percent.  Id. 

An "injury" is "[p]hysical damage to a person's body," or "harm or hurt; usually applied to damage inflicted on the body of an external force."  Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484, 492 (2016) (quoting BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY (9th ed. 2009) and DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 941 (32nd ed. 2012)).  Although Diagnostic Code 5284 applies to disabilities resulting from actual injuries to the foot, closely related conditions that are not explicitly listed in the Rating Schedule may be rated by analogy under Diagnostic Code 5284.  Id. at 492-93.  Foot conditions that are specifically listed in the Rating Schedule may not be rated by analogy under Diagnostic Code 5284.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 338 (2015) ("as a matter of law, [Diagnostic Code] 5284 does not apply to the eight foot conditions specifically listed in § 4.71a") (citing 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20 and 4.27)).

VA's General Counsel has determined that Diagnostic Code 5284 is a general diagnostic code under which a variety of foot injuries may be rated, including trauma involving the forefoot and toes, the talus and midfoot, and the os calcis and heel cord, which may affect range of motion.  VAOPGCPREC 9-98.

Under Diagnostic Code 5284, each foot is rated separately.  Prokarym v. McDonald, Vet. App. 307, 311 (2015).  Words such as "moderate" and "severe" are not defined in the VA Rating Schedule.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. §4.6.

According to Merriam-Webster Dictionary, "moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension."  See www.merriam-webster.com/ dictionary/moderate.  "Severe" means "of a great degree."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.

Within the context of Diagnostic Code 5284, "moderately severe" is a level that is more impaired than moderate, and less impaired than severe.  To be characterized as moderately severe under Diagnostic Code 5284, there must be features of both moderate foot injury and severe foot injury, which considered together, establishes an intermediate level of impairment.  

The Veteran underwent VA foot conditions examination in January 2024.  At that time, his condition began in 2016 at which time he constantly had repeated ingrown toenails and eventually they became infected on both great toes of the left and right foot.  He reported that since onset, his condition has progressed/worsened.  He reported current symptoms of severe constant aching pain at the base joint of each great toe and shooting pain in each great toe from the plantar to the tip of the toes.  The Veteran reported that flare-ups impact the function of the foot which were characterized as increased aching pain at the base joint of each great toe and shooting pain in each great toe from the plantar to the tip of the toes.  Precipitating factors included standing, running, boots, climbing and jumping.  Alleviating factors included Tylenol heat pad, ice pad, rest and soft shoes.  He reported the severity of his flare-ups as severe.  The examiner reported that pain did not contribute to functional loss during flare-ups.  The Veteran did not report having functional loss/impairment.

The examiner reported that the Veteran has foot injuries/conditions of recurrent onychocryptosis (ingrown toenail) bilateral and post-cellulitis great toe, bilateral residual (pain).  The examiner reported that the bilateral great toe was tender to touch, toenail intact, no noted current bilateral onychocryptosis (ingrown toenail).  The examiner further reported that skin had normal color and texture, and there was no swelling or drainage, and no noted current bilateral cellulitis great toe, bilateral.  The examiner reported that the severity of the conditions was mild and affected both sides.  The examiner reported that the foot conditions did not chronically compromise weight-bearing and did not require arch supports, custom orthotic inserts or shoe modifications.

The examiner reported that the Veteran had foot surgery.  In this regard, in May 2018, he underwent ingrown toenail removal on his right foot and in August 2018, he underwent ingrown toenail removal on his left foot.  The examiner reported that the Veteran had residual signs or symptoms due to his foot surgeries, described as severe constant aching pain at the base joint of each great toe and shooting pain in each great toe from the plantar to the tip of the toes.  The examiner reported no pain on physical examination of the right foot or left foot.  The examiner also reported no function loss of the left lower extremity or right lower extremity attributable to the Veteran's conditions.

The examiner reported that procured evidence did not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time.  The examiner reported there was no other functional loss during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time.  The examiner reported evidence of pain on passive motion, active motion and on weight-bearing for the right and left foot but stated that the pain did not contribute to functional loss.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, sign, symptoms or scars.  No imaging studies were performed.  The Veteran did not use an assistive device.  The examiner diagnosed cellulitis of the great toe with an onset date of May 3, 2018 for the right great toe and August 29, 2018 for the left great toe.  The examiner also diagnosed onychogryphosis with an onset date of May 3, 2018 for the right foot and August 29, 2018 for the left foot.

Upon review, the Board finds that initial 20 percent disability ratings, but no higher, are warranted throughout the entire period on appeal for the Veteran's service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis which are moderately-severe.  In this regard, the Board notes the VA examiner reported the Veteran's condition as being of mild severity; however, the examiner also documented pain on active motion, passive motion and weight-bearing.  The Board also acknowledges the Veteran's report of severe constant pain and his classification of severity of his conditions as severe.  However, the Veteran also reported no functional loss/impairment, and the examiner reported that pain did not result in functional loss.  Given the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's conditions are more impaired than moderate but less impaired than severe and thus, encompass features of both moderate foot injury and severe foot injury, which considered together, establishes an intermediate level of impairment.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis more nearly approximate a moderately-severe level of impairment and not a severe level of impairment, which warrants a 20 percent disability rating, not a rating in excess of 20 percent.

As such, initial 20 percent disability ratings, but no higher, are warranted for the Veteran's service-connected cellulitis of the left great toe with onychogryphosis and service-connected cellulitis of the right great toe with onychogryphosis.

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medina, Sara

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.