Citation Nr: A25031213
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 250203-512527
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative disc disease, intervertebral disc syndrome, and degenerative joint disease of the lumbar spine is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1969 to March 1972, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam.  The Veteran also had additional service in the National Guard.  

This case has a long procedural history that has been ongoing since the Veteran submitted his Supplemental Claim in December 2018.  Most recently, in August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of this matter previously addressed in a November 2023 rating decision.  In November 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal.  In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As this issue was previously denied in prior rating decisions, the Board notes that VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d)).  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1)).  Here, in the November 2024 rating decision, the AOJ indicated that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted.  However, the AOJ then proceeded to discuss all the relevant evidence of record and decide the issue on the merits.  As the AOJ decided the issue on the merits, it is implied that it found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted, which is a favorable finding that is binding on the Board.  As the AOJ has already determined that new and relevant evidence has been submitted, the Board need not address new and relevant evidence herein.

The Board acknowledges that this decision is being issued prior to the expiration of the period during which the Veteran may elect to switch Board review dockets.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  However, the Veteran's case has been advanced on the docket, meaning that he has met the criteria to have his case considered ahead of normal docket order.  As such, the Veteran has indicated that he wants the Board to adjudicate this matter as quickly as possible, and given the need to remand for further development, the Board concludes that there is no prejudice to the Veteran in the issuance of this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative disc disease, intervertebral disc syndrome, and degenerative joint disease of the lumbar spine is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he initially injured his low back during active service while stationed in Vietnam.  He further claims that his low back disorder was subsequently incurred in or aggravated during a period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) when he suffered an injury while changing a tire on a two and half ton truck working in the motor pool.  In support of his claim, he has submitted lay statements from fellow service members.  In this regard, in an August 2013 statement, a service member who served in the National Guard with the Veteran stated that he was told by the Veteran about the back injury in Vietnam.  Further, an April 2011 statement from another service member indicated that the service member witnessed the low back injury while the Veteran was on ACDUTRA in 2007.  Another statement in September 2015 by a different service member confirmed that the incident on ACDUTRA was reported to him by the service member who wrote the April 2011 statement, but indicated it was in 2006.  

The Veteran has continued to report that the injury was in 2006.  Moreover, a May 2009 retirement points statement shows that the Veteran's last period of ACDUTRA was sometime during the period from February 2005 to April 2006.  The Veteran subsequently retired in 2009.  Importantly, private treatment records show reports of back pain and treatment with a chiropractor during this period.  However, no attempts have been made to verify the date of the Veteran's ACDUTRA during 2005 to 2006.  

Likewise, in October 2010, the AOJ issued a memorandum finding that the Veteran's service treatment records for his period of National Guard service were unavailable.  However, as the Veteran had recently retired from the National Guard, there is an indication in the record that his records may have been in transit.  Regardless, no further attempts have been made to obtain the Veteran's National Guard treatment records, to include any Line of Duty determinations.  In sum, the AOJ failed to take appropriate steps to obtain all relevant National Guard records.  In order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the AOJ should take appropriate steps to verify the Veteran's periods of ACDUTRA during 2005 and 2006, and obtain any treatment records, including Line of Duty determinations.  

Moreover, the February 2019 VA examiner stated that the Veteran provided a copy of notes dated in 2015 from his private chiropractor detailing that the chiropractor recalled providing prior treatments for the 2006 injury.  A September 2005 private treatment record indicated that the Veteran was receiving chiropractic treatment.  Although the Veteran has indicated that most of his chiropractor records have been destroyed, he obviously had a relevant private treatment record in his possession at the February 2019 VA examination.  This record is not associated with the claims file, and it does not appear that the AOJ made any attempts to request this record from the Veteran.  Thus, on remand, in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the AOJ must attempt to obtain the Veteran's private chiropractor treatment records, to specifically include asking for any in his possession.  

The Board recognizes that the February 2019 and November 2023 VA examiners appear to indicate that the Veteran's current low back disorder is due an injury while on ACDUTRA.  However, these opinions are inadequate as they are based on inconsistent evidence.  In this regard, the February 2019 VA examiner refers to an injury in 2006, but as noted above, further development is necessary to confirm the Veteran was on ACDUTRA at that time.  Moreover, the November 2023 VA examiner referred to an injury in 1979 and the Veteran has never reported any such injury during that year and the evidence clearly shows no periods of ACDUTRA during that year.  

Further, in September 2023, the Board previously remanded this matter to obtain an opinion as to whether the Veteran's low back disorder was secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  The November 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's low back disorder was not proximately due to or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  The examiner rationalized that the Veteran's low back disorders and left and right knee chondromalacia are not medically or physiologically related.  The readjudication of the claim for service-connection for degenerative disc disease and degenerative joint disease of the lumbar spine is a separate entity entirely from the left and right knee chondromalacia and unrelated to it.  A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship between the left and right knee chondromalacia and the current back condition.  A nexus has not been established for existing claim.

Importantly, a secondary service connection claim has two prongs: causation and aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Nevertheless, here, the examiner provided the same rationale for secondary causation and aggravation.  To be adequate, a VA opinion must provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  As such, the secondary opinion is also inadequate.  Thus, the Veteran has not been afforded an adequate VA opinion to address direct or secondary service connection.  Accordingly, to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, an addendum opinion must be obtained.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate steps to verify the Veteran's periods of ACDUTRA during 2005 and 2006, and obtain any treatment records, including Line of Duty determinations.  All attempts must be clearly documented in the claims file. 

2.  Request that the Veteran provide any private chiropractic treatment records in his possession, to specifically including the records he brought to the February 2019 VA examination.  Also inform the Veteran that he may complete a VA Form 21-4142 so that the AOJ can attempt to obtain any private chiropractor treatment records.  Make two requests for the authorized records from any identified facilities, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's low back disabilities. The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner must address the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's low back disabilities (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service, or (4) related to an in-service injury, event, or disease during active duty, a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, including the reported injuries.

b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's low back disabilities were caused or aggravated by (any incremental increase regardless of permanence, even transient) service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions reached.  The examiner must address the service treatment records, National Guard records, post service treatment records, the Veteran's lay statements concerning the onset of his disorder, and the lay statements from fellow service members.

With respect to the secondary opinion, the examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities and his low back disorder.  The examiner must also provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation.  

 

J.M. ESTES

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.