Citation Nr: A25031249
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 220315-228328
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is denied.

Service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

Service connection for lumbar condition is denied.

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

Service connection for peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity (RLE), is denied.

Service connection for peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity (LLE), is denied.

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for essential tremors is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has not been shown to have a medical diagnosis of TBI, or residuals from a TBI. 

2. The Veteran was not exposed to herbicides during service, and his diabetes mellitus type II is not directly related to his active service.

3. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is directly related to active service.

4. The weight of the evidence is against finding that the Veteran's lumbar condition was incurred in or otherwise caused by his active-duty service.

5. The evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's hearing loss disability is related to active service.

6. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy had its onset in or is otherwise related to active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for TBI have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for diabetes mellitus type II have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disability are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for service connection for hearing loss have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for RLE peripheral neuropathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

7. The criteria for service connection for LLE peripheral have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1968 to August 1972.

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2018 rating decision under the legacy system by a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The Veteran filed a notice of disagreement and a statement of the case (SOC) was issued in February 2022. 

In March 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Evidence submission lane, seeking to opt into the AMA from the SOC, which became the decision on appeal. While the Veteran did not specifically select the "Opt-in from SOC/SSOC" box on the forms submitted, it is generally Board policy to accept VA Form 10182s as opt-in request if timely and otherwise valid, notwithstanding unmarked opt-in check boxes. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2022 SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. 

Additional evidence has been added to the claims file outside of the evidentiary windows the Board is allowed to consider.  The Board, by operation of law cannot review that evidence in adjudicating this appeal.  To the extent the Veteran would like that evidence reviewed in conjunction with any of the issues on appeal, he may file a supplemental claim and identify or resubmit the evidence.  Instructions on filing a supplemental claim are attached to this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI)

The Veteran asserts he has a TBI that is related to his active military service.

A review of the service treatment records (STRs) reveal that in December 1969, the Veteran had a fall but only injured his knee. He also had a football injury in the May 1971, but only injured his left shoulder. There are no indications of treatment for or diagnosis of a TBI in service.  Further, the Veteran's 1972 separation examination was negative for any head injuries.

The Veteran submitted a statement of his traumatic experiences during service, and noted that he witnessed two Marines hit their heads with full force and were bleeding profusely, however, the Veteran did not experience the head injury himself. 

In a May 2018 VA Initial Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed TBI. He was diagnosed with PTSD, but no other psychiatric conditions. 

The Veteran submitted a letter from a Veteran Center counselor, who noted the Veteran had symptoms of anger, anxiety, depression, hopelessness, need to isolate and sleep disturbances, however, these symptoms were attributed to his PTSD. 

The Veteran's VA and private treatment records contain no medical documentation of any TBI.

Upon a careful review of the evidence of record, the Veteran's record does not reflect that he has been diagnosed with a TBI.  In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). As the evidence fails to support a diagnosis of TBI at any time during this appeal, service connection cannot be granted and the claim is denied.

2. Service connection for diabetes mellitus type II

The Veteran claims that he was exposed to herbicide agents while in Guam and the Republic of Vietnam.

Service connection for type II diabetes can be established based on herbicide exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6). If a veteran is presumed to have been exposed to herbicides or the evidence with respect to exposure is at least in equipoise, the veteran is entitled to a presumption of service connection for certain disorders listed under 38 C.F.R. 3.309(e), such as type II diabetes.

A veteran who had active service in certain geographic areas during certain periods of time is presumed to have been exposed to herbicides agents. These presumptive regions include places such as the Republic of Vietnam, the Korean DMZ, and Air Force bases in Thailand during certain periods of time. The PACT Act has further expanded the places in which herbicide exposure is presumed, and included service in Guam. 

The Veteran submitted a statement in May 2018 that he was assigned to the USS Hunley. In 1971, he alleges the USS Hunley was ordered to Guam, but then detoured to Australia, then ultimately Vietnam. While docked at Da Nang harbor, he volunteered to help with cooking at the mess hall on the airbase. He states he worked there for one to two weeks assisting cooking. From Vietnam, he alleges the USS Hunley sailed to Guam where he attended the mess hall on the ship as well as the base. He states he was in Guam until February 1972, when he was transferred to Lakehurst New Jersey Naval Base where he stayed until his discharge in 1972. He alleges that the USS Hunley was on a secret mission since they were unloading highly classified equipment. 

The Veteran's military personnel records reflect that he was stationed aboard the USS Hunley (AS-31) from March 15, 1969 until May 27, 1971. In March 1971, the Veteran requested reassignment to return home to take care of his mother. The records show the USS Hunley was scheduled to go to Guam in the late summer of 1971, however, the Veteran's application for reassignment was approved and he left the ship in May 1971. 

The logbooks from the USS Hunley (AS-31) were reviewed by the Military Records Research Center for the period that the Veteran was aboard, however, after a comprehensive review, they concluded that the USS Hunley did not visit either Vietnam or Guam during that time. Further, they concluded that there is no other evidence of exposure to herbicide agents in the claims folder, personnel records or deck logs.

Although the Veteran provided a detailed statement of his duty assignments in Vietnam and Guam, his statements are not credible as they are contradicted by the more probative and contemporaneous logbooks.  As such, exposure to herbicide agents during service cannot be conceded, and service connection for diabetes on a presumptive basis is not warranted.

Next, the Board will analyze whether service connection for diabetes may be granted on a direct basis.

Here, STRs do not show any complains or treatment for diabetes. The Veteran's separation physical in March 1972 showed no endocrine findings, and urinalysis for sugar was negative. There is also no evidence that diabetes was first diagnosed within one year of separation of service. 

Here, the Veteran contends that his diabetes is related to his exposure to herbicide agents during service, however, such exposure cannot be corroborated by any credible evidence. Moreover, no medical evidence even suggests that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus was the result of his military service.

In sum, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's diabetes is etiologically related to his service either based on exposure to herbicide agents in service or based on a direct nexus. Accordingly, service connection for diabetes is denied.

3. Service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder

The Veteran filed a claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder in January 2018. While the appeal was pending, the Veteran filed a separate claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, which was subsequently granted as service connection for PTSD in an April 2024 rating decision, effective January 18, 2024.

As the claim on appeal was pending prior to that date, the April 2024 rating decision does not reflect a full grant of the benefits sought on this appeal. Where, as here, a claim for service connection is granted while an appeal for the same claim is pending, the Board retains jurisdiction over the appeal. See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136-48 (2024); Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. at 204, supra; see also Warren v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 214, 221 (2016) (holding that a subsequent AOJ decision cannot divest the Board of jurisdiction over the prior appeal; therefore, an AOJ grant of service connection cannot finally decide the claim of service connection already on appeal to the Board).  This is relevant in that the date of claim often impacts the effective date for the grant of service connection. 

Here, the Board is bound by the favorable findings in the April 2024 rating decision that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD is directly related to events in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The Board, as a subsequent VA adjudicator, is bound by this favorable application of law to facts and finds no clear and unmistakable error to rebut the AOJ's findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As a result, the elements required to establish service connection are met. The claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is granted.

4. Service connection for lumbar condition is denied.

The Veteran claims his current lumbar condition is related to his military service. Specifically, he states that he fell down a flight of stairs during his last six months of service and injured his back. See December 2020 Correspondence.

STRs reflect that the Veteran injured his back in September 1970 lifting milk cartons and had mid back pain with movement. He was advised to avoid lifting for 4 days and rest for 3 days. He was diagnosed with a strained back.  However, no additional back complaints were registered over the last two years of service, and the Veteran's Report of Medical Examination at separation was absent a current or ongoing lumbar spine disability.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records confirm he has a diagnosis of lumbar strain, and x-rays noted some age-appropriate degenerative changes. Private treatment records show he reported low back pain in June 2013 after power washing a deck and that it occasionally happened in the past, but it resolved itself. There is, however, no indication that it stemmed from his military service.

The Veteran submitted a statement indicating that he injured his back in service from falling from a flight of stairs and since service he experiences bouts of low back pain. He stated that a few years later he reinjured his back while lifting boxes. The doctor took x-rays and told him he had two herniated discs that were probably due to the fall during service since there were no prior incidents. The Veteran stated he reinjures his back about every two years but this past year, he had to be rushed to the hospital after bending over and hearing two pops in his back. 

The May 2018 VA back conditions examination shows he had a diagnosis of lumbar strain. Upon physical examination, a review of the evidence of record, and the Veteran's lay statements, the VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current lumbar spine disability was incurred in or caused by the back pain during service. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's discharge examination noted no lower extremity or spine abnormalities. The medical records also do no support direct service connection. 

Additionally, he VA and private treatment records do not reveal evidence in support of an etiological link between the Veteran's lumbar spine disability and his military service.

After consideration of the entire record and the relevant law, the Board finds that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability is not related to service and service connection is not established.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's credible statements that he first injured his back in service. However, while the Veteran did injure his back from heavy lifting, there is no positive etiological opinion linking his current back condition to the injury, other than the Veteran's lay statement. The Veteran reported that his doctor told him his disc herniation is probably from the fall in service, however, the Veteran has not provided probative evidence as such.  Furthermore, his separation examination found no clinical abnormalities relating to a spinal condition.  Here, while the Veteran is competent to report injuring his back in service, the evidence of record refutes his assertion that back problems which began in service continued thereafter.  Moreover, the Veteran has noted multiple post-service back injuries.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran has a confirmed diagnosis of a lumbar disability, however, the criteria for service connection have not been met. The lack of positive etiological opinion weighs against the claim. In this respect, the Board finds that the VA opinion to be highly probative. The VA opinion was based on a thorough review of the claims file and was consistent with other evidence of record. Accordingly, the VA opinion is entitled to great probative weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04.

While the Veteran asserts that a private doctor told him he had herniated discs from his fall in service, no medical evidence has been submitted to this point, and there is no showing that the medical professional, to the extent he rendered such a statement, had the benefit of reviewing the Veteran's claims file so as to understand the nature of his claimed link between the Veteran's back disability and his service.  This is relevant as the Veteran's separation physical did not show any back problems and the Veteran is not shown to have received any treatment for his back for years after service.

The Veteran believes his back condition is related to an in-service injury. The Veteran in this case is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that he does not have the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the medical evidence of record regarding a nexus opinion.

Overall, the evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's lumbar condition was the result of his active service. Therefore, service connection is denied.

5. Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

For VA purposes, hearing loss will be considered to be a disability when (1) the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or (2) the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or (3) when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

It is of note that although the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was chef/cook, he stated he was a gunner onboard his ship and loaded guns with no hearing protection. He is service connected for tinnitus based on his reports of noise exposure while on the ship. Thus, military noise exposure is conceded. STRs are silent with respect to any hearing or ear issues, including hearing loss, ear trouble or ringing in the ears. Audiological tests in service were shown to be within normal limits.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2018, at which he was diagnosed with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss according to VA standards. The VA examiner opined that his hearing loss was less likely than not caused by service, as the Veteran had normal hearing at entrance and separation. Further, he stated that the Veteran had recreational and occupational noise post-service. The examiner, however, did not consider the Veteran's reports of noise in service, as he had done for tinnitus. 

The Veteran provided a private audiological evaluation in February 2018. The provider noted the Veteran's statements regarding noise exposure during service and his current hearing loss diagnosis. He opined that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's asymmetric hearing loss is related to his military experience. 

Here, the Veteran has met the VA standard for hearing loss based upon his audiological results from the May 2018 VA examination. The question then becomes whether or not there is a nexus between the Veteran's hearing loss and his in-service noise exposure. The Board finds that the statement from his private audiologist, at the very least, puts the evidence for and against the Veteran's claim in relative equipoise.

Accordingly, service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

6. Service connection for peripheral neuropathy, bilateral lower extremity 

The Veteran contends that his bilateral peripheral neuropathy, lower extremities, are related to his active-duty service.

Review of the Veteran's STRs show no diagnosis, treatment, or complaint of bilateral peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremity, nor symptoms thereof. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records from June 2013 show he had numbness and tingling in his lower back, with some minor radiation to his right thigh and bilateral big toe. He reported this happens on occasion but resolves itself.

In a May 2018 VA Back examination, the Veteran reported moderate paresthesias in the right lower extremity, but no numbness. The examiner attributed the symptom to radiculopathy due to his back condition.

For the period on appeal, the record contains no evidence that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremity. The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination of his peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremity. VA must provide a medical examination where there is "competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability" and the evidence indicates that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the claimant's active military, naval, or air service," but there is insufficient "medical evidence for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim." 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). To trigger VA's duty to assist, there need only be evidence that indicates that there may be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event or injury. This is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. Applying the McLendon test, the Board observes that none of the factors are satisfied. No evidence of record suggests that the Veteran is presently diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremity; there is no evidence of an inservice injury, event, or illness; and absent evidence of either a present condition or a past event, there can be no evidence linking the two. The Board thus finds that the McLendon threshold is not satisfied, and no duty-to-assist error occurred when the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination. 

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for service connection for bilateral peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for essential tremors is remanded.

The Veteran is currently diagnosed with essential tremors in both hands. Further, STRs show the Veteran had an infection in his left hand and a laceration of the right hand that required sutures. The AOJ denied service connection because there was no evidence that his essential tremors were caused by active service.

In this case, the Board finds that the McLendon criteria, as noted above, have been satisfied. Accordingly, a remand is required because the Veteran has not yet been afforded VA examination to determine the etiology of his essential tremors. The absence of a VA examination to determine the nature and extent of the claimed disability constitutes a pre-decisional error in failing to fulfill the duty to assist. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the etiology of his essential tremors. The examiner should answer the following question:  Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's essential tremors had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include as a result of his left-hand infection in December 1970 and/or right-hand laceration in May 1971?  Why or why not?  

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jaigirdar, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.