Citation Nr: A25031051
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240616-447840
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), claimed as anxiety and depression, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for low back pain with spinal stenosis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right bicipital tendonitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for anemia, to include as secondary to a service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, her current acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, claimed as anxiety and depression, was incurred in service.

2. The Veteran's GERD was not incurred in active service or otherwise related to service.

3. The Veteran's sinusitis was not incurred in active service or otherwise related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, claimed as anxiety and depression, were met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for service connection for GERD were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty training (ACDUTRA) in the Army from September 1996 to March 1997, with additional service in the Army National Guard.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ claim in August 2021. In October 2021, the RO issued a rating decision which denied service connection for anemia, anxiety, cervical strain, depression, GERD, right bicipital tendonitis, right elbow strain, and sinusitis. 

In June 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 supplemental claim regarding the above issues as well as serviced connection for cephalgia and a back disability. In an October 2022 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for anemia, anxiety, cephalgia, cervical strain, GERD, low back pain with spinal stenosis, right bicipital tendonitis, right elbow strain, sinusitis, and depression.

In March 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, seeking review of the October 2022 rating decision. This led to the RO issuing the June 2023 HLR decision on appeal.

In June 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), specifically appealing the issues of entitlement to service connection for anemia, a psychiatric disorder, a cervical disability, a low back disability, GERD, right bicipital tendonitis, right elbow strain, and sinusitis. As for the psychiatric disorder, although the Veteran's August 2021 claim form listed anxiety and depression only, VA is obligated to consider all pertinent symptomatology, regardless of how that symptomatology is diagnosed. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5, 9 (2009). Because the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD during the appeal period, that diagnosis is considered as part of this appeal.

The Veteran elected the Direct Review option. As such, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the initial October 2022 AOJ rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

In January 2025, the Veteran filed a motion to have her appeal advanced on the docket. In an April 2025 letter, the Board granted the motion. See 38 U.S.C. § 7107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.800(c), 20.902(c).

Pursuant to the Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA), VA has duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159 (2022). 

Regarding the claims decided below, there is no evidence of any VA error in notifying or assisting the Veteran that reasonably affects the fairness of this adjudication. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Neither the Veteran nor her lawyer raised any other issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In the context of Reserve or National Guard service, "active service" includes active duty and any period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled from a disease or injury incurred in the line of duty. See 38 U.S.C. § 101(21), (24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a). "Active service" also includes any period of inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA) during which the individual concerned was disabled from an injury incurred in the line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident which occurred during such training. Id. Accordingly, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA, or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA.

In determining whether service connection is warranted, the Board shall consider the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claimant is entitled to the benefit-of-the-doubt when the competing evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal." That is, exact equipoise is not required to trigger the favorable benefit-of-the-doubt rule. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, claimed as anxiety and depression, is granted.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression. She argues these disorders are related to in-service trauma. As noted above, she has also been diagnosed with PTSD, which the Board will consider as part of her appeal. After careful review, the Board finds service connection is warranted.

There are particular requirements for establishing entitlement to service connection for PTSD in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) that are separate from those for establishing service connection generally. Arzio v. Shinseki, 602 F.3d 1343, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) and 38 C.F.R. § 4.125.

When a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than a veteran's service records may corroborate the veteran's account of the stressor incident. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5); see also Patton v. West, 12 Vet. App. 272, 277 (1999). Examples of such evidence include, but are not limited to, records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians, pregnancy tests or tests for sexually transmitted diseases, and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

Evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these sources. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include, but are not limited to, a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment, deterioration in work performance, substance abuse, episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes. Id.

In this case, the Veteran's service treatment records do not reflect complaints or treatment for mental health problems. In October 2018, a diagnostic consultant provided an opinion stating the Veteran presented with symptoms of PTSD, including insomnia, sleep deprivation, anxiety, isolation, memory loss, hyper vigilance, depression, and agoraphobia. She was provisionally diagnosed with PTSD, and the examiner opined it was at least as likely as not the condition was directly and causally related to the Veteran's military service. The consultant noted a more thorough psychiatric evaluation would be completed.

In November 2018, a more detailed report from a licensed psychologist reflects the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD and depressive disorder. The psychologist reviewed the Veteran's history, including her reports of in-service traumatic experiences, and concluded the Veteran's diagnoses were related to those experiences. The psychologist included with his report a New York Times article from July 2005 describing an electrical accident that caused four deaths, as well as a July 2005 AP article describing a Boy Scout event that resulted in heat exhaustion among participants.

In December 2018 and May 2019, the Veteran submitted PTSD stressor statements. In one statement she described an incident during a training period in 2005 where she witnessed people passing out from heat exhaustion, and other incident when a fire causing people to be burned and electrocuted (likely the incidents described in the articles mentioned above).

In another statement the Veteran reported she had a "battle buddy" during basic training who was always talking about killing herself. The Veteran stated, "I would have to be with her all day every day" and was a "nervous wreck." She recalled reporting this to her drill sergeant only to get "yelled at as if it was my fault." The Veteran stated she still thought about this person every day.

In another statement the Veteran reported that she was sexually harassed by commanding officers during training. She reported the instructor would repeatedly make sexually explicit comments directed at her. She described an incident where one of the instructors who harassed her forced her to wear a gas mask despite her feeling like she was suffocating; the instructor yelled at her and tried to make her stand with the mask on. She stated, "I constantly have nightmares about that day."

In December 2018 and in early 2019, the Veteran submitted "buddy statements" from her fiancé, mother, and cousin describing the Veteran's symptoms of paranoia, sleep disturbance, and moodiness, among other mental health problems. The statements explained the authors' belief that the Veteran's symptoms were due to in-service trauma. The Veteran's mother noted the Veteran was a happy, "carefree" child who graduated in the top 10% of her class and gave her "no trouble." But when she returned from basic training and explained some of the "unpleasant" things that happened to her there, her mother told her to report these incidents but the Veteran stated she was too scared to do so. The Veteran's mother described dramatic behavioral changes, stating, "My daughter was a totally different person she was very reclus[ive] and most of the time extremely paranoid." 

In March 2019, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4142 authorization to obtain private medical records wherein she reported receiving counseling from a chaplain and mental health treatment in the late 1990s. Unfortunately, these records could not be obtained because the Veteran did not provide her signature on the form.

In April 2019, the Veteran received a VA Compensation and Pension (C&P) PTSD examination. She was diagnosed with PTSD and alcohol use disorder, mild. The examiner noted the three main stressors reported by the Veteran (discussed above), apparently concluding these were sufficient to support a PTSD diagnosis. However, the examiner found the Veteran's PTSD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner explained the Veteran's PTSD was not likely to be linked to her claimed military sexual trauma, "because it is less likely than not that the MST stressor is supported by marker evidence." The examiner noted that she "does not doubt the authenticity of [the Veteran's] self report which appeared credible, however without clear marker evidence it does not meet the VA's threshold for determining a nexus." The examiner also noted that the stressor which the Veteran appeared "most focused on" appeared during a training event during her Reserve service. The examiner concluded, "Therefore, while the veteran did display a pattern consistent with PTSD and has some records and evaluations to support this event there was not clear or adequate evidence found at this time sufficient for a nexus."

Finally, the Veteran submitted a March 2022 psychological evaluation from a private psychologist. The report reflects a clinical assessment based on DSM criteria resulted in a diagnosis of PTSD and major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe. The psychologist noted the Veteran was traumatized by her experiences in the military, which had a "dramatic and negative impact on her functioning." Importantly, the Veteran indicated she sought counseling while in active service and was seen by a psychologist from November 1998 to November 1999. Among other impacts, these experiences caused the Veteran to use alcohol in increasing quantities after leaving service. She also experienced occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas of her life. 

The psychologist noted the Veteran had a history of mental health treatment and had been diagnosed with PTSD by three clinicians. She had no pre-military mental health problems; her enlistment examination indicated normal neurologic and psychiatric functioning. Her "in-service stressful traumatic incidents led to mental impairment as corroborated by written accounts of family members who attested to significant changes in behavior and personality." Therefore, the psychologist opined it was "at least as likely as not that her enduring mental health impairments of [PTSD and major depressive disorder] were solely caused by trauma she experienced during her military service."

In this case, the Board finds the evidence sufficient to grant service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.

As for the specific PTSD requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304, the Board will resolve any reasonable doubt in finding the Veteran experienced in-service stressors that were corroborated by credible supporting evidence. Of note, it does not appear the RO undertook sufficient investigation as to the reported stressors. However, the psychologist who wrote the March 2022 report is correct that the record contains competent, credible lay statements from the Veteran and her family members attesting to the Veteran's behavioral and personality changes after returning from active duty. The Board also finds it notable that the Veteran reported seeking counseling and mental health treatment immediately after her period of active duty. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (discussing the competence of laypersons to report contemporaneous diagnoses made by medical professionals).

In addition, the April 2019 C&P report reflects the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD, in the processing finding evidence of a medical link between PTSD and service, as required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f). (The VA examiner's negative nexus opinion was based on the lack of credible "markers," which is not a medical determination.) 

In sum, the medical evidence in this case is unanimous that the Veteran (a) has a diagnosis of PTSD, which (b) is likely linked to in-service trauma. While the Board accepts there is some ambiguity as to whether there is credible supporting evidence for each and every stressor identified by the Veteran, she provided the type of evidence listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5) that indicates behavioral changes following the claimed assault, to include substance abuse, episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes. Id. Any doubt will be resolved in her favor in light of the detailed and positive VA and private evaluations of record. The Board finds the requirements for service connection for PTSD are met.

The Board reiterates there is credible lay evidence that the Veteran sought counseling and mental health treatment shortly after her discharge from active duty. The Veteran's lay statements describing her history, along with the private and VA examiners' positive opinions, demonstrate a strong likelihood she suffered mental health symptoms in service, diagnosed afterward as PTSD and major depressive disorder, and that these symptoms persisted thereafter. It is therefore likely that her current condition is linked to in-service experiences. There is sufficient evidentiary basis for awarding service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, on a direct basis. The Veteran's claim is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

The Veteran argues her current GERD and sinusitis originated in service or are otherwise related to service. On her August 2021 claim form, she reported (as to GERD) experiencing "major acid reflux and the sensation of burning, at time the pain gets so intense that I have to lay down." She also reported (as to sinusitis) that she had sinusitis manifested by headache, fever, chills, earache, nasal discharge, sneezing, and sore throat." For the following reasons, the Board finds service connection for these disorders must be denied.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not reflect she was diagnosed with GERD or sinusitis during her period of active duty. There is also no lay or medical evidence suggesting these disorders were diagnosed as a result of disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA, or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA.

Post-service medical records including an August 2011 Reserve treatment record noting the Veteran's reports of headaches and sinus pain. However, diagnoses of GERD and sinusitis do not appear in the reviewable medical records. There are no medical opinions of record demonstrating a nexus between the Veteran's GERD or sinusitis and her service.

After carefully reviewing the record, the Board finds the relevant evidence does not establish that the Veteran's claimed GERD or sinusitis are related to her service. As noted above, the Veteran has not alleged, and the medical records do not show, that she developed symptoms of GERD or sinusitis or was diagnosed with either condition in active service; as a result of disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA; or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA.

The only positive evidence of record which tends to suggest the Veteran's GERD and/or sinusitis are related to her period of active duty, or to periods of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, is the August 2021 claim itself (the relevant portions of which are quoted above). The Board acknowledges the Veteran is competent to relate symptoms within the realm of her personal knowledge, just as she is competent to relate what she has been told by a medical professional. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994); Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. However, the Veteran has not actually asserted that her GERD or sinusitis began in service, or are otherwise related to service. Rather, the August 2021 claim form includes only her descriptions of symptoms which she believes are related to the claimed conditions. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995) (in weighing credibility, VA may consider inconsistent statements and consistency with other evidence of record); see also Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287-88 (2009) (a claimant bears the "'evidentiary burden' to establish all elements of [the] claim, including the nexus requirement"). The relevant evidence does not show the claimed disorders were diagnosed in service or indeed for many years thereafter. 

Moreover, the question of whether the Veteran's GERD or sinusitis were incurred in service, or are otherwise related to service, are complex medical questions, not capable of lay observation. But see Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376 (noting that lay witness was capable of diagnosing a dislocated shoulder); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308-309 (2007) (finding lay testimony was competent to establish the presence of varicose veins). Because the evidence does not indicate the Veteran has the appropriate training, experience, or expertise to provide a medical opinion concerning the etiology of her GERD or sinusitis, she is not competent to comment on the etiology of these disorders. She has provided no additional objective evidence in support of service connection for these disorders.

The Board is aware the Veteran was not afforded VA examinations for GERD or sinusitis during the pendency of her appeal. In the absence of competent evidence indicating these disorders were incurred in or are related to service, or arose as a result of disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA, or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA, no VA examinations are warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006).

Unfortunately, the evidence is insufficient to warrant grants of service connection in this matter. The Veteran is not competent to substantiate her contentions, and there is no other credible evidence substantiating the claims. To reiterate, the Veteran has not presented or identified any competent evidence to support her contention that her current GERD and/or sinusitis are related to her military service. The most persuasive evidence reflects these disorders developed many years following her separation from active service. As such, the evidence weighs against finding in favor of service connection.

For the above reasons, service connection for GERD and sinusitis must be denied. The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to the claims; rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

REASONS FOR REMAND

4. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for low back pain with spinal stenosis is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for right bicipital tendonitis is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends her current neck, back, right arm, and right elbow disabilities resulted from a training injury. In a May 2022 statement, she reported the injury occurred during weekend drill in 2007. She described a drill where she had to carry a soldier on a litter when she fell into a hole; she reported she "heard a crack in my shoulder." She reported being on sick call afterwards and was placed on profile. The Veteran stated, "Since my injury to my right hip and right shoulder while I was on drill. . . I had constant pain and my symptoms have gotten worse, there are days I stay in bed all day because of my neck, shoulder and hip pain."

The Veteran also submitted "buddy statements" in May 2022 attesting to the training injury. Of note, her Reserve medical records corroborate to some extent her reports of a 2007 injury. Treatment records from July 2011 and August 2011 reflect diagnoses of right bicipital tendonitis and right shoulder impingement, as well as reports of back and neck pain since 2007. A July 2011 treatment note indicates the Veteran's report of "constant [right] shoulder pain since litter carry in 07." An August 2011 note reflects her report that "she was carrying a litter, right side gave way and elbow locked out when other members on the opposite side carrying litter dropped it. . . . The pain has remained the same since 4 years ago."

The Veteran received VA C&P examinations for these conditions in September 2021. She reported her right arm and elbow symptoms began around 2009; she stated she was a medic and was carrying a patient and she fell into a hole, injuring her right elbow. She also reported her neck and back symptoms "developed over time from heavy lifting and carrying patients as a medic." The examiner provided negative nexus opinions on the question of direct service connection. The examiner's rationale was that there were "no treatment records from 96-97 regarding the condition[s]." The examiner acknowledged the medical records included treatment notes from 2011 addressing right upper extremity, neck, and back pain" dating from approximately 2007, but did not further address the injury.

The Board first finds the RO did not adequately investigate whether the reported 2007 injury described by the Veteran was incurred in the line of duty, despite the Veteran's fairly specific May 2022 statement describing the injury and the existence of medical records from 2011 referring to such an injury. The RO must send a letter to the Veteran asking her to provide specific details about when and where that injury occurred. The RO should then take additional appropriate stems to verify the dates of any active duty, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA periods in or around the 2007 injury. 

The Board further finds the September 2021 VA opinions are inadequate. The examiner relied on the absence of records without addressing the Veteran's reports of in-service injury and subsequent symptoms. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (lay evidence concerning onset of symptoms, if credible, is competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence). Updated examinations and opinions are necessary to correct these pre-decisional errors. See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311 (when VA provides a claimant with an examination or medical opinion, it must ensure the examination or opinion is adequate).

8. Entitlement to service connection for anemia, to include as secondary to a service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for anemia. On her August 2021 claim form, she reported that due to traumatic events, she developed a loss of appetite, which affected her nutrition and resulted in her developing anemia.

The Veteran's service treatment records show no indication of these diagnoses. Still, the Veteran is competent to report symptoms within the realm of her personal observation. See Layno, 6 Vet. App. at 469-70. In this case, she is competent to report her loss of appetite due to mental health issues, which suggests a possible link between anemia and a service-connected disability. Given the complex medical question at issue here, the Board finds the RO's decision not to afford the Veteran an examination constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991). On remand, an examiner should clarify whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of anemia and address her specific contention regarding the condition being linked to her service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate steps to determine whether the Veteran's 2007 litter-carrying injury (as described in her May 2022 statement and referenced in 2011 Reserve treatment records) was incurred in the line of duty. Note that these medical records show the Veteran received treatment for right upper extremity, neck, and back symptoms which she consistently attributed to the 2007 injury. Send the Veteran a letter asking her to provide more specific details regarding that injury, including when and where it occurred.

Then, to the extent possible, determine the dates the Veteran served on ACDUTRA and/or INACDUTRA in or around the date of the 2007 injury. Once appropriate investigatory steps have been taken, issue a formal finding summarizing the RO's investigatory actions and explaining whether it is possible to verify that the 2007 injury was incurred in the line of duty. Notify the Veteran and her lawyer of all efforts taken in this regard.

2. Schedule the Veteran for examinations with appropriate clinician/s regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current neck, back, right arm, and right elbow disabilities. After reviewing the record, the clinician/s must respond to the following:

(a) Identify any relevant diagnoses pertaining to the neck, back, right arm, and right elbow.

(b) Opine as to whether the Veteran's current neck, back, right arm, and/or right elbow disabilities were incurred in active service, to include as a result of disease or injury incurred in, or aggravated, while performing ACDUTRA, or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing INACDUTRA. 

The clinician/s should discuss: 

"	Relevant service treatment records, including records from July 2011 and August 2011 reflecting diagnoses of right bicipital tendonitis and right shoulder impingement, as well as reports of back and neck pain since 2007. A July 2011 treatment note indicates the Veteran's report of "constant [right] shoulder pain since litter carry in 07." An August 2011 note reflects the Veteran's report that "she was carrying a litter, right side gave way and elbow locked out when other members on the opposite side carrying litter dropped it.... The pain has remained the same since 4 years ago."

"	The Veteran's lay statements regarding her symptom history, to include what she has been told by medical professionals regarding the nature and etiology of her disabilities. 

Specifically discuss the Veteran's May 2022 statement, where she described a 2007 injury during weekend drill where she had to carry a soldier on a litter and fell into a hole, after which she "heard a crack in my shoulder." She reported being on sick call afterwards and was placed on profile. The Veteran stated, "Since my injury to my right hip and right shoulder while I was on drill... I had constant pain and my symptoms have gotten worse, there are days I stay in bed all day because of my neck, shoulder and hip pain."

(c) If different etiologies for the Veteran's claimed disabilities are found, this should be stated.

The clinician/s are advised the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, including those that occurred in service, and her assertions must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions.

All opinions must be thoroughly explained, and a complete and detailed rationale for any conclusions reached should be provided (a bare conclusory statement will be deemed inadequate).

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's anemia. After reviewing the record, the clinician must respond to the following.

(a) Clarify whether the Veteran was diagnosed with anemia during the appeal period.

(b) Opine as to whether the Veteran's anemia was incurred in active service.

(c) Opine as to whether the Veteran's anemia was caused or aggravated by his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder. 

Specifically discuss the Veteran's assertions (on her August 2021 claim form) that due to traumatic events, she developed a loss of appetite, which affected her nutrition and resulted in her developing anemia.

(d) If different etiologies for the Veteran's claimed disability are found, this should be stated.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The clinician is advised the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, including those that occurred in service, and her assertions must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions.

All opinions must be thoroughly explained, and a complete and detailed rationale for any conclusions reached should be provided (a bare conclusory statement will be deemed inadequate).

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Ryan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.