Citation Nr: A25031518
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240110-407741
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for type II diabetes is denied. 

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity is granted. 

Entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for diabetic retinopathy is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for peripheral neuropathy of left upper extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for diabetic retinopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to March 15, 2022, for entitlement to Dependents' Educational Assistance benefits is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's type II diabetes has not required prescribed regulation of activities during any period herein on appeal. 

2. The record does not reflect more than mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve affecting either lower extremity for any portion of the appeal period. 

3. Peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities and diabetic retinopathy, all secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, were present, patent in the record, and inarguably associated with underlying diabetes from the July 23, 2012 date of claim for service connection for diabetes. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for type II diabetes are not met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.321, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7913. 

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity are not met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.321, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, DC 8520.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity are not met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.321, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, DC 8520.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity are met. ?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

5. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity are met. ?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

6. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity are met. ?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

7. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity are met. ?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

8. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012, for an award of service connection for diabetic retinopathy are met. ?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1983 to August 1983, June 1984 to August 1984, and from August 1990 to July 1991. She had additional service in the Army Reserve, to include various periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. For clarity's sake, and pursuant to the instant grant of earlier effective dates for awards of service connection, the period on review for the claims for increase dates from July 23, 2012 through the date of the September 2023 decision on appeal. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding several of the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Effective Dates

The effective date for the award of service connection for a disease or injury is the day following separation from active duty, or the date entitlement arose, if a claim is received within one year after separation from service. Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. The effective date of an award based on a claim reopened after final adjudication shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.? 

Similarly, the effective date for an increased rating will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.?Id.?For an increase in disability compensation, the effective date will be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability occurred if a claim is received within one year from such date; otherwise, it is the date of receipt of the claim.?38?C.F.R. §?3.400?(o)(2).

In this case, the Veteran seeks earlier effective dates for her awards of service connection for peripheral neuropathies of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and for diabetic retinopathy, each of which the record reflects is etiologically related to service-connected diabetes mellitus, type II. 

The Veteran is service-connected for diabetes from July 23, 2012, and contends that service connection for the above-enumerated related conditions should apply from the same date. The Board agrees.

It is a precept of Veterans law that VA must, of its own accord, determine and evaluate all sequelae of a service-connected condition when those sequelae are patent in the record. See Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103 (2022). In this case, the medical record demonstrated plainly that peripheral neuropathies of all extremities and diabetic retinopathy were extant from the effective date of service connection for diabetes, that they conferred roughly the same degree of disability that they have though the current appeal period, and that they were etiologically related to diabetes. As such, service-connection for those sequelae were constructively before the Board along with the Veteran's diabetes claim, and there is no basis for separate (later) effective dates for the secondary conditions. In other words, based on the Wilson holding, the date of claim for diabetes is the date of claim for each of the above-enumerated sequelae. 

In sum, the Board finds warranted entitlement to an effective date of July 23, 2012 for each of peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities, peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities, and diabetic retinopathy, and to that extent, the appeal is granted. 

Regarding diabetes mellitus, the effective date for service connection of which is July 23, 2012, the record is bare of any document that can be construed as a formal or informal claim for benefits for that condition prior to the current effective date. As such, July 23, 2012 represents the earliest available effective date, (being the latter of the two relevant dates,) and as such, there is no basis for an earlier effective date for service connection for diabetes. 

2. Increase for Diabetes Mellitus, Type II

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based, as far as can practically be determined, on the average impairment of earning capacity.?38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §?4.1. Each service-connected disability is rated on the basis of specific criteria identified by Diagnostic Codes.?38?C.F.R. §?4.27. When rating the Veteran's service-connected disability, the entire medical history must be borne in mind. Schafrath v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?589?(1991). The Court has held that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Hart v. Mansfield,?21?Vet. App.?505?(2007). Separate compensable evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. See Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119, 126?(1999).? 

Regulations require that where there is a question as to which of two evaluations is to be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.?38?C.F.R. §?4.7.

The Veteran is in receipt of a 20 percent evaluation for diabetes mellitus, type II, and appeals now for increase. Diabetes is evaluated under DC 7913, which provides for a 40 percent evaluation where diabetes requires one or more daily insulin injections, along with restricted diet and regulation of activities. A 60 percent evaluation contemplates all the criteria associated with a 40 percent evaluation, as well as evidence of episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year, or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where the evidence shows a requirement of more than one daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities) with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately evaluated.

Thus, an increased evaluation in the Veteran's case would require a showing of each of the following: one or more daily insulin injections, restricted diet (as prescribed by a diabetic care provider,) and regulation of activities (as prescribed by a diabetic care provider). 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a rating of 40 percent due to his requirement of daily insulin injections and due to a restricted diet and regulation of activities. See attorney brief of January 2024. 

A 40 percent rating is assigned when the condition requires one or more daily injections of insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  30 C.F.R. 4.19, DC 7913.  All three of these criteria must be satisfied for a 40 percent rating.  Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172, 1178 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  To demonstrate that regulation of activities is required, medical evidence must show that strenuous occupational and recreational activities are to be avoided. Camacho v. Nicholson, 2 Vet. App. 360 (2007).  

The VA examiner with whom the Veteran met in August 2023 confirmed the Veteran required more than one insulin injection daily, as well as a prescribed oral hypoglycemic agent. However, the record was noted to be bare of evidence of prescribed regulation of activities. The Veteran had not been hospitalized in the year prior to the examination for diabetic complications, and had not experienced diabetes-related weight loss. 

Similar findings are reported in a March 2023 VA examination report, where again, the examiner found no evidence of prescribed regulation of activities. 

The Veteran cited several notations from her medical records, to include a notation in 2012 which indicated that she was only walking one mile per week, which represented a decrease in activity.  Further documentation from 2015 - 2018 indicated that she continued to walk, but needed to ensure she ate prior to exercising.  Furthermore, a VA examination in May 2021 noted that the Veteran required a regulation of activities which consisted of a diabetic diet, weight management, and glucose monitoring. 

Based on the notation of the May 2021 examiner, the Board finds that the Veteran required a restricted diet.  However, the Board finds the May 2021 notation did not amount to a regulation of activities.  First, the notation explained that the regulation of activities meant the Veteran needed to eat healthy, attempt to control her weight, and watch her glucose levels.  The entirety of the record demonstrates that the Veteran's medical providers encouraged the Veteran to continue to exercise to control her weight and manage her diabetic symptoms. There is no evidence in the record that supports that the Veteran was to avoid strenuous occupational and recreational activities. 

Here, while the record has reflected several diabetes-related sequelae throughout the appeal period, these are addressed by separate disability ratings, and the record has never shown that the Veteran was prescribed a restricted diet of regulation of activities. Absent a showing in the medical record of those elements, there is no basis to a higher schedular evaluation for diabetes mellitus, type II, for which reason the appeal for increase must be denied. 

3. Increase for Peripheral Neuropathy of Lower Extremities

The Veteran's peripheral neuropathies of the lower extremities, secondary to service-connected diabetes, are evaluated under DC 8520. She is in receipt of 10 percent evaluations for each lower extremity. A 20 percent evaluation requires a showing of moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis warrants an evaluation of 40 percent. DC 8520 provides for a 60 percent evaluation for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with marked muscular atrophy, and a maximum 80 percent evaluation for complete paralysis of the nerve including foot drop.

The Board acknowledges the VA Adjudicative Procedures Manual M21-1 (hereinafter M21-1) contains provisions regarding rating peripheral nerve disabilities.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the Board is not bound by the provisions of the M21-1 and the manual does not "carry the force of law."  DAV v. Sec'y of Veterans Affs., 859 F.3d 1072, 1077 (Fed. Cir. 2017). It is "an internal manual used to convey guidance to VA adjudicators. It is not intended to establish substantive rules beyond those contained in statute and regulation." Id. The M21-1 provisions do not go through the regular rulemaking procedures and is little more than evidence as to how VBA applies law and regulation in practices; it is not binding on the Board as it is not a regulation, instruction of the Secretary, or OGC opinion. Id.; see also 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c). The regulations further clarify that the Board "is not bound by Department manuals, circulars, or similar administrative issues." 38 C.F.R. § 20.105. Nevertheless, the Court in Overton v. Wilkie held that the Board is required to discuss "any relevant provisions contained in the [M21] as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases, but because it is not bound by those provisions, it must make its own determination before it chooses to rely on an [M21] provision as a factor to support its decision." Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018). More recently, in Wilson v. McDonough, the Court elaborated that, in the context of relevant guidance documents, the Board can "neither merely invoke nor ignore a relevant guidance provision to support its decision but must provide an independent rationale relating its decision to the relevant guidance document." 35 Vet. App. 75, 80 (2021).

Pursuant to Wilson, the Board finds that VA's M21-1 does contain guidance relevant to the adjudication of the issue currently on appeal.  Specifically, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A(c) of the M21-1 provides "general guidelines" for the terms "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" in the context of evaluating incomplete paralysis of upper and lower peripheral nerves.  Under the M21-1, "mild" is described as the lowest level of evaluation based on the symptoms, however, slight, as long as they were sufficient to support a diagnosis of the peripheral nerve impairment.  Generally, "mild" is limited to a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, and affecting a small area and / or a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality.  "Moderate" in the M21-1 is described as the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment.  The M21-1 further elaborates that the following "sign / symptom combinations" may fall into the moderate category: combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and / or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate.  

The M21-1 provides "moderately severe" is only applicable for involvement of the sciatic nerve and is described as motor and / or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability is expected.  Atrophy may be present with moderately severe peripheral neuropathy.  "Severe" in general, is expected to include motor and / or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability.  Trophic changes may be seen with severe longstanding neuropathy.  Even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs / symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.

With regard to neurological conditions, moreover, aside from the underlying nerve-root impairment, consideration should also be made as to whether a separate rating is warranted for "neuritis" (defined a "loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating) and/or "neuralgia" (defined as "dull and intermittent pain"). See Banschbach v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 422 (2024); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a.

Initially, the Board observes that complete paralysis or its functional equivalent has never been shown in objective medical evidence in this case, nor has it been alleged. Further, the evidence has never indicated any degree of muscular atrophy associated with the Veteran's neurological disability. Thus, the Board will focus the balance of its analysis on whether the evidence supports a finding of moderate or moderately severe incomplete paralysis of either sciatic nerve during any relevant period.

The VA examiner with whom the Veteran met in March 2023 noted symptoms including bilateral mild constant pain, and mild numbness of the left lower extremity only, along with slightly diminished lower extremity muscle strength and decreased position sense. The examiner also noted the most recent EMG testing in the record, conducted in August 2020, characterizing it as normal.

The VA examiner with whom the Veteran met in August 2023 reported similar findings, including mild constant pain, mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias, and mild numbness, but full lower extremity strength, normal reflex and sensation testing, no muscle atrophy, and no trophic changes.

The examiners agreed that the Veteran's disability was, overall, most accurately characterized as mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

A review of the objective evidence and the competent opinion evidence in this case fails to reveal any assessment that the Veteran's condition is of greater than mild overall severity. No treating or examining provider has ever characterized the condition as moderate, moderately severe, or severe in any respect. As such, the Board affords greater probative value to the objective assessments of the VA examiner in this case than to the various lay statements. The examiner reviewed the medical record in full, examined the Veteran in person, and considered the lay statements in the record and at the examination. His expert medical assessment is predicated not only on medical expertise but on the evidence of record and that obtained at the in-person examination.

The Board considered whether a separate rating or ratings could be assigned for "neuralgia" and/or "neuritis."  See Banschbach, at 424.  A separate rating for neuralgia is assigned for manifestations of dull and intermittent pain and neuritis is assigned for manifestations of loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and pain.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a.  The Veteran's current disability rating, awarded for mild paralysis, in this case, does not just encompass the loss of function of the actual extremity, but as outlined above, is rated at the "mild" level because of additional manifestations such as mild pain, mild loss of strength, and mild numbness.  Thus, in this case, the Veteran's rating already encompasses the manifestations listed for neuralgia and neuritis and separate ratings here would constitute impermissible pyramiding. Cf. Id.; see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  The symptomatology considered to support the 10 percent rating award are duplicative and overlapping with neuritis and neuralgia and, therefore, separate ratings are precluded here. 

As such, the Board does not find warranted entitlement to increased evaluations for any portion of the period herein on appeal, as there is neither objective evidence nor competent opinion evidence to support the assertion that the condition affecting either leg was more than mild during the period. Accordingly, the appeal for increase must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Increase for Peripheral Neuropathy of Upper Extremities

2. Increase for Diabetic Retinopathy.

3. Effective Date for DEA Entitlement

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. §5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. §5103A?(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. §20.802?(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. §20.802?(a).

Regarding diabetic neuropathy of the upper extremities, the VA examiner with whom the Veteran met in August 2023 did not furnish a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy of either upper extremity, and thus did not assess in detail any symptomatology associated with that condition. A March 2023 VA examiner similarly indicated there was no upper extremity disability. As such, both examination reports lack the requisite detail regarding upper extremity symptomatology to apprise the Board of the current nature and severity of the service-connected disabilities. On remand, a new VA examination must be scheduled and clarity obtained as to the nature and current manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected diabetic neuropathies of the upper extremities. 

Regarding diabetic retinopathy, the August 2023 VA examiner noted uncorrected distance vision of 10/200 bilaterally, indicating legal blindness, but indicated elsewhere on the examination report that the Veteran had neither "extremely poor vision" nor blindness, nor any visual field defect or decrease in visual acuity attributable to diabetic retinopathy. The Board is aware that the Veteran also has a diagnosis of non-service-connected cataracts, but the August 2023 examination report does not adequately apprise the Board of the degree of limitation with respect to vision may be attributable to diabetic retinopathy, if such limitation can be adequately dissociated from any limitation attributable to cataracts, and as such, the matter must be remanded for clarity.

Finally, regarding an earlier effective date for DEA entitlement, because entitlement to that benefit may be predicated in part on the disposition of the above-discussed claims for increase, the claims are inextricably intertwined, and the earlier effective date claim must be remanded as well. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to explore the nature and severity of his peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities. The entire claims file should be reviewed prior to the examination.

The examiner is directed to relate all current symptomatology associated with peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities in accordance with VA rating criteria.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to explore the nature and severity of his diabetic retinopathy. The entire claims file should be reviewed prior to the examination.

The examiner is directed to relate all current symptomatology associated with diabetic retinopathy in accordance with VA rating criteria. Specifically, the examiner is directed to state whether the Veteran's decrease in visual acuity and/or visual field defect is attributable to diabetic retinopathy. The examiner is further directed to relate whether diabetic retinopathy causes incapacitating episodes. 

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Z. Sahraie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.