Citation Nr: A25031355
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240630-470616
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for headaches as secondary to tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served on active duty from November 1975 to March 1976 and under honorable conditions from December 1979 to May 1983. In an October 2023 rating decision, the Regional Office denied service connection for headaches. The Veteran appealed, electing the Board's Direct Review. 

In seeking service connection, the Veteran maintains that his headaches are related to his service-connected tinnitus. In his July 2023 statement in support of claim, he describes his symptomatology and explains that he gets intense morning headaches on account of his insomnia which is secondary to his tinnitus and which is also service connected. With that, he describes the cyclic interplay between his headaches and tinnitus symptoms, which are mutually aggravating. In support of this claim, he submitted a July 2023 private evaluation report reflecting a medical opinion that his symptomatology is consistent with migraine headaches and then concludes based on the enclosed medical literature that the Veteran's migraine headaches are "secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-related condition to include Tinnitus." Unfortunately, this favorable evidence has not been even acknowledged, let alone adequately addressed, in a September 2023 report of examination, despite indicating that the "[a]ll available records were reviewed."

The September 2023 VA examination report reflects a medical opinion that the Veteran has a common type of headaches. To this end, the VA report notes that the Veteran does not have any characteristic prostrating attacks or any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to his headaches. However, the Veteran was neither examined in-person nor interviewed over the phone in September 2023, while his July 2023 statement reflects that "at least 3-4 times per month, [his] headaches knock [him] out of commission to the point [where he is] totally incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for 7 hours."  He also reported that, during his headaches, he experiences sensitivity to noise and flashing or shimmering lights, along with nausea, tingling, weakness, throbbing and pulsating pain, none of which has been addressed in the September 2023 VA report. Likewise, the VA report does not even acknowledge the July 2023 private medical opinion that the Veteran's symptomatology is consistent with migraine headaches. By implication, without any apparent consideration of the Veteran's lay reports of pertinent symptomatology and the medical opinion that he has migraine headaches, the basis for diagnosing him with common type of headaches is unclear.  

The September 2023 report further reflects a medical opinion that the Veteran's common type of headaches is less likely than not the result of or proximately due to his service-connected tinnitus because "the current literature does not support tinnitus as a common etiology of HA." Yet, clearly contrary to that statement, the medical literature enclosed with the July 2023 private report unambiguously states: "Both disorders may be linked by common pathophysiological mechanisms." This medical literature then discusses the concept of "cochlear migraines" and explains the pathophysiological mechanism by which cochlear disorders, especially tinnitus, may cause and/or aggravate migraine headaches. Although "may" is not the legal standard, while causation and aggravation are separate and discrete legal concepts and thus the private report is insufficient to decide the claim, the private report does effectively undermine the VA opinion based on a generalized assertion that "the current literature does not support tinnitus as a common etiology of HA," which is the extent of the offered rationale. The VA September 2023 report also fails to address aggravation which has reasonably been raised by the discussed medical evidence of record and therefore is within the scope of claim.

In these circumstances, VA must obtain an addendum or supplemental medical opinion, which was not done. This pre-decisional error must be corrected.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum or supplemental medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headaches. If an in-person examination or a telephonic interview is necessary to that end, one should be scheduled. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (meaning a likelihood that is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) that the Veteran's headaches, however diagnosed, resulted from or were proximately caused by his service-connected tinnitus, to include insomnia secondary to tinnitus? Why or why not?

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (meaning a likelihood that is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) that the Veteran's headaches, however diagnosed, were aggravated (meaning made worse) by his service-connected tinnitus, to include insomnia secondary to tinnitus? Why or why not?

If aggravation is found, the examiner should indicate a degree of aggravation by identifying the baseline of severity levels of headaches prior to their onset and their severity levels thereafter, and explain the reasons for such determination, or explain the reasons why such determination cannot be made.

In answering the above questions, the examiner must consider the Veteran's statement in support of claim (VA Form 21-4138 received on 7/28/2023) and the private evaluation report (marked "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility" received on 7/28/2023), to include consideration of the medical opinions expressed therein and the enclosed medical treatises. The examiner is encouraged to review this remand to understand the reasons why the prior medical opinions of record are insufficient to decide the claim. 

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alex Bardin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.