Citation Nr: A25031484
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473123
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic disability manifested by dizzy spells as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

A chronic disability manifested as dizzy spells was caused or aggravated by service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and schizoaffective disorder, depressive type. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic disability manifested by dizzy spells, as secondary to PTSD and schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from February 1983 to February 1986 and from March 1987 to March 1991.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal of a July 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veteran's Affairs (VA) Regional Office of the Veteran's Benefits Administration, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In September 2024, the Veteran elected to appeal this issue to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement and selected the direct review docket.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the prior AMA decision on May 12, 2023, which was followed by a higher-level review rating decision that identified a duty to assist error (VA failed to obtain a medical examination with medical opinion), and in turn by the July 2024 rating decision that denied service connection following further development of the record.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a chronic disability manifested by dizzy spells

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Direct service connection may be granted based on evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Analysis

The July 2024 rating decision identified the following favorable findings which are binding on the Board: The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during your service.  Service treatment records dated July 11, 1984, shows evidence of complaints of dizziness.  Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded.  You were exposed to environmental hazards during military service as shown by the Toxic Exposure Risk Activity Memorandum.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2023.  The examiner noted service treatment records show an acute episode of dehydration/volume depletion associated with dizziness.  Post military private/VA treatment records note acute episode of high blood pressure, psychosis, associated with dizziness.  July 1984 service treatment records noted complaints of feeling "weak and dizzy."  The Veteran reported dizziness and loss of strength, and he was seen in the ER.  July 1998 medical records show overall weakness and dizziness.  He had an episode on in June 2004 with lightheadedness, double vision, headache, and nausea where he was working in an unconditioned warehouse at Camp Lejeune Naval Base.  He was evaluated in urgent care with normal MRI/MRA of the head and neck and blood pressure was 147/87.  He was started on propranolol for the blood pressure mild elevation.  A July 2014 family medicine note reflects followup for dizziness and workup for dizziness, acute psychosis, high blood pressure.  

The examiner provided three medical opinions.  First, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The rationale was that the Veteran's dizzy spells is a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology.  It is less likely than not that the dizzy spells are related to a specific exposure event during service in Southwest Asia.  The Veteran has claimed dizzy spells secondary to Southwest Asia exposure.  He enlisted in the Army from 02/1983 to 02/1986 and the Navy from 03/1987 to 03/1991.  He reported being stationed at Camp Lejeune for 5 years.  C-files including relevant evidence reviewed.  Medical records indicate the majority of the reports of dizziness have been accompanied by viral syndrome, with migraine headaches, blood pressure medications, elevated blood pressure, or in conditions with heat.  In 2011, the Veteran was evaluated for dizziness with an impression of "vertigo likely acute labyrinthitis by Hx" and was prescribed meclizine for 10 days.  However, Veteran reports he "gets very hot" followed by dizziness and "sometimes fainting."  In this case, the dizziness is not an unexplainable condition as it is a multifactorial symptom that can be the result of several conditions that the Veteran has including anxiety, stress, DM, HTN along with medications to treat these conditions.  Therefore, the dizziness was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by a specific exposure event in Southwest Asia.

The examiner next opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The rationale was that the Veteran has claimed dizzy spells secondary to toxic exposure while in the military.  He enlisted in the Army from 02/1983 to 02/1986 and the Navy from 03/1987 to 03/1991.  He reported being stationed at Camp Lejeune for 5 years.  C-files including relevant evidence reviewed.  Medical records indicate the majority of reports of dizziness have been accompanied by viral syndrome, with migraine headaches, blood pressure medications, elevated blood pressure, or in conditions with heat.  In 2011, Veteran was evaluated for dizziness with an impression of "vertigo likely acute labyrinthitis by Hx" and was prescribed meclizine for 10 days.  However, Veteran reports he "gets very hot" followed by dizziness and "sometimes fainting."  In this case, the dizziness is a multifactorial symptom that can be the result of several conditions that the Veteran has that include anxiety, stress, DM, HTN along with medications to treat these conditions.  Therefore, the dizziness was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

Finally, the examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  The rationale was that there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis.

The Board notes that a favorable finding has established that the Veteran's dizziness onset during active service and has continued since then.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).  The Board further notes that the secondary medical opinion is inadequate as a secondary medical opinion which addresses a causal relationship, but which does not address the question of aggravation, is inadequate.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).  Nonetheless, the rationale for the direct service connection opinions provides evidence of secondary service connection that is sufficient to avoid remanding for an adequate secondary opinion.  Soyini v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 540, 546 (1991) (holding that remand should be avoided if it imposes unnecessary burdens on VA without a benefit flowing to the veteran).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). 

The Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for PTSD with schizoaffective disorder, depressive type.  Further, a March 2017 VA examination for PTSD notes anxiety as a symptom of the Veteran's PTSD with schizoaffective disorder, depressive type.  Here, the April 2023 VA examiner's rationale stated that the Veteran's dizziness is not an unexplainable condition as it is a multifactorial symptom that can be the result of several conditions that the Veteran has including anxiety, stress, DM, HTN, along with medications to treat these conditions.  The Veteran is not service connected for diabetes or hypertension (but has pending claims for those disabilities).  However, as the examiner found that the Veteran experiences dizzy spells in part caused by anxiety, and where the evidence shows that anxiety is a symptom of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, which disability is treated with medication, the Board finds that the VA examiner's opinion supports granting service connection for dizzy spells on a secondary basis to due to or aggravated by PTSD and schizoaffective disorder, depressive type and medications taken for this service-connected disability.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.