Citation Nr: A25031660
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240315-424333
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left foot infection, loss of toe is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot bone deterioration, to include as secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran was exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange while stationed at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, Japan. 

2. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity was caused by his military service. 

3. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity was caused by his military service. 

4. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's left foot infection, loss of toe was caused by his military service. 

5. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's right foot bone deterioration is secondary to a service-connected disability. 

6. The evidence of record is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's right foot bone deterioration was caused by his military service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1116; 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left foot infection, loss of toe have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right foot bone deterioration as secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right foot bone deterioration have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 1970 through January 1972, to include Vietnam Era service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (HLR) and requested review of a November 2021 rating decision. In December 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a HLR rating decision, finding there was a duty to assist error as records had not been obtained and development for records verifying herbicide exposure was required and transferred the claim to the supplemental claim decision review option for additional development. In August 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal considering the evidence of record at the time of that decision and denied the claim.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the August 2023 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision addressing the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection 

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in the active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding that secondary service connection is warranted under the causation standard of 38 U.S.C. § 1110 where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the nonservice-connected disability). 

If a Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, air, or space service, certain diseases shall be service-connected if the requirements of section 3.307(a)(6) are met, even though there is no record of such disease during service, provided further that the rebuttable presumption provisions of section 3.307(d) are also satisfied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Section 3.307(d)(6) provides that the term "herbicide agent" means a chemical in an herbicide used in support of the United States and allied military operations in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d)(6)(i). 

A Veteran who performed covered service shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the Veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service. "Covered service" includes active military, naval, air, or space service (1) performed in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975; (2) performed in Thailand at any United States or Royal Thai base during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on June 30, 1976, without regard to where on the base the Veteran was located or what military job specialty the Veteran performed; (3) performed in Laos during the period beginning on December 1, 1965, and ending on September 30, 1969; (4) performed in Cambodia at Mimot or Krek, Kampong Cham Province during the period beginning on April 16, 1969, and ending on April 30, 1969; or (5) performed on Guam or American Samoa, or in the territorial waters thereof, during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on July 31, 1980, or served on Johnston Atoll or on a ship that called at Johnston Atoll during the period beginning on January 1, 1972, and ending on September 30, 1977. "Service in the Republic of Vietnam" includes service in the waters offshore and service in other locations if the conditions of service involved duty or visitation in the Republic of Vietnam. 38 U.S.C. § 1116 (as amended by the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), expanding presumption of herbicide agent exposure to additional locations); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307. The presumption of exposure to herbicide agents has been extended to those Veterans who served offshore of the Republic of Vietnam during the same time period. 38 U.S.C. § 1116A. For purposes of this section, an offshore location is one that is not more than 12 nautical miles seaward of a line commencing on the southwestern demarcation line of the waters of Vietnam and Cambodia and intersecting at certain enumerated points.

In addition, the presumption of exposure to herbicide agents has been extended to those Veterans who served in a unit as determined by the Department of Defense to have operated in or near the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) between September 1, 1967 (originally April 1, 1968), and August 31, 1971. 38 U.S.C. § 1116B; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

The diseases presumed to be associated with herbicide exposure include: chloracne or other acneform diseases consistent with chloracne, type II diabetes (also known as type II diabetes or adult-onset diabetes), Hodgkin's disease, ischemic heart disease (including, but not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable, and Prinzmetal's angina), all chronic B-cell leukemias (including, but not limited to, hairy-cell leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia), multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, or mesothelioma), Parkinson's disease, early-onset peripheral neuropathy, prostate cancer, and respiratory cancers. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

Despite the presumptive regulations, a claimant may also establish service connection based on exposure to herbicide agents with proof of actual direct causation. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding that the availability of presumptive service connection for some conditions based on exposure to Agent Orange does not preclude direct service connection for other conditions based on exposure to Agent Orange); Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994); Brock v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 155 (1997).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other). 

Factual Background and Analysis

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made several favorable findings: first that the Veteran has been diagnosed with disabilities as a San Diego VA treatment report from June 14, 2019 diagnosed the Veteran with idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, a Palo Alto VA treatment report from August 4, 2017 shows the Veteran's third toe on the left foot was amputated due to infection, and a San Diego VA treatment report from June 19, 2020 diagnosed the Veteran with Charcot arthropathy of the right foot; that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection as he served in the Air Force from March 9, 1970 through January 8, 1972; and that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service as early onset peripheral neuropathy is a presumptive chronic disease under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Findings identified as favorable in an AOJ decision are binding on subsequent adjudicators, including the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Favorable findings can only be rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).

The Veteran contends his right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right foot bone deterioration as secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity, and left foot infection and loss of toe are caused by his military service. Specifically, he asserts that while stationed at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, Japan the herbicide Agent Orange was sprayed three times per week and that he was exposed to this herbicide multiple times while out jogging on the roads. See September 2021 Statement; see also April 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Veteran has also reported that the base commander at Kadena Air Force Base made a statement in the base newspaper while he was stationed there that Agent Orange would be sprayed for the control of weeds along the roads on the base. Within his statement he referenced a 2003 Army report "An Ecological Assessment of Johnston Atoll," which he stated indicated approximately 25,000 barrels of Agent Orange were stored on Okinawa after transport from Vietnam. He also referred to Marines who cleaned up steel barrels in Okinawa in 1981 and later were affected by conditions associated with Agent Orange exposure, as well as a 2014 report indicating that the key chemical components of Agent Orange were discovered at a military dumpsite in Okinawa, however the experts did not say the barrels contained Agent Orange itself. See September 2021 Statement.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran provided citations to other Board decisions. The Board notes however, that prior Board decisions are not precedential and the decision as to one appellant can have no precedential weight in the decision for a different Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. Board decisions must be based on the facts and applicable legal authority specific to the case before it. Id. Thus to the extent the Veteran argues that entitlement to service connection based on presumptive herbicide exposure in Okinawa is established based on prior Board decisions, the Board finds this argument has no merit. See Gray v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 313, 328 (2015) ("[I]t is well established that Board decisions are not precedential or binding on other Veterans."). 

The Veteran's military service records document that he served on Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa Japan from January 1971 through November 1971, during the Vietnam War. See Veteran's Military Personnel Record. 

VA conducted development to verify the Veteran's claims that Agent Orange was used at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, Japan. Comprehensive research was conducted by the Veterans Benefits Administration Office of Field Operations, Military Records Research Center. Three separate time periods were researched: January 1, 1971 through May 7, 1971, May 9, 1971 through September 6, 1971, and September 7, 1971 through November 8, 1971. For all three research periods the Military Records Research Center partnered with the Air Force Historical Research Agency (AFHRA), which is the custodian of Air Force unit records for Veterans' claimed exposure events. For all three periods researched, AFHRA was unable to confirm the exposure event claimed by the Veteran. The reports noted that a review of the unredacted 2019 DOD Tactical Herbicide location list failed to verify the herbicide exposure claimed by the Veteran and that no evidence was located to support documentation of the claimed exposure event. See August 2023 Military Records Research Center Records Research Responses. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records document his right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right foot bone deterioration, and left foot infection, including the loss of his left third toe due to amputation. These records also include a letter from his podiatrist D.P.M. S.N. (initials used to protect privacy). This letter notes the Veteran has been treated by three different podiatrists for his conditions of idiopathic peripheral neuropathy and chronic neuropathic ulcers on his left and right feet, as well as Charcot arthropathy, which is a complication of peripheral neuropathy. D.P.M. S.N. also noted the Veteran's severe midfoot, rearfoot, and ankle deformities and dislocations due to these conditions and that found he will forever be at risk for ulcers, osteomyelitis, and amputation. She further stated that the Veteran was stationed in Okinawa and that Agent Orange was stored and shipped from the base, that Agent Orange was sprayed three times per week, that the Veteran ran alongside the roads while they were spraying, and that he has ongoing and permanent disability to both feet and ankles due to this. D.P.M. S.N. concluded by finding it was more likely than not that the Veteran's idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, neuropathic left and right foot and ankle ulcers, and Charcot arthropathy dislocations and deformities were the result of his time in service. See February 2021, June 2020, and August 2017 Oceanside CBOC Medical Records; see also May 2021 Podiatry Nexus Letter. 

The Board finds the nexus letter from D.P.M. S.N. is based on an inaccurate factual premise and is therefore afforded no probative weight. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (A medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). D.P.M. S.N. states in her letter that Agent Orange was stored and shipped from the Veteran's base and that it was utilized around the base three times per week and that the Veteran ran alongside the roads while the spraying occurred, and that he now has ongoing disabilities as a result. She does not provide any information as to how she reached this conclusion, which appears to be a restatement of the Veteran's contentions and not a fully reasoned medical explanation. Her statement that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides during service relies on his report of exposure and does not in fact establish that herbicide exposure occurred. Although in her letter D.P.M. S.N. stated that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, neuropathic left and right foot and ankle ulcers, and Charcot arthropathy dislocations and deformities are the result of his time in service, her opinion is vague and conclusory, and she did not provide a rationale. A medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (stating that a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can weigh, and a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision). 

Additionally, the Board finds the Military Records Research Center responses more probative and persuasive than the Veteran's lay assertions as to whether the Veteran was exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange while stationed at Kadena Air Force Base. Accordingly, the Board finds there is no probative evidence of record that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides while stationed at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, Japan.  

Right and Left Lower Extremity Idiopathic Peripheral Neuropathy 

The Veteran contends his right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy was caused by his military service, in particular his exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange while stationed at Kadena Air Force Base in Okinawa, Japan. See April 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to presumptive service connection for his right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy. Although idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is a disability which can be presumptively linked to herbicide exposure pursuant to 38 C.F.R. 3.309(e), here there is no evidence the Veteran was actually exposed to herbicides while stationed in Okinawa. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's sincere belief that he was exposed to herbicides while in Okinawa, however Okinawa is not on the list of locations where exposure to herbicides is presumed. The Board has also considered whether exposure to herbicides can be made on a facts-found basis, however the research conducted by the Military Records Research Center with AFHRA concluded there was no evidence of herbicide use in Okinawa during the period the Veteran was stationed there. Although the Veteran claims exposure to herbicides, the evidence does not reflect that he had the medical or scientific training or expertise to identify herbicides to which he was reportedly exposed during service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2011); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). A layperson's assertions indicating exposure to gases or chemicals during service are not sufficient evidence alone to establish that such an event actually occurred during service. Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010). 

The Veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection with proof of direct causation. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Here, however, the Board finds the Veteran is also not entitled to direct service connection for his right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy as there is no in-service event. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy. His post-service VA medical records contain diagnoses of right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy as well as his assertions that he believes his disabilities are related to exposure to Agent Orange in Okinawa, Japan. See August 2015 Oceanside CBOC Primary Care Note.

Although the Veteran meets the first criteria for service connection, as he has current disabilities, namely a diagnosis of right and left lower extremity idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, there is no evidence of an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury or causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

In order to grant service connection, there must be a nexus between the disability and the Veteran's service. Although the Veteran submitted a nexus letter from his podiatrist, as noted above, this opinion is afforded no probative weight as it is based on an inaccurate factual premise, fails to provide a rationale, and is vague and conclusory. As there is no probative evidence of an in-service injury or event, service connection cannot be granted on a direct basis. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity is denied and entitlement to service connection for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity is denied.

Left Foot Infection and Loss of Toe

The Veteran contends his left foot infection and loss of toe were caused by his military service, specifically exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange while stationed in Okinawa, Japan. April 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's left foot infection and loss of toe are not disabilities that can be presumptively linked to herbicide exposure. However, the Veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection with proof of direct causation. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Therefore, the Board will address the claim as entitlement to service connection on a direct basis. 

The Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to service connection for his left foot infection and loss of toe as there is no in-service event. The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a left foot disability. His post-service VA medical records contain a diagnosis of a left foot infection, as well as a subsequent amputation of his left third toe in addition to his assertions that he believes his left foot disabilities were caused by exposure to Agent Orange in Okinawa, Japan. See August 2015, August 2017, and January 2019 Oceanside CBOC Primary Care Records. 

Although the Veteran meets the first criteria for service connection, as he has a diagnosis of a left foot infection and loss of his left third toe, there is no evidence of an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury or causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

In order to grant service connection, there must be a nexus between the disability and the Veteran's service. Although the Veteran submitted a nexus letter from his podiatrist, as noted above, this opinion is afforded no probative weight as it is based on an inaccurate factual premise, fails to provide a rationale, and is vague and conclusory. Therefore, there is no probative evidence of record that the Veteran's left foot infection and loss of toe resulted from his military service. Thus, entitlement to service connection for left foot infection and loss of toe is denied. 

Right Foot Bone Deterioration 

The Veteran contends his right foot bone deterioration is caused by his military service, including as secondary to his idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, which he asserts was caused by his exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange while stationed in Okinawa, Japan. See April 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's right foot bone deterioration is not a disability that can be presumptively linked to service. However, the Veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection with proof of direct or secondary causation. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). The Board will address the claim on a secondary service connection basis as well as on a direct service connection basis. 

The Board finds the Veteran is not entitled to service connection for right foot bone deterioration, as secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy. The Veteran's medical records show he has a current diagnosis of right foot bone deterioration secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy. See February 2021 Oceanside CBOC Primary Care Records.

The Board finds, however, that the Veteran is not service-connected for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy. Since the Veteran is not service-connected for idiopathic peripheral neuropathy, a threshold legal requirement for establishing secondary service connection is not met, as it is not shown that the primary disability alleged to have caused or aggravated the disability for which service connection is sought is service-connected. Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for right foot bone deterioration, as secondary to idiopathic peripheral neuropathy is denied. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). 

Turning to direct service connection, the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right foot disability. Although the Veteran's treatment records contain his diagnosis of right foot bone deterioration, as well as his contentions that his disability resulted from his military service due to exposure to herbicides, the Board finds there is no evidence of an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury or causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In order to grant service connection, there must be a nexus between the disability and the Veteran's service. Although the Veteran submitted a nexus letter from his podiatrist, as noted above, this opinion is afforded no probative weight as it is based on an inaccurate factual premise, fails to provide a rationale, and is vague and conclusory. Therefore, there is no probative evidence of record that the Veteran's right foot bone deterioration resulted from his military service. Thus, entitlement to service connection for right foot bone deterioration on a direct basis is also denied.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.L. Davis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.