Citation Nr: A25031356
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240728-460221
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a current left knee disability to include functional impairment of earning capacity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Army Reserves from February 2014 to June 2014 and subsequent periods of active duty for training.

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from December 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The December 2023 rating decision was issued following a defect with the va.gov platform that affected previous application submissions. The Veteran appealed the December 2023 rating decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, and electing the Direct Review docket in July 2024. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. In a Direct Review docket, the Board can consider only the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision and not consider evidence submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran asserts that her left knee disability had its onset during service or is otherwise related to service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

After carefully reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that a left knee disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. The reasons follow.

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records show that she injured her left knee in April 2014. She subsequently As to the first element of a service-connection claim, a current disability, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has a current left knee disability. In particular, within the November 2021 VA examination report, the examiner documented that the Veteran did not have a current disability related to the left knee. The examiner performed an in-person examination and stated that the objective examination of the knee was normal, and the Veteran's symptoms were subjective. 

The Board acknowledges the holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), wherein the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that pain alone, absent a specific diagnosis or otherwise identified disease or injury, could constitute a disability provided there is evidence of functional impairment of earning capacity. However, here, the Veteran has not alleged, and the evidence does not persuasively show, that the Veteran has left knee symptoms that have caused pain or functional impairment that affects earning capacity. Therefore, even under Saunders, the Board cannot make a finding that the Veteran has a current left knee disability. As there is no current left knee disability, service connection for a left knee disability is not warranted.

The Board notes that that VA has conceded that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on her military occupational specialty of motor transport. Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1), it provides that the Secretary of VA shall provide a veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion "if a veteran submits to the Secretary a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability [] with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during" service. However, in this case, as the Veteran does not have a current left knee disability, a TERA examination and medical opinion are not warranted.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection for a left knee disability is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against service connection for a left knee disability. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not applicable. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). Thus, the claim for service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.