Citation Nr: A25031835
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240301-421802
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from August 1978 to October 1982.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the March 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

2. Service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

After review of the record, the Boards finds that a remand is warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

In November 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination and was diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss in both ears. However, the examiner noted that the Veteran's hearing acuity could not be tested (CNT) because his reported hearing loss results were inconsistent with organic hearing loss. 

Moreover, in January 2023, a VA audiologist stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with non-organic hearing loss of the bilateral ears.  Most recently, in July 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination. However, the examiner noted that the Veteran's hearing acuity could not be tested (CNT) because his reported hearing loss results were inconsistent with organic hearing loss. 

Non-organic hearing loss is defined as hearing loss that lacks any pathological or traumatic discontinuity of tissue or loss of function. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 825, 1025 (32nd ed.) (2012). However, the Veteran was diagnosed with sensorineural hearing loss, which is by definition due to a lesion in either the cochlea (sensory mechanism of the ear), the vestibulocochlear nerve, the central neural pathways, or a combination of these structures. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 825 (32nd ed. 2012).

The Board finds that these definitions are incompatible. By definition, non-organic hearing loss is not caused by tissue damage or a related loss of function, whereas sensorineural hearing loss is definitively caused by tissue damage in the form of a lesion.  

VA must ensure any medical examination or opinion it provides is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Accordingly, the Board finds that the opinions of record are inadequate to resolve the Veteran's hearing loss claim.  Accordingly, on remand, the RO should obtain a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss.

3. Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is inextricably intertwined with the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss remanded herein, as the February 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is related to his hearing loss. Hence, a determination on the claim should be deferred pending final disposition of the claim for entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss and service connection for right ear hearing loss. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his current bilateral hearing loss. After reviewing the pertinent evidence of record, and conducting the relevant and necessary testing, the examiner must opine as to whether the Veteran's hearing loss is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his service, to include as due to his conceded hazardous noise exposure in service based upon his MOS as an indirect fire infantryman.  

The examiner should clarify the Veteran's hearing loss diagnosis (sensorineural vs. non-sensorineural hearing loss / organic vs. non-organic hearing loss) and address whether any indicated non-organic hearing loss was related to in-service noise exposure. 

It should be noted that the absence of in-service evidence of a hearing disability during service is not always fatal to a service connection claim. Evidence of a current hearing loss disability and a medically sound basis for attributing that disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for hearing loss when there is credible evidence of acoustic trauma due to significant noise exposure in service, post-service audiometric findings meeting the regulatory requirements of a hearing loss disability for VA purposes, and a medically sound basis upon which to attribute the post-service findings to the injury in service.

The examiner should discuss the medically known or theoretical causes of hearing loss and describe how hearing loss which results from noise exposure generally presents or develops in most cases, as distinguished from how hearing loss develops from other causes, in determining the likelihood that current hearing loss was caused by noise exposure in service as opposed to some other cause.

A clear and complete rationale should be given for each opinion expressed, as well as a discussion of all the facts and medical principles involved. 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Costello, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.