Citation Nr: A25031947
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-432078
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1998 to November 2002 and from March 2005 to March 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Although the Board regrets additional delay, remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error in failing to obtain an adequate examination and obtain clarification regarding the Veteran's symptoms.

The Board notes that the Veteran experiences flare-ups relating to the bilateral radiculopathy of her lower extremities.  Specifically, the Veteran related that she experiences numbness, tingling, and aching on both sides, extending from her lower back to her foot.  The Board finds as fact that the Veteran experiences flare-ups several times a week, typically lasting a few hours.  When the flare-ups occur, the Veteran cannot sit or stand for a prolonged period and she cannot engage in household chores, yard work, running or jogging, or extended car rides.  Finally, the Veteran's feet scrape the ground when she walks.  See VA 21-4138 Statement In Support of Claim, January 2023.  No examiner has provided an opinion regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any radiculopathy flare-ups nor have they identified any functional loss during flare-ups.  As such, remand is necessary to determine the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy during flare-ups.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected radiculopathy.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  The examiner must accept as true that the Veteran experiences flare-ups several times a week, typically lasting a few hours.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.