Citation Nr: A25031257
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230209-323867
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include coronary artery disease (CAD) status post coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a prostate disability, including benign prostatic hyperplasia, that was incurred in service or is otherwise related to any incident of his active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a prostate disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from February to December 1978. The Board thanks the Veteran for his service. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the February 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 1, 2023, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for service connection for benign prostatic hyperplasia, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's claim for service connection for a heart disability, to include CAD status post CABG, was subject to a prior Board denial in April 2020. In the February 2023 decision on appeal, the AOJ implicitly found that the Veteran had submitted new and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate the claim. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 CFR § 3.104(c).

Entitlement to service connection for a prostate disability, including benign prostatic hyperplasia, claimed as prostatitis. 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from a prostate disability that was incurred in service. 

Generally, to establish service connection for a claimed disorder, the following must be shown: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain lay-observable symptoms and the time that those symptoms appeared. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). The Board can find lay statements competent and sufficient to establish that a condition existed if the lay statements are used to support a later diagnosis. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Davidson, 581 F.3d at 1316.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant; however, the reasonable doubt rule is not a means for reconciling actual conflict or a contradiction in the evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

When all of the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55 (1990).

The Board notes that it has reviewed all of the evidence of record, with an emphasis on the evidence relevant to this appeal. Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, every piece of evidence. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (VA must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence.) Hence, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence, as appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or does not show, as to the claim.

The Agency of Original Jurisdiction made the following favorable findings: the Veteran had a qualifying in-service event as service treatment record showed a diagnosis of chronic prostatitis and the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability as a VA examination showed a current diagnosis of BPH. These favorable findings are binding on the Board where, as here, there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary. Thus, the first and second elements of service connection are met.

The only male reproductive system condition identified in the December 2022 VA examination was benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), first diagnosed in 2014. The Veteran reported that he was treated for this disability in service and that his symptoms come and go. 

According to a November 1978 service treatment record, the Veteran underwent a urological evaluation due to hematuria found during his induction and separation physicals. A diagnosis of chronic prostatitis was recorded. The second element is therefore met. 

With respect to the third element of service connection, the Board finds that the evidence of record weighs persuasively against a finding of a nexus between the Veteran's BPH and the chronic prostatitis diagnosed in service. The December 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's BPH was less likely than not incurred in service or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. She noted that there was no evidence of chronicity of care of the chronic prostatitis diagnosed in service. Further, she stated that this condition is unrelated to his current prostate disability (BPH). 

The Board finds that the December 2022 examiner's opinion, based upon an in-person examination of the Veteran, a review of the claims file, and containing a detailed rationale, is entitled to high probative weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

The record does not show any treatment or complaints of a prostate disability between the Veteran's separation in November 1978 and an October 2012 VA treatment record attributing the Veteran's urinary symptoms to a "prostate issue." 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he was first treated for this disability in service. However, the competent medical evidence of record (i.e., the December 2022 VA medical opinion) demonstrates that his current disability is unrelated to the chronic prostatitis noted in service. 

The Board therefore finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's BPH was incurred in or is otherwise related to any incident of his active service. As the evidence is not in approximate balance, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable, and the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include CAD status post CABG, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from a heart disability that was incurred in service. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction made the following favorable findings: the Veteran had a qualifying in-service event as a service treatment record noted chest pain, and the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability as a VA examination showed a current diagnosis of arteriosclerotic heart disease s/p CABG. These favorable findings are binding on the Board where, as here, there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary. Thus, the first and second elements of service connection are met.

The Veteran was afforded a new VA examination in October 2022. The examiner opined that the Veteran's heart disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. In her rationale, the examiner noted that there had been a three-decade gap between the Veteran's "isolated" in-service complaints of chest pain and his CABG in 2012. 

The Board notes that the Veteran reported experiencing chest pains from service until his CABG in 2012. See, e.g., November 2017 Board hearing transcript. The October 2022 VA medical opinion is therefore inadequate insofar as it relies solely on a lack of documented medical treatment during the period between separation and the Veteran's CABG in 2012 without addressing his lay statements regarding symptoms since service. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (2006).

The AOJ's reliance on the October 2022 medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, necessitating remand. 38 CFR § 20.802(a); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Board makes no credibility findings at this time as to any of the Veteran's lay statements. To the extent that the March 2018 Board remand directives, which instructed the examiner to address the Veteran's contentions of chest pain and fatigue since service, could be construed as an implicit credibility finding as to these statements, this remand serves as notice of the overturning of this prior Board finding. See Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332, 334 (2020) ("the principles of fair process require the Board to provide claimants notice and an opportunity to respond when it purports to reverse prior assertions that evidence is credible or otherwise satisfactory to establish a fact necessary to the claim.")

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer the claim to an appropriate clinician to provide an addendum opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's heart disability. The opinion should contain a detailed rationale and be responsive to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., evidence in approximate balance or greater) that the Veteran's heart disability, to include coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass graft, is related to the Veteran's documented in-service chest/precordial pain or any other incident of his active service? The examiner must address the Veteran's reports of chest pain symptoms since service but is advised that the Board has made no findings as to the credibility of these reports. 

 

M. C. GRAHAM

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alvarez, D.A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.