Citation Nr: A25031099
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-452153
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 1992 to December 1996.  

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for bilateral hearing loss most recently addressed in a March 2022 rating decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.         38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Initially, it is noted that the Board is bound by favorable findings. In this instance the AOJ has indicated that (1) the evidence shows noise exposure in service, and (2) VA examination shows a diagnosis of left ear hearing loss. It is also noted by the Board, that on February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran was also shown to have hearing loss for VA purposes in the right ear. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. 

Additional development of the record is necessary for the proper adjudication of this claim. When VA undertakes to provide the Veteran with a medical opinion, it must provide one that is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

In a March 2022 VA opinion, the clinician opined that "there is no medically sound basis for attributing the hearing loss to a service injury" and that "there is no evidence on an injury because there was no change in hearing sensitivity from enlistment to discharge." 

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted medical literature entitled "AHRF Researchers Believe Damage from Noise Occurs Long Before Hearing Loss is Perceived." 

In a February 2024 VA opinion, the clinician opined that "there is no permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation, which is objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty from conceded noise. There is no report of complaint/treatment for hearing decrease in STRs or at separation. Although noise exposure is conceded and the relationship of noise, auditory damage is well-established, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone. There must be a nexus of auditory damage to relate current hearing loss to military noise and not another etiology. The evidence is against a nexus in this case therefore it is less likely than not that the hearing loss is related to military noise exposure." 

It is well established in caselaw that the fact that a hearing loss disability was not shown in service is not fatal to a claim of service connection for hearing loss. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); see also Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 157 (1993). However, the two opinions of record (March 2022 and February 2024) rely heavily on a lack of hearing loss disability in service while forming their opinions that are against the Veteran's claim. Additionally, the February 2024 clinician did not consider the medical literature submitted by the Veteran in December 2023. Whether the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disability is related to service (to include as due to conceded noise exposure) is a medical question. The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion on this matter constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, a new medical opinion is necessary.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability. The clinician must be provided with a copy of this Remand. Upon review of the record, the clinician must provide a comprehensive rationale in addressing a medical opinion on the following: 

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss was incurred in or is otherwise related to his in-service noise exposure? In arriving at an opinion, the clinician must specifically address the medical literature submitted by the Veteran in December 2023 entitled "AHRF Researchers Believe Damage from Noise Occurs Long Before Hearing Loss is Perceived."

(b.) If the opinion is that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and/or tinnitus is determined to be unrelated to service, provide the etiology considered more likely and explain why that is the more likely etiology. 

The examiner must provide a CLEAR, UNDERSTANDABLE, AND COMPLETE RATIONALE for all conclusions reached and any opinions rendered. Medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions citing to supporting factual data and medical literature, as appropriate, but also a reasoned medical explanation. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.) and what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made. 

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Staskowski, Nichole

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.