Citation Nr: A25031585
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452860
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2002 to August 2006.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO). 

In October 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision which denied the Veteran's claim.  In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review.  The RO again denied the claim in the February 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran then filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Notice of Disagreement in July 2024, indicating that he was appealing the February 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision, and selected the direct review docket.  

When the AOJ issues a Higher-Level Review decision, the evidentiary record is limited to the evidence of record as of the date the AOJ issued notice of the decision under review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f).  Thus, the Board can only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision prior to the Higher-Level Review decision.  If evidence was submitted after the October 2023 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  Specifically, he attributes this condition to exposure to burn pits during his military service.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  The Board notes that, in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO found that the Veteran had participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during his Persian Gulf Service.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted private treatment records containing a positive screening for sleep apnea, which indicated he was a high risk individual.  See May 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non Medical Facility.  Additionally, these records contained a May 2023 private medical opinion, in which Dr Z.M., a clinician specializing in sleep medicine, opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was the result of weight gain caused by his service connected disabilities.  However, the records indicated that a sleep study had not been completed.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his sleep apnea in September 2023, at which time the examiner indicated that he did not have a diagnosis of sleep apnea.  However, the examination report noted that a sleep study was not performed.  

The Board first notes that the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) has instructed its adjudicators that a diagnosis of sleep apnea without a sleep study will trigger the duty to assist in obtaining a sleep study but is insufficient to award service connection for sleep apnea. VA Adjudication Manual M21-1 V.iii.4.A.2.a. When clinical examination leads to the conclusion that symptoms of sleep apnea are present, the subsequent diagnosis of sleep apnea must be confirmed by sleep study for compensation purposes. Id. However, although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, it is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 and conduct its own analysis before determining whether the M21-1 provisions may be relied upon to support its decision, thereby fulfilling part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases for its decision. See Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263-64 (2018). Here, though this instruction is not binding, the Board finds the instruction persuasive.

Consequently, the Board finds the AOJ should have obtained an adequate VA examination prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal, which constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is warranted for a new VA examination, which provides the Veteran with a sleep study, prior to appellate review. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any current sleep apnea disability.  The examiner is requested to review the claims file in its entirety.  All appropriate testing should be performed, to include the administration of a sleep study. 

The clinician is then requested to opine as to the following:

(a) Identify whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of sleep apnea.

The clinician's attention is directed to the evidence of a positive screening for sleep apnea, as well as the May 2023 positive private opinion.

(b) If a diagnosis of sleep apnea is confirmed, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in or is otherwise related to service, to include as due to TERA participation.

(c) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran would not have obstructive sleep apnea but for obesity.  

(d) Whether it is at least as likely as not that any of the Veteran's service connected disabilities caused him to become obese.  

(e) Whether it is at least as likely as not that any of the Veteran's service connected disabilities aggravated his obesity.  

The examiner should also consider the impact of any lack of exercise due to his service connected disabilities.

A complete rationale for each opinion provided is requested.  

 

Michael Lane

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Erin J. Trojanowski, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.