Citation Nr: A25031254
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-459705
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to dependency and indemnity compensation (DIC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the Veteran's death, he was not in receipt of, or entitled to receive compensation for, service-connected disability rated totally disabling for a period of 10 or more years immediately preceding death, or for a period of five or more years from the date of his discharge from active duty, nor was he a former prisoner of war. 

2. The Veteran passed away in April 2020.

3. The death certificate listed the Veteran's cause of death as severe bacterial sepsis due to intrabdominal abscess and metastatic colon cancer.  

4. Resolving all doubt in the Appellant's favor, the Veteran's cause of death, metastatic colon cancer, is related to his conceded in-service herbicide exposure. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for DIC under the provisions of?38?U.S.C. §?1318?have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §?1318;?38?C.F.R. §?3.22. 

2. The criteria for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1310, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1966 to September 1968 and passed away in April 2020.  The Appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse. 

In November 2022, the Appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 and entitlement to service connection for cause of the Veteran's death most recently addressed in a May 2022 and September 2022 rating decision.  In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In July 2024, the Appellant filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  In its review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 

The Appellant seeks entitlement to DIC under 38?U.S.C. §?1318.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182.

DIC benefits are payable under?38?U.S.C. §?1318?to the surviving spouse and children of a veteran if the veteran's death was not the result of his or her own willful misconduct, and who was in receipt of or entitled to receive (or but for the receipt of retired or retirement pay was entitled to receive) compensation at the time of death for a service-connected disability rated totally disabling if: (1) the disability was continuously rated total disabling for a period of 10 or more years immediately preceding death; or (2) the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than five years from the date of such veteran's discharge or other release from active duty; or (3) the veteran was a former prisoner of war and the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding death.? 

After careful review and consideration, the Board finds entitlement to DIC under 38?U.S.C. §?1318 is not warranted.  Specifically, in a March 2011 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for prostate cancer with an evaluation of 20 percent effective July 29, 2010.  See March 2011 Rating Decision.  The March 2011 rating decision was not appealed nor was additional related information received within one year of the rating decision.  Therefore, the rating decision is final, and at the time of the Veteran's death, he was in receipt of a 20 percent rating for prostate cancer from July 29, 2010.

In this instance, the Veteran's rating was not total, and it was in effect for less than 10 years at the time of his death.  Likewise, he was not in receipt of a total rating continuously since his discharge from active duty and for at least five years immediately preceding death.  Finally, he was not a former prisoner of war.  Thus, there is no legal basis for entitlement to DIC under?38?U.S.C. §?1318, and the claim must be denied as a matter of law.  The?benefit of the doubt?doctrine, codified in?38?U.S.C. §?5107?(b), is therefore not for application.  See Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the?benefit of the doubt?doctrine not for application). 

Entitlement to Service Connection for Cause of Death

The Appellant seeks entitlement to service connection for cause of the Veteran's death.  Specifically, the Appellant contends that the Veteran passed away from colon cancer and that the colon cancer was related to the Veteran's Agent Orange exposure during military service.  See August 2020 VA Form 21-4138.

Service connection for the cause of a veteran's death may be granted if a disability incurred in or aggravated by service was either the principal or contributory cause of the veteran's death.  38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312 (a).  To constitute the principal cause of death, the service-connected disability must be one of the immediate or underlying causes of death or be etiologically related to the cause of death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312 (b).  For contributory cause of death, the service-connected disability must be shown to have contributed substantially or materially to the cause of death, combined to cause death, or aided or lent assistance to the production of death.  Id. at (c)(1).  A causal connection, not just a casual sharing in producing death, must be shown.  Id. 

At the time of the Veteran's death, he was in receipt of service connection for one disability, prostate cancer.  Notably, the Veteran was not in receipt of service connection for the disability the Appellant contends caused the Veteran's death, colon cancer.   Nevertheless, if the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's colon cancer was incurred in, or aggravated by, active service and was the principal or contributory cause of his death, service connection may be established for the cause of death.  Accordingly, the Board must determine whether colon cancer should have been service-connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.  Service connection generally requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

As to a current disability, the Veteran's medical records evidence a diagnosis of malignant neoplasm of the colon.  See February 2020 Diagnostic Imaging.  Notably, the Veteran's death certificate listed his cause of death as severe bacterial sepsis due to intraabdominal abscess and metastatic colon cancer.  See Certificate of Death.  As to an in-service incurrence, the VA conceded that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides based on his duty or visitation (boots on ground) in the Republic of Vietnam.  See April 2021 Herbicide Exposure Verification Memo; see also DD 214 and Military Personnel Record.  Additionally, the VA determined that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity during his military service based on his exposure to Herbicide Agent -, 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin.  See March 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity Memo. 

As to a nexus, or link, between the Veteran's colon cancer and conceded in-service exposures to herbicides, there are several opinions of record.  There is an October 2022 opinion rendered by a private oncologist consultant.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, encompassing private and VA medical records, military service records, and communications with the VA totaling 1,011 pages.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's conceded exposure to herbicides based on his service in Vietnam, specifically dioxin in Agent Orange and arsenic in Agent Blue, summarized the Veteran's diagnosis and cause of death from metastatic colon cancer, and discussed risk factors associated with colon cancer, to include race, family history, alcohol abuse, exposure to ionizing radiation, obesity, type 2 diabetes, smoking, inflammatory bowel disease, and rare genetic disorders.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's only risk factor was obesity and contended that the Veteran's herbicide exposure easily competed with his obesity as a risk factor.  See October 2022 Medical Private Opinion. 

Citing to medical literature, the examiner discussed dioxins and colorectal cancer, why epidemiologic studies regarding Agent Orange and colon cancer were lagging, persistence of dioxins in human tissues, arsenic and colorectal cancer, and latency or carcinogen-induced colon cancer.  Ultimately, the examiner determined that in the absence of any meaningful personal risks factors, in the context of known exposure to two carcinogens, based on medical and scientific evidence reviewed, and to a high degree of confidence, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosis and cause of death from metastatic colon cancer was caused by his conceded exposure to herbicides including Agent Orange and Agent Blue.  See id.

There is a May 2023 opinion that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  As a rationale, the examiner explained that there is no current literature showing a conclusive causal nexus between Agent Orange exposure and development of colon cancer and that the matter of a nexus between colon cancer and environmental exposures in service are medical questions beyond the scope of lay observation or common knowledge.  Citing to medical literature, the examiner stated that doctors are unsure what causes most colon cancers, described the formation of colon cancer, and listed the risk factors of colon cancers, which included: older age, African American race, inflammatory intestinal conditions, inherited syndromes, family history, low-fiber and high-fat diet, sedentary lifestyle, diabetes, obesity, smoking, alcohol, and radiation therapy.  In conclusion, the examiner determined that a nexus was not established and emphasized that the Veteran had a previous history of colon polyps and obesity, that not all individuals with Agent Orange exposure develop colon cancer, and that the literature does not support toxic exposure risk activity, to include Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, as an etiology to colon cancer.  See May 2023 Medical VA Opinion.

Finally, there is a July 2023 opinion regarding conflicting medical evidence.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's colon cancer diagnosis in 2020 with complications including abscess with severe bacterial sepsis and dehydration which resulted in death.  The examiner explained that current literature did not support a causal relationship between metastatic colon cancer, intraabdominal abcess with bacterial sepsis, and exposures the Veteran experienced.  The examiner further explained that the PACT act did not identify the Veteran's conditions as presumptive diagnoses for direct service connection.  Based on the foregoing, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  In conclusion, the examiner stated there is no causal connection or nexus and opined that the Veteran's presumed toxic exposure risk activity less likely than not contributed to the Veteran's death.  In support of the opinion, the examiner cited to medical literature discussing colon cancer and medical literature discussing PACT presumptive conditions.  See July 2023 Medical VA Opinion. 

After careful review and consideration, the Boards finds that all three medical opinions are adequate and probative.  While the opinions differ as they are for and against the nexus, all three examiners relied on relevant medical literature in drafting well-reasoned, logical, and thorough rationales in support of their overall opinions.  As such, the Board affords the opinions equal credibility and weight. 

Therefore, based on the specific foregoing facts, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's colon cancer should have been service connected.  In such cases, the benefit of the doubt is weighed in favor of the Appellant.  Accordingly, resolving all doubt in the Appellant's favor, entitlement to service connection for cause of the Veteran's death is granted.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch,?21 F.4th at 776. 

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.