Citation Nr: A25031854
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 210816-178841
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with unspecified depressive disorder (hereinafter "PTSD") is granted.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran continuously pursued his claim for an increased initial rating for his service-connected PTSD since filing a claim for service connection on March 9, 2018.

2. From March 9, 2018, the most persuasive weight of the evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran's PTSD manifested in symptoms that more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; however, the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms have not been shown to result in total occupational and social impairment at any point during the appeal period on review.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for service-connected PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1999 to April 2006. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2021 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision that was issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Prior to the June 2021 HLR rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied the issues on appeal in a March 2021 rating decision - for which the Veteran filed a HLR request - and again in a May 2021 rating decision, for which the Veteran filed another HLR request.

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and selected the June 2021 HLR rating decision as the decision he wished to appeal. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 AOJ rating decision, which was subsequently subject to two higher-level reviews - that is, the May 2021 rating decision and the June 2021 rating decision on appeal). 38 C.F.R. §?20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued its March 2021 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Continuous Pursuit, Earlier Effective Date, and Disability Evaluations for PTSD

Continuous Pursuit and Earlier Effective Dates

A Veteran "may continuously pursue a claim or an issue by timely and properly filing [an enumerated] administrative review [option]" following issuance of a decision by an AOJ, the Board, or the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. See § 38 C.F.R. 3.2500(c), (h). An effective date will be preserved if a Veteran files for administrative review within one year of any decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h). However, while the date of claim is preserved when a claim is continuously pursued, the proper effective date is still subject to a finding regarding when entitlement to the benefit sought arose.

The assignment of an effective date for an award of disability compensation is generally governed by 38 U.S.C. § 5110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an initial claim or supplemental claim shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

When a supplemental claim is filed, if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the AOJ will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. The effective date of an award of compensation based on a supplemental claim received more than one year after the date on which the AOJ issues notice of a decision, will be the date of receipt of the supplemental claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400; 3.2500(h). The filing date of a supplemental claim is determined according to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155, with the exception of the intent to file rule found in § 3.155(b) which applies to initial claims only. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.2501.

An effective date for a claim for increase may be granted prior to the date of claim if it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred within one year from the date of claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1) and (2). Thus, according to Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997), three possible effective dates may be assigned depending on the facts of the particular case:

(1) if an increase in disability occurs after the claim is filed, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (date entitlement arose) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1));

(2) if an increase in disability precedes the claim by a year or less, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (that is, the date the increase is factually ascertainable) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2)); or,

(3) if an increase in disability precedes the claim by more than a year, the date that the claim is received (date of claim) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2)).

In summary, determining the appropriate effective date for an increased rating under the effective date statutes and regulations involves an analysis of the evidence to determine (1) when a claim for an increased rating was received, and, if possible, (2) when the increase in disability actually occurred. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2).

Disability Rating Evaluation for PTSD

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or a combination of injuries that is based upon the average impairment of earning capacities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its entire history, with emphasis upon the limitations proportionate to the severity of the disabling condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. When rating the Veteran's service-connected disability, the entire medical history must be reviewed. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). The Board must also fully consider the lay assertions of record. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).

Where there is a question as to which of the two disability evaluations is applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence of record, any reasonable doubt remaining will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where service connection has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).

The Board acknowledges that multiple distinct degrees of disability might be experienced which result in different compensation levels from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Staged ratings apply to both initial and increased rating claims. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provide the relevant ratings for psychiatric disabilities, including PTSD.

Generally, a 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often) chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id. 

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id. 

The Court held that evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather, "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptom, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).

The use of the term "such as" in the general rating formula for mental disorders in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). It is not required to find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms recited for particular ratings. Id. The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of the symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms.

In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms[,] but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" -  that is, "the regulation... requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Vasquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The Board must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination." Id.

Regardless, as alluded to above, a claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (providing, in pertinent part, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant). When the evidence supports the claim, or is in relative equipoise, the claim will be granted. See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55 (1990); see also Wise v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 517, 532 (2014). If the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, then it must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent disability rating for his PTSD prior to its current effective date of September 29, 2020; alternatively, the Veteran contends that a 100 percent rating since the award of service connection for this disability is warranted.

As to the first contention, the Board notes that the AOJ has characterized the issue on appeal at times as both a claim?for?an earlier effective date?for?the award of service connection for PTSD and as a claim for an earlier effective date for various disability ratings for PTSD. However, as discussed in greater detail below, the Veteran's representative argues that there has been continuous pursuit of the appeal since the award of the initial disability rating for the Veteran's PTSD. If the argument advanced by the Veteran's representative is correct - and as discussed below, the Board agrees that it is - the issue of entitlement to an earlier?effective date for?the rating increase from 30 to 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD is?not separate or distinct in either form or function from a typical increased rating claim since the initial disability evaluation. Indeed, the Board notes that absence explicit evidence to the contrary, the Veteran is presumed to seek the maximum available benefit; as such, the Board will evaluate the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms since the date of the award of service connection this condition. See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).

Procedural History and Period on Review

As noted above, determining the appropriate effective date for an increased rating under the effective date statutes and regulations involves an analysis of the evidence to determine (1) when a claim for an increased rating was received, and, if possible, (2) when the increase in disability actually occurred. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400(o)(2). However, given the somewhat complicated procedural history as well as the arguments advances by the Veteran's representative, a detailed discussion of the procedural history of this case is necessary to establish the period on appeal before the Board and for the resolution of the issues on appeal.

In January 2014, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for an unspecified depressive disorder, which the Veteran initially characterized as PTSD. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated January 10, 2014. The Veteran did not appeal this decision nor does the record show that new and material evidence was identified or otherwise associated with the file (including constructively) within the one-year appeal period following mailing of notice of the January 2014 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b) (2018) (providing, under VA's Legacy review system, that if new and material evidence is received within one year after the date of mailing of a rating decision, it will be "considered as having been filed in connection with the claim which was pending at the beginning of the appeal period"); Bond v. Shinseki, 659 F.3d 1362, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (holding that, pursuant to § 3.156(b), VA must "assess any evidence submitted during the relevant period and make a determination as to whether it constitutes new and material evidence related to the old claim"). Accordingly, the January 2014 rating decision became final. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103. 

The next relevant pleading of record was the Veteran's Intent to File that was received by VA on March 9, 2018, after which the Veteran formalized his claim of entitlement to service connection for depression and anxiety condition by electronically filing VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

In August 2018, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim above, which the AOJ characterized as "service connection for unspecified depressive disorder (claimed as PTSD)." Rating Decision - Narrative, dated August 1, 2018. The Veteran filed the appropriate appeal under VA's Legacy appeal system, after which the AOJ issued another denial in its October 2019 Statement of the Case (SOC). See NOD, received April 18, 2019.

The Veteran appealed the October 2019 SOC to the Board and in a March 2020 decision, the Board granted the Veteran's claim, which it recharacterized as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD and depression. See BVA Decision, dated March 5, 2020; see also Form 9, received October 21, 2019. 

In a June 2020 rating decision, the AOJ effectuated the Board's March 2020 grant of service-connected acquired psychiatric disability, which the AOJ again recharacterized as posttraumatic stress disorder with unspecified depressive disorder (hereinafter "PTSD"). In this decision, the AOJ assigned a 30 percent disability rating for the Veteran's PTSD, effective March 9, 2018 - the day VA received the Veteran's Intent to File.

In January 2021, the Veteran's representative filed VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim as to the June 2020 rating decision, thereby opting into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In this form, the Veteran's representative sought a higher initial disability evaluation for the Veteran's PTSD. 

In March 2021, the AOJ partially granted the Veteran's increased rating claim insofar as it increased the Veteran's disability rating from 30 percent to 50 percent for his PTSD. However, instead of evaluating the applicability of the increased 50 percent rating since March 9, 2018 - the initial effective date of service connection - the AOJ instead determined, "The effective date of this grant is January 8, 2021. Entitlement to an increased evaluation has been established from the day VA received your supplemental claim." Rating Decision - Narrative, dated March 4, 2021.

The Veteran's representative filed a timely HLR request of the March 2021 rating decision in which he contested both the newly assigned disability rating of 50 percent as well as the effective date of the increased rating. See VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review, received March 22, 2021 (stating, "Effective [date] is incorrect [...] The effective date should be May 8, 2018. We have timely appealed in every instance"). 

Finally, in the June 2021 HLR rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD at any point during the appeal period but also granted an earlier effective date of September 29, 2020, for the award of a 70 percent evaluation for PTSD. In arriving at this effective date, the AOJ provided the following rationale: "We also reviewed multiple examinations. The April 29, 2020 clearly supports [an] evaluation consistent with the 30 percent disabling criteria. The examinations completed September 29, 2020 [and] March 3, 2021 have also been reviewed. These evaluation[s] are supportive and consistent with both the 50 percent and 70 percent criteria. These two most recent evaluations represent a disability picture more nearly approximates the either the 50 percent or the 70 percent criteria therefore, the higher evaluation will be assigned." Rating Decision - Narrative, dated June 28, 2021.

As discussed above, when a claimant's appeal stems from a granted claim of service connection with respect to the initial evaluation assigned, VA assesses the level of disability from the effective date of service connection. See Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126. Under the AMA, a claim can be continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued. If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(h).

Here, the Veteran has continuously pursued the appeal of his various denials for service-connected PTSD and following the Board's grant of such in March 2020, the assignment of the initial disability rating via the submission of a timely supplemental claim, timely HLR requests, and ultimately an appeal to the Board. Considering the facts and governing legal authorities delineated above, the Board finds that the Veteran has maintained continuous pursuit of his appeal of the initial disability rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c). As such, the Board will consider the evidence of record from March 9, 2018 - the date of the award of service connection - as it pertains to that claim.

Disability Rating Evaluation for PTSD

As discussed at length above, the Veteran continuously pursued his increased rating claim since the initial grant of service connection. Accordingly, the next question is whether the evidence of record available for consideration under the AMA supports an increased initial disability.

During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology has been rated as follows under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411: 30 percent effective March 9, 2018; and 70 percent effective September 29, 2020. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated December 21, 2022. The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent initial disability rating for his PTSD prior to September 29, 2020, or, alternatively, a 100 percent rating since the award of service connection for this disability. 

In this case, after careful review, the Board disagrees with the AOJ's conclusion that the appropriate effective date for the increased 70 percent rating for the Veteran's PTSD was September 29, 2020. In particular, the Board cannot ascertain with reasonable certainty that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms became markedly worse on September 29, 2020. Rather, his medical records show that in the preceding years he experienced irritability, difficulty with concentration, memory loss, insomnia, depression, anxiety, recurrent interpersonal difficulties, as well as instances to passive suicidal ideations. However, the Board does not find that the Veteran's PTSD caused total occupational and social impairment as contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria.

Pursuant to his service-connection claim, the Veteran attended a VA mental disorders Compensation and Pension (C&P) examination in June 2018 that was administered by B.C., Ph.D. See C&P Exam, received June 28, 2018. Notably, Dr. B.C. determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis for a mental disorder and, thus, had no social or occupational deficits from mental symptoms. However, during this session, the Veteran endorsed symptoms of anxiety that started "after his deployment to Iraq and has continued to increase up to the present time." Id. The Veteran further reported "having problems managing his temper and he will yell but not destroy property. He can watch movies and news stories about combat." Id. Dr. B.C. noted that the Veteran endorsed experiencing hypervigilance but also denied "any suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation citing his children as protective." Id.

The Veteran reported the following regarding his post-service social functioning: "Veteran married in October 2004 and remains in that union. They have two daughters, ages 10 and 4 and a son, age 5. He reported that the children are doing well. The family recently purchased a house [...]. His mother-in-law is living nearby. He reported that the marriage was strained in years past but was doing better now. He reported having financial concerns and this creating conflict with his wife. Veteran reported having hobbies that included shooting at a local gun range as well as riding his motorcycle. He is active with his family in church and he serves as a referee in the church sports league. He reported using social media to stay in touch with the soldiers he served with." Id.

Similarly, regarding his occupational capabilities, the Veteran reported that following his separation from military service, he has maintained fulltime employment as follows: "After his discharge the veteran remained at Ft. Bragg working for a government sub-contractor performing the same job he did during his active duty tenure. He then moved [....] He has continued to work in the same capacity but for another sub-contractor. He has advanced to management with the company." Id. The Veteran also acknowledged the following: "He is content with the job and did not consider moving into another career. He has completed 140+ college hours via on-line courses. He reported having an overall GPA of 3.1. He last attended classes two years ago and is scheduled to resume classes next week. He is majoring in business management." Id.

The Veteran's VA treatment records reveal that he began attending psychotherapy sessions March 2019. In his initial treatment session, the Veteran reported that his primary care provider prescribed Celexa and Hydroxyzine, which the Veteran took as needed, but otherwise indicated that "this is the first time he sought help with mental health." CAPRI, pg. 67, received September 8, 2020. The Veteran reported that his "wife prompted him to seek help because his symptoms have gradually worsened. He reports that his symptoms started 10 years ago after he returned from deployment to Iraq." Id. 

In a June 2019 mental health encounter, the Veteran reported improvements in his mental symptoms due to pharmacotherapy but also acknowledged significant lingering issues as follows: "He states that it (psychotropic medication) has helped a lot with his anxiety, and his irritability. However, he verbalizes that it does not give him any motivation, and he sleeps a lot while on the medication." CAPRI, pg. 44, received September 8, 2020. Notably, Veteran endorsed passive suicidal thoughts "today while at work. He works on aircraft at work, and this morning, he thought 'how nice it would be run into the propeller.' It surprised him because he never had suicidal thoughts in the past, and never tried to harm himself." Id. The Veteran's treatment provider discussed "how antidepressants can activate suicidal thoughts and to monitor these thoughts. Veteran denies any intents, plans on hurting himself because 'I love my family.'" Id. 

In December 2019, the Veteran again reported feeling that psychotropic medication was helpful in addressing his depressive and anxiety-based symptomatology during a mental health encounter. See CAPRI, pg. 13, received September 8, 2020. However, the Veteran's mental health provider noted that the Veteran continued to endorse significant depressive symptoms "with no energy or motivation, lasting for 3 days. He still goes to work, still functions, takes care of his family. Veteran reports having 'dreams' about dying sometimes, he wakes up startled[.]" Id.

In a psychotherapy encounter from January 2020, the Veteran again endorsed improved psychiatric symptoms, but his treatment provider noted, "Veteran reports depression at a 4 out of 10 today. He reports his anxiety fluctuates throughout the day. If he is at home he reports his normal anxiety level is 7." CAPRI, pg. 6, received September 8, 2020. The Veteran revealed that in order to manage his depression and anxiety at home, he would remove himself from his family until he felt that his symptoms were manageable. Id.  

In April 2020, VA clinician, A.G., Psy.D., administered a telehealth C&P examination and completed a Disability Benefits Questionnaire in which she determined that the Veteran experienced "[o]ccupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation." C&P Exam, received April 30, 2020. Indeed, Dr. A.G. noted that the Veteran endorsed the following symptoms: anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; and chronic sleep impairment. Id. However, Dr. A.G.'s behavioral observation notes reflect normal mental status and psychiatric functioning throughout the session. See id. 

The Veteran also endorsed symptoms that appear greater in severity than those endorsed during the June 2018 C&P examination. Specifically, Dr. A.G. noted, "He does states that becomes anxious and agitated when the children get loud. Veteran resides with spouse and children. Socially, the veteran states that he is friendly with a few co-workers. He rarely engages in a social activity with a co-worker. He typically turns down invitations. Veteran spends free time playing video games, spending time with wife and children. He has played video games excessively at times and this has caused problems with wife historically." Id. 

The Veteran still worked fulltime but also acknowledged mental symptoms that were either more frequent or severe than those reported during the June 2018 C&P examination as follows: "The veteran is currently employed in aircraft maintenance. He has worked for his company, [...], for seven years. He was deploying as an aircraft mechanic for the company in 2017. He requested to be reassigned to a non-deployable position. He deployed to Africa and Iraq for 90 days at a time. He completed 6-8 tours. In 2018 veteran moved to Georgia for a promotion for a few months. He and his supervisors mutually decided he was not a good fit for the position and he returned to his former position in New Mexico." Id. Nevertheless, the Dr. A.G. noted that the Veteran was "enrolled in a bachelor degree in business administration. He began the program in 2009 and recently re-enrolled. His GPA is 3.0." Id.

In September 2020, VA clinician, T.R.S., Psy.D., administered a telehealth C&P PTSD examination - the third VA mental examination during the appeal period on review - the findings from which bolstered the AOJ's increase in the Veteran's disability rating from 30 percent to 70 percent in the June 2021 rating decision on appeal. Indeed, Dr. T.R.S. determined that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

Similarly, the Veteran's recount of his mental symptoms and associated functional deficits also reflect significant difficulties. Dr. T.R.S. noted that the Veteran continued to work for the same company as well as in same work capacity and position as described in previous VA C&P reports. The Veteran also "[n]oted overall positive work performance, has strong work ethic" but also "noted some difficulties with work due to sleep disturbance, decreased motivation, decreased energy, concentration difficulties. Related has to overcompensate as result and has had increased leave due to depression." Id. Moreover, the Veteran reported increased strains on his marital and family relationships due to his "problematic anger, depression, more isolated, withdrawn from family." Id. The Veteran also endorsed "concerns with anhedonia, no longer interested in hobbies, indicated has a flight simulator enjoys and a new pool, however noted decreased interests, is more withdrawn." Id. 

Dr. T.R.S. stated, "Veteran endorsed multiple PTSD symptoms in the moderate range including: hypervigilance, anxiety, heightened startle response, occasional flashbacks, problematic anger, intrusive memories from attacks in Iraq. Veteran endorsed concerns with sleep disturbance, nightmares, insomnia." Id. Additionally, Dr. T.R.S. reported that for VA rating purposes, the Veteran experienced the following PTSD-related symptoms and associated deficits: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; obsessed ritual which interfere with routine activities; and impairment impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. Id. 

VA received a private opinion authored by J.L., Psy.D., which was dated August 28, 2020, but received by VA on January 8, 2021. See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility, received January 8, 2021, received January 8, 2021. Dr. J.L. noted, "However, the Compensation and Pension (C&P) exam provides for PTSD and Depressive Disorder in which indicates details more closely aligning with symptoms in the 70% rating category as reports that he shared situations regarding nightmares, flashbacks, hallucinations and suicidal ideations. He reports he suffers from uncontrollable flashbacks, hypervigilance, mood." Id. Dr. J.L. did not reference which specific documents - treatment notes, VA C&P examination reports, or otherwise - evince the symptoms delineated above. Regardless, the Board ultimately agrees with Dr. J.L.'s assessment that the severity of the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms "more closely aligning with symptoms in the 70% rating category" for Diagnostic Code 9411 throughout the entire appeal period on review. 

Based on the evidence discussed above, the Board cannot agree with the AOJ's determination that a definitive change occurred in the severity of the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms between the April 2020 and September 2020 rating decisions - especially to the extent contemplated by a rating increase from 30 percent to 70 percent. Instead, the Board finds that that Veteran's PTSD should be rated 70 percent for the entire appeal period and not just from September 29, 2020. 

In particular, the Board considers the Veteran's reports of suicidal thoughts, even after establishing regular mental health care and acknowledging the efficacy of pharmacotherapy, to be particularly supportive of this finding. The Board acknowledges that Dr. B.C.'s June 2018 VA mental disorders C&P examination report does not reflect psychiatric dysfunction that is typically required of a 70 percent rating for Diagnostic Code 9411. However, Dr. B.C. determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis for a mental condition despite robust evidence to the contrary in the record. The Board further notes that Dr. B.C.'s VA examination report is the outlier, with the bulk of the evidence of record available for consideration under the AMA reflects much more serious psychiatric symptoms and associated functional deficits. 

Therefore, the Board finds that the severity, duration, and frequency of the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms manifested in symptoms that more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

that the Veteran's PTSD manifested in symptoms that more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; however, the Veteran's PTSD-related symptoms have not been shown to result in total occupational and social impairment at any point during the appeal period on review.

However, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have risen to the severity, frequency, and duration required for a 100 percent schedular rating, which contemplates "total" occupational and social impairment. Occupationally, the Veteran credibly reported a history of anxiety and interpersonal conflicts that limited his ability to obtain promotions and led him to use personal leave time during period of heightened symptomatology. However, inherent in these lay statements is the acknowledgement that the Veteran engaged in steady fulltime employment during the appeal period on review. Similarly, despite reporting strained relationships with his wife and family members, the Veteran reported having positive relationships with his young children and retained the ability to interact, at least minimally, with coworkers as needed. Given the above, the Board finds that the Veteran cannot be said to be "totally" socially and occupationally impaired. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

For all the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence shows that the overall impairment caused by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood, for the entire appeal period. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. As the evidence is persuasively against a 100 percent rating, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not otherwise for application. Id. Accordingly, an increased rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's PTSD is warranted.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cross, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.