Citation Nr: A25031148
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230323-333403
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected migraine, including migraine variants, is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for service-connected post-concussion dizziness/vertigo is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2018 to March 2023.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2023, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In March 2023, a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), was received electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran's disability evaluation for service-connected migraine, including migraine variants, was increased to 10 percent disabling in a March 2025 rating decision.  The Board considers this to be a favorable finding by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  The issues on appeal reflect the increase.

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected migraine, including migraine variants.

2. Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for service-connected post-concussion dizziness/vertigo.

The Board finds that remand is needed in order to address the following duty to assist errors.  First, in March 2023, a VA Form 21-526EZ was associated with the electronic docket, which notes treatment for, inter alia, tinnitus and hearing loss.  This form is dated the same day as the notification letter for the March 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran's service-connected dizziness/vertigo is evaluated as an ear condition.  See VA Examination Report, January 2023 (Ear Conditions); and VA Examination Report, January 2023 (General Medical); and Rating Decision - Codesheet, March 2025.  Further, in the January 2023 VA examination report for ear conditions, head pain is mentioned.  Accordingly, the Board finds that there may be records outstanding relevant to the issues on appeal.  Accordingly, remand is needed in order to obtain any outstanding relevant records.

Further, the Board finds that a remand is needed in order to obtain new examinations.  In particular, the Board seeks clarification regarding the Veteran's use of medication.  The January 2023 VA examination report for headaches notes that the Veteran takes "OTC meds".  VA Examination Report, January 2023 (Headaches).  Similarly, the January 2023 VA examination report for ear conditions notes that the Veteran "Takes OTC meds"; although, the Board acknowledges that the report also indicates "No" to the question: "Does the Veteran's treatment plan include taking continuous medication for the diagnosed condition?"  VA Examination Report, January 2023 (Ear Conditions).  Accordingly, the Board asks that an examiner clarify that the Veteran's disability was evaluated without considering the ameliorative effects of medication.

?

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After securing any necessary consent forms from the Veteran, obtain any outstanding relevant treatment records, to include any private and/or VA treatment records, to include records contained in repositories accessible through VA, pertaining to the issues on appeal.

Obtain all necessary consent.  All efforts should be documented in the claim file.  If any records could not be obtained, this should be noted in the claim file.

2. Upon completion of the above, schedule the Veteran for examinations in order to evaluate the severity of the service-connected disabilities on appeal.

The Board asks that an examiner clarify that the Veteran's disabilities were evaluated without considering the ameliorative effects of medication.

				(Continued on next page)

?

Obtain all necessary consent.  The examiner should be given access to the claim file.  The examiner should state that a review of the claim file was completed.  The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  A detailed rationale is requested for all opinions provided.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Foster, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.