Citation Nr: A25031494
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240804-461398
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1996 to January 2000.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2023 decision.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued an HLR decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2023 decision.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  The Veteran selected the December 2023 decision to appeal.  Regardless of which decision he chose to appeal, the evidence window would be the same.  Either appeal would be timely.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

A claimant may request readjudication of a previously denied claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured.  VA will readjudicate the claim, taking into consideration all of the evidence of record.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Evidence is considered "new" if it was not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  The RO found new and relevant evidence in its December 2023 rating decision.  This is a prior favorable finding the Board will not disturb. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(c); 20.801(a).  

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for his migraine disability.  His representative further argues that the examination provided to the Veteran is inadequate.  The Board agrees and finds that a remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007)(When VA undertakes to provide an examination for a claim for service connection, it must provide an adequate one.)

In January 2020, the Veteran established care with a different provider.  The January 2020 private initial treatment note reflects that the Veteran already had a diagnosis of migraines and a prescription for amitriptyline to treat them.  On that prescription, he has less headaches and is sleeping better.  It is unknown who prescribed it, or when.  This is the earliest available private treatment record concerning the Veteran's migraines.

When the Veteran filed his VA Form 21-526EZ initial claim application in July 2022, he wrote the migraine disability was "[s]econdary to Other Specified Trauma And Stressor Related Disorder Adjustment Like Disorder[.]  Migraines have been a significant part of my life since diagnosed.  Typically, I have 2 to 3 major migraine headaches each month due to the stress and tension caused from the symptoms of this disability."  He also wrote that, "some of the medicines I have been on for this disability have increased migraine symptoms."

The Veteran was first examined by VA for his migraine disability in August 2022.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of migraines or migraine variants in 2015.  The examiner wrote, "[h]e was on a migraine medication previously but lost his insurance."  

The form used for the opinion asked, "[i]s the Veteran's migraine at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) proximately due to or the result of [adjustment disorder]."  The examiner opined that it was not.  The examiner then wrote, "[t]he etiology of common migraine is not entirely understood.  Migraines can occur more commonly in patients with various [mental] health conditions.  However, a CAUSATIVE association, i.e., an association showing that migraines are caused by 'Trauma and Stressor Related Disorder Adjustment-like Disorder' has not been established."  The opinion did not address secondary aggravation or direct service connection.

VA examined the Veteran again for his migraines in November 2023.  The examiner noted the same diagnosis of "migraines or migraine variants," but stated it was diagnosed in 2020.  The Veteran reported the onset of symptoms in 2000 (the year the Veteran left service), but the examiner noted that the earliest available medical evidence of migraines was dated in 2020.  

The examiner then opined that the Veteran's migraines were less likely than not due to his tinnitus.  The examiner wrote, "[p]ersistent and severe tinnitus can occasionally lead to the onset of tension headaches.  However, the pathophysiology behind migraines is more complex..."  The examiner described this pathophysiology by quoting the following from an unknown source:

The pathophysiology of migraine, which was once thought to be purely vascular, is now transitioned to a neurovascular hypothesis [8].  A wave of depolarization and suppression of the neurons and glia of the CNS results in alteration of the local blood flow and metabolism in the cortex and the brainstem; this phenomenon is called cortical spreading depolarization (CSD) [9].  The physiological mechanism of a migraine visual aura is thought to be due to CSD [9].  As acknowledged by a PET study, the earliest stage of a migraine attack showed activation of neurons in the posterior hypothalamus and the lateral hypothalamus, and the adjacent midbrain ventral tegmentum [7].  Based on the findings, it was proposed that a brain stem generator initiates the migraine attacks either through an abnormal activation or through a failure of inhibition [10].  The involved areas, such as the hypothalamus and the midbrain, have a central connection with the limbic system, which might explain the alterations in homeostasis and aura symptoms like mood changes.

The examiner then wrote, "[i]n summary, there is no known pathway for tinnitus to lead to the triggering mechanism described above and lead to causation of migraine headaches."  The opinion did not address secondary aggravation or direct service connection.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to an examination for direct service connection for his migraine disability.  Under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2), VA must provide a medical examination and/or obtain a medical opinion when there is: (1) competent evidence that the Veteran has a current disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability); (2) evidence establishing that he suffered an event, injury or disease in service or has a disease or symptoms of a disease within a specified presumptive period; (3) an indication the current disability or symptoms may be associated with service; and (4) there is not sufficient medical evidence to make a decision.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Specifically, there is some evidence that the Veteran's migraines onset during service, including his lay statement, and the indication of an earlier private diagnosis.  Both the date of onset and the date of diagnosis are unclear, with different years being reported by both examiners and the Veteran.  It is possible that the Veteran received a diagnosis in 2015, as he already had a diagnosis and prescription by the time of the January 2020 note, which is incorrectly cited at the date of diagnosis/onset through his subsequent treatment records.  This evidence is sufficient to meet the low threshold for a VA examination as to direct service connection.

Both examinations are inadequate.  As to the 2022 opinion, the examiner's stated rationale does not support their conclusion.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that a medical opinion obtains probative weight from "factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion").  If migraines are more common in those with mental health diagnoses, and their etiology is not fully understood, it would appear that there is a possibility that a mental health condition can lead to migraines.  The issue is that the link is not identified or understood, not whether there is a link.  Instead, the examiner came to the opposite conclusion.

As to the 2023 examination, it does not appear that the lengthy quote directly supports the examiner's conclusion.  Specifically, the long quote does not appear to be a definitive statement of the only pathophysiology of migraines, but rather a hypothesis or an attempt to understand said pathophysiology.  It also does not reference tinnitus.  The 2022 examination noted that the etiology of migraines is not fully understood, and the long quoted paragraph is full of language reflecting uncertainty ("thought to be," "proposed," "might explain").  

If the Board finds that a medical text that serves as the basis for a medical opinion contains apparent qualifiers or contradictions, or if the Veteran raises the issue or it is reasonably raised from review of the record evidence, then the Board must address that issue and explain whether those aspects of the medical text diminish the probative value of the medical opinion evidence or render the opinion inadequate.  McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).  Although the Board is capable of interpreting medical text evidence, it may seek clarification from a medical expert if it requires assistance in understanding or interpreting the underlying medical text evidence.  Id.

The examiner's conclusion (that tinnitus does not cause migraines) could ultimately be a sound one, but it is not directly supported by the medical text, which does not reference tinnitus.  Further, that text itself also contains several qualifiers, and it is not clear whether there are other potential causes for migraines that could include tinnitus.

Both examinations also fail to address the Veteran's claims that his tinnitus or adjustment disorder medications aggravated his migraines.  For claims of secondary service connection, the failure to obtain opinions that address aggravation is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

Accordingly, the RO should obtain an addendum opinion which adequately addresses all of his raised theories of service connection.  Failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error which requires a remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraine disability.  An examination should only be scheduled if the examiner deems one is necessary.

(a) The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's migraine disability was incurred in or is otherwise directly related to his active service, to include having onset during service.  The examiner should explain why or why not.

(b) The examiner should also opine as to whether the Veteran's migraine disability was caused or aggravated on a secondary basis by the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder or tinnitus.

Separate opinions should be provided for secondary causation and aggravation.

While making the above determinations, the examiner should consider:

(a) August 2022 and November 2023 examinations containing the Veteran's lay statements, including his statements concerning an onset of symptoms in 2000 and that his tinnitus, adjustment disorder, and medications cause or aggravate his migraines; and

(b) January 2020 private treatment records reflecting an existing diagnosis and prescription for migraines.

A clear and complete rationale should be given for each opinion expressed, as well as a discussion of all the facts and medical principles involved.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T.E. Yahner, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.