Citation Nr: A25031753
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 230619-355146
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective March 3, 2023, was improper; reinstatement of the 20 percent rating is therefore granted.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability on a secondary basis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot disabilities is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to higher initial ratings in excess of 20 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The November 2022 VA examination used to justify the rating reduction of the Veteran's lumbosacral strain from 20 percent to 10 percent was inadequate.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that his acquired psychiatric disability is etiologically related to his service-connected disabilities.

3. A left knee disability was not shown in service and no probative and competent evidence has been received which relates any left knee disability to the Veteran's period of active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for the reinstatement of the 20 percent rating for lumbosacral strain, effective March 3, 2023, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105 (e), 3.344, 4.2, 4.10, 4.71a.

2. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability on a secondary basis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.303, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps from January 1985 to January 1989.

The matters on appeal arise before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from rating decisions dated April 8, 2023, and April 25, 2023 (acquired psychiatric disability claim).  In the June 19, 2023, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 8, 2023, and April 25, 2023 (acquired psychiatric disability claim) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy claims and bilateral feet disabilities claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As noted above, the Board has recharacterized the service connection claims for anxiety and for depression as a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). Pursuant to the principles of Clemons, the Board shall broaden and recharacterize the claim to a service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disability.

1. The reduction of the rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective March 3, 2023, was improper; reinstatement of the 20 percent rating is therefore granted.

In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ decreased the rating for lumbosacral strain from 20 percent to 10 percent effective March 3, 2023.

First, despite the reduction in rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain, from 20 percent to 10 percent, effective March 3, 2023, his combined rating was not reduced, and there was no reduction in compensation payments. Therefore, the procedural provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 5112(b)(6) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) are not applicable in this case.

Next, the Board notes that the reduced rating was in effect for less than five years at the time of the rating reduction. Therefore, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c), which set forth regulatory requirements for evaluations in effect for less than five years apply. Title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations, section (c) of 3.344 provides that, for disabilities which have not become stabilized and are likely to improve, reexaminations disclosing improvement in these disabilities will warrant a reduction in rating. Such reduction must be based on improvement in a disability that reflects an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993). Moreover, a rating reduction must also be based on adequate examinations. Tucker v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 201 (1992).

Here, the Board finds that the reduction was based on the findings in the November 2022 VA examination evaluating the Veteran's lumbar spine. However, the examination report failed to provide any objective findings concerning the Veteran's reports of flare-ups of his back disability, even though he reported that if he stands for too long, he gets severe pain.

The Board therefore concludes that the reduction was improper as the reduction was based upon an inadequate examination. As the reduction was not supported by evidence that showed a maintained improvement in the severity of the Veteran's back disability, restoration of the disability rating is warranted.

Based on the foregoing, reinstatement of the 20 percent rating for lumbosacral strain effective March 3, 2023, is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability on a secondary basis is granted.

To prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Here, VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disability, to include persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress. See, e.g., April 8, 2023, rating decision. Therefore, the current diagnosis requirement is met.

The second element on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection is also met, as the Veteran is service connected for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and for lumbosacral strain. 

Finally, the nexus element is met, as the Board finds that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to include persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress, is related to his service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and service-connected lumbosacral strain. The Board finds persuasive the October 7, 2022 VA medical record, wherein the treatment provider stated that the Veteran's depression is likely related to his chronic pain, due in part to his service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and lumbosacral strain.  This opinion was based on a review of the Veteran's chart and an examination of the Veteran.  VA treatment records also show the Veteran reported that his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and lumbosacral strain caused him extreme chronic pain.  See September 2022 VA treatment record. The Board therefore finds that the sum of the evidence shows that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is related to the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and lumbosacral strain, at least to an evidentiary position of equipoise. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307, 4.124a; see also 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

In addition, there are no negative secondary nexus opinions of record.

Hence, after resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, and based on the foregoing, service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is granted on a secondary basis.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

Again, to prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin, 11 Vet. App. at 512; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Here, VA has conceded that the Veteran has a left knee disability current diagnosis.  See April 2023 rating decision.

However, there is insufficient evidence to establish an in-service incurrence - the second element of service connection. Here, the service treatment records lack a diagnosis of a left knee disability, or any medical complaints that could be construed as related to a left knee disability.  In addition, the Veteran has not asserted any in-service incurrence associated with this claim. 

Even if the second element of service connection could be established, the claim must still be denied because there is insufficient evidence to establish a nexus, the third element of service connection. Here, there is no competent evidence that establishes a causal connection between the Veteran's left knee disability and his periods of military service or a service-connected disability. Such evidentiary deficiency concerning the nexus element is fatal to the claim. See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) (a determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or disease incurred in service).

The Board acknowledges that VA has not obtained a medical etiology opinion for this claim and finds that it is not necessary. This is so because there is no indication in the record of a link between the left knee disability and his active service or a service-connected disability. Moreover, under current case law, any bare assertion of a nexus by the appellant, alone, does not suffice to trigger this duty to assist. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (Fed. Cir. 2010); cf. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006).

Accordingly, service connection for the Veteran's left knee disability must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot disabilities is remanded.

Under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA), the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a)). Here, the Board's review of the record reveals a duty to assist error that was evident prior to the April 8, 2023, Rating Decision on appeal.

A VA examination and opinion were obtained in February 2023. The VA opinion states that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the service because "[t]here is a lack of evidence on record (VA e-folder), therefore there is no support of this claim as there are no complaints, diagnosis or treatment of plantar fasciitis, pes planus condition while in service." 

The Board finds this opinion is inadequate because the Veteran reported at the February 2023 VA examination that his bilateral feet disabilities symptoms of severe pain, swelling, and difficulty walking on his feet began in 1986 during service, which he is competent to testify, and the examiner disregarded the lay statements because the lack of contemporaneous medical records. See February 2023 VA examination; see also January 27, 2023 VA treatment record (Veteran reports foot pain since he came out of boot camp; reports that his feet were hurting in bootcamp but he had to be "gung ho" and ignore the pain). The lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence incredible or serve as an "absolute bar" to service connection. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

Moreover, no examiner has opined on whether the Veteran's bilateral feet disabilities is related to his service-connected back disability. See August 2022 VA treatment record (Veteran stating that the pain radiates to and from the foot to the level of the back).

Thus, on remand, a new opinion considering the Veteran's lay statements, without discounting them solely because of the absence of contemporaneous documents, and a secondary service connection opinion, must be obtained.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Similarly, the Board's review of the record reveals a duty to assist error that was evident prior to the April 8, 2023, Rating Decision on appeal for the migraine and right shoulder disability service connection claims as well.

VA examinations and opinions were obtained in February 2023. The VA opinions state that the Veteran's migraines and right shoulder disability were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the service because there are no complaints, diagnosis or treatment of the migraine or right shoulder condition in the service treatment records. 

The Board finds these opinions inadequate because the Veteran reported at the February 2023 VA headaches examination that his migraine symptoms began in 1986 from illness from loud sounds and being around extremely loud ammunition and firing, and that these same symptoms have persisted to the present day. See February 2023 VA headaches examination. Additionally, the Veteran reported at the February 2023 shoulder examination that his shoulder symptoms began in 1985 during PT and working out.  See February 2023 VA shoulder examination. 

The lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence incredible or serve as an "absolute bar" to service connection. See Dalton, 21 Vet. App. at 23.

Thus, on remand, new opinions considering the Veteran's lay statements, without discounting them solely because of the absence of contemporaneous documents, must be obtained.

4. Entitlement to higher initial ratings in excess of 20 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is remanded.

A VA Back Conditions Disability Benefits examination was conducted in March 2023 that diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathies. However, the DBQ used by the examiner did not include the option for the examiner to choose "moderately severe" to assess the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy. The Board observes that the sciatic nerve is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520, which provides for a 40 percent rating if the radiculopathy is "moderately severe." Therefore, a remand is required to afford the Veteran a peripheral nerves examination that includes the option to choose "moderately severe" to assess the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathies.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new etiology opinion from a new examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot disabilities. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the case. All examination findings, along with the complete rationale for all opinions expressed, should be set forth in the examination report. All tests and studies deemed necessary should be conducted.

After reviewing the claims folder and examining the Veteran, the examiner is specifically instructed to provide the following information:

(a) Is it "at least as likely as" that the Veteran's bilateral feet disabilities BEGAN IN or is related to his time in the service, yes, or no?

(b) Is it "at least as likely as not" that the Veteran's bilateral feet disabilities was CAUSED BY a service-connected back disability, yes, or no?

(c) Is it "at least as likely as not" that the Veteran's bilateral feet disabilities underwent any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence, due to a service-connected back disability, yes, or no?

The examiner is instructed to explicitly address and consider the Veteran's report that his bilateral feet disabilities symptoms of severe pain, swelling, and difficulty walking on his feet began in 1986 during service. See February 2023 VA examination; see also January 27, 2023 VA treatment record (Veteran reports foot pain since he came out of boot camp; reports that his feet were hurting in bootcamp but he had to be "gung ho" and ignore the pain).

2. Obtain a new etiology opinion from a new examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraines. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the case. All examination findings, along with the complete rationale for all opinions expressed, should be set forth in the examination report. All tests and studies deemed necessary should be conducted.

After reviewing the claims folder and examining the Veteran, the examiner is specifically instructed to provide the following information:

(a)	Is it "at least as likely as" that the Veteran's migraines BEGAN IN or is related to his time in the service, yes, or no?

The examiner is instructed to explicitly address and consider the Veteran's report that his migraine symptoms began in 1986 from illness from loud sounds and being around extremely loud ammunition and firing, and that these same symptoms have persisted to the present day. See February 2023 VA examination.  

3. Obtain a new etiology opinion from a new examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right shoulder condition. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the case. All examination findings, along with the complete rationale for all opinions expressed, should be set forth in the examination report. All tests and studies deemed necessary should be conducted.

After reviewing the claims folder and examining the Veteran, the examiner is specifically instructed to provide the following information:

(b)	Is it "at least as likely as" that the Veteran's right shoulder disability BEGAN IN or is related to his time in the service, yes, or no?

The examiner is instructed to explicitly address and consider the Veteran's report that his shoulder symptoms began in 1985 during PT and working out.  See February 2023 VA shoulder examination.  

4. For each opinion obtained:

The examination opinion must reflect consideration of the Veteran's lay statements of record. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.

A complete rationale for all opinions is requested. Any opinion expressed must "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two." See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

If the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts, or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner, i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training. Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 389 (2010) (The Agency of Original Jurisdiction should ensure that any additional evidentiary development suggested by the examiner be undertaken so that a definite opinion can be obtained.)

5. Ensure that there is an adequate VA examination sufficient to adjudicate the Veteran's claim for an increased disability rating for his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.  

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.J. Cho

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.