Citation Nr: A25031838
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231127-396693
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an anxiety disorder is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for nerve damage is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for tendinitis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had an anxiety disorder at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an anxiety disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2012 to January 2020. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the service connection claim for an anxiety disorder, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the remaining service connection claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may also be granted on a presumptive basis for diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 under the following circumstances: (1) where a chronic disease or injury is shown in service and subsequent manifestations of the same disease or injury are shown at a later date unless clearly attributable to an intercurrent cause; or (2) where there is continuity of symptomatology since service; or (3) by showing that the disorder manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder.

In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran stated that prolonged exposure to stress and discipline instilled during service prevented him from being able to relax even during the simplest tasks. In addition, he stated that the anxiety of striving for perfection and being unwilling to accept what he could not control had affected his daily life and family/social relationships.

Initially, the August 2023 rating decision did not render any favorable findings for the anxiety disorder claim. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis of any mental health disorder. 

Post-service the Veteran has not identified or provided any medical evidence in support of his claim. In the May 2023 application, the Veteran did not identify any VA medical centers or Department of Defense military treatment facilities where he had received treatment after separating from service. The AOJ developed for VA treatment records in March 2025; however, none were available. As for private treatment records, the Veteran did not submit any with his claim nor did he submit any authorizations identifying private treatment records that he wished VA to request for him. 

A VA examination or opinion was not obtained regarding this claim. However, other than the Veteran's general contention, there is no competent evidence establishing a current diagnosis or suggesting an etiological connection. Accordingly, the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence of record to trigger the duty to provide an examination or obtain an opinion addressing the question of direct service connection. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The Board has considered the Veteran's general claim for service connection. While he is competent to speak to his experiences and symptoms in service and beyond, he is not competent as a lay person to provide a diagnosis, particularly in the absence of any medical evidence reflect complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis associated with an anxiety disorder. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for an anxiety disorder is not warranted. There is no evidence to show that the Veteran has been diagnosed or treated for an anxiety disorder at any time during the pendency of the claim or contemporaneous to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). In the absence of competent evidence of a current disability, there is no basis upon which service connection may be granted. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Accordingly, the claim for service connection for an anxiety disorder must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), an appeal may generally only be remanded to correct an error in the development of the claim prior to the initial decision. In this case, the August 2023 VA opinions for the nerve damage claim, back disorder claim, erectile dysfunction claim, left knee disorder claim, and tendinitis claim were inadequate and not requesting an addendum opinion was a pre-decisional error. 

Entitlement to service connection for nerve damage is remanded.

In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran described nerve damage primarily on the bottom of the feet and toes, which he associated with marching, rucking, hiking, running, and daily wear of Marine Corps-issued combat boots. The record also shows that the Veteran was engaged in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, and in August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.

During the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms of shooting pain with numbness and tingling in hands and feet started in 2012. The examiner diagnosed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and bilateral tarsal tunnel syndrome. See August 2023 VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). In the four associated medical opinions, the examiner considered whether the neurological disorders, diagnosed as bilateral carpel tunnel and bilateral tarsal tunnel syndromes, were related to total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran or synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities experienced by the Veteran during service. The examiner concluded that the disorders were due to overuse pathologies related to constantly carrying heavy loads, repetitive wrist movements, running, and other physical activities as opposed to TERA. However, the examiner did not discuss whether the in-service activities described by the Veteran, such as rucking, marching, running, lifting heavy ordnance and equipment and other activities were physical activities as contemplated by the examiner. Moreover, as noted above, during the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran identified the onset of his symptoms as taking place in service, in 2012. 

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, remand is warranted for an addendum VA medical opinion, as discussed above.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran contended that he had chronic back pain and issues caused by carrying heavy packs during marches and lifting heavy aviation ordnance explosives and equipment, such as missiles, bombs, ammunition, and aircraft gun system containers and support equipment.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in August 2023; a lumbosacral strain was diagnosed. See August 2023 VA Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions DBQ. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was less likely as not incurred in service. The rationale for the opinion was that, while the Veteran was seen multiple times in 2013 for back pain, there was no indication the pain became a chronic issue since there were no subsequent complaints of back pain in service. The examiner observed that the separation examination was silent for a back disorder, and there was no continuity of care for a back disorder after service. 

Despite the August 2023 VA examiner's recognition and discussion of the Veteran having been seen on multiple occasions in 2013 for back pain, the examiner does not adequately address the fact that when the Veteran presented for initial treatment in February 2013, he reported that his symptoms of low back pain had been present for 2-3 years. He related it to mostly sports trauma, activity, and also recalled having some pain during boot camp with the pain increased in the past 3 months. He denied any specific spinal trauma that he could recall and noted that he had been to a chiropractor in the past with good relief; his last visit was in July 2012. Additionally, although subsequent STRs do not reflect any additional treatment for the low back, it is noted that lumbago continued to be listed as an active problem in STRs dated September 2013, July 2014, March 2015, January 2016, and March 2017, and when the comprehensive information report was created in February 2020.

As noted, the August 2023 VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion finding no evidence of a chronic back issue in service. However, STRs show the Veteran experienced low back pain for at least 2-3 years in service and continued to be recognized as having an active problem of lumbago from 2013 to 2017 and at the time of his separation from service when a comprehensive information report was created for his STRs. On remand, an addendum VA medical opinion should be obtained to ensure that a medical opinion is rendered based on an accurate understanding of the Veteran's medical history. 

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran stated that he believed prolonged exposure to hazardous materials as well as multiple injections of vaccines for both domestic and foreign diseases had affected his ability to sustain a full erection as he was once able to do. 

The Veteran's STRs are silent for complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. Nevertheless, as the record shows the Veteran was engaged in a TERA during service, a VA examination was provided in August 2023.

During the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the condition began in 2019. The examiner diagnosed erectile dysfunction, with or without penile deformity. See August 2023 VA Male Reproductive Organ Conditions (Including Prostate Cancer) DBQ. In the associated medical opinion, the August 2023 VA examiner stated that after a review of the record, examination of the Veteran, and considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran, the erectile dysfunction was less likely as not a result of the Veteran's military service. The examiner explained that erectile dysfunction was the result of conditions that could affect the penile vasculature's ability to fill and remain filled. Further, he indicated that there was no known association between the Veteran's toxic exposures and the erectile dysfunction, nor was there any known mechanism that could explain how such exposures could cause erectile dysfunction. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was likely due to his tobacco use (1/2 a pack to 1 pack a day) which had been linked to erectile dysfunction through alterations in the nitric oxide signal transduction pathway. The examiner stated that the Veteran's risk factor for the disorder outweighed the TERA.

Despite the medical opinion provided, the Board finds the record incomplete. First, based upon the nature of the examination request, the August 2023 VA examiner only addressed the Veteran's in-service exposure to burn pits, sand dust particulates, other particulate matters, and general Gulf War exposures. However, as noted, the Veteran also claimed that his erectile dysfunction could be related to the vaccinations he received in service. STRs confirm the Veteran was administered multiple vaccinations in service; thus, an opinion should be rendered on this basis. Second, during the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the condition began in 2019, which suggests it may have had its onset in service. A direct service connection was not requested or rendered.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, remand is warranted for an addendum VA medical opinion, as discussed above.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder and tendinitis is remanded.

As an initial matter, it is noted that in the Veteran's May 2023 application for benefits, he claimed tendinitis and a left knee condition. With respect to the tendinitis claim, the Veteran associated the disorder with loud engine noises and weapons fire on the rifle range. This statement was interpreted as a claim for tinnitus (ringing in the ears), and service connection for tinnitus was granted in the August 2023 rating decision. As for the claimed left knee condition, the Veteran was found to have a current diagnosis of tendinitis. See August 2023 VA Knee and Lower Leg DBQ. Accordingly, the AOJ also addressed the tendinitis claim as a claim for such and separately adjudicated a service connection claim for a left knee disorder. Given this procedural background, the Board will also address the claims separately. However, the analysis is the same for both the claimed conditions of a left knee disorder and tendinitis, as they refer to the same disability.

In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran described having chronic knee pain and joint discomfort caused by marches, lifting heavy aviation ordnance explosives and equipment as well as injuries sustained while in the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program. These statements may be associated with the left knee generally and with left knee tendinitis. 

In August 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms began in 2017 with left knee aching and stiffness. His treatment at that time as well as currently consisted of Tylenol and Ibuprofen; since onset, the condition had stayed the same. Following an examination, the examiner diagnosed left knee tendinitis. In the associated medical opinion, the August 2023 VA examiner stated that, after reviewing medical records and performing a physical exam, the left knee disorder was less likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. In support of the opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran was seen in 2012 for a left knee complaint, but there was no evidence that this was a chronic issue since there were no subsequent complaints in service. Further, the examiner noted that the separation exam was silent for any knee disorder, and there was no continuity of care for a left knee disorder after service. 

Despite the August 2023 VA examiner's discussion of the Veteran having been seen in 2012 for left knee pain, the examiner does not adequately address the fact that he was assessed with an ilio tibial band friction syndrome at that time. Thereafter, ilio tibial band friction syndrome continued to be listed as an active problem in STRs dated December 2012, February 2013, September 2013, July 2014, March 2015, January 2016, and March 2017, and at the time of separation when a comprehensive information report was created in February 2020 for his STRs, even though subsequent STRs do not reflect any additional or specific treatment for the left knee.  

In light of the foregoing, remand for an addendum VA medical opinion is necessary to ensure that a medical opinion is rendered based on an accurate understanding of the Veteran's medical history. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Direct the claims file to a clinician to address the etiology of a nerve damage disorder, including bilateral carpel tunnel syndrome and bilateral tarsal tunnel syndrome. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following:

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that the right carpel tunnel syndrome, left carpel tunnel syndrome, right tarsal tunnel syndrome, and/or left tarsal tunnel syndrome had its onset in service (the Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms as 2012) or is otherwise due to or caused by physical activities during the Veteran's military service, such as marching, rucking, running, and lifting and carrying heavy ordnance and equipment or any other activities described by the Veteran?

A rationale for any opinion must be provided. 

A telephone interview with the Veteran should be conducted. A clinical examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one.

2. Direct the claims file to a clinician to address the etiology of a back disorder. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following:

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that the lumbosacral strain had its onset in service or is otherwise due to or caused by physical activities during the Veteran's military service, such as marching, rucking, running, and lifting and carrying heavy ordnance and equipment or any other activities described by the Veteran?

A rationale for any opinion must be provided. The examiner should specifically address the fact that when the Veteran presented for initial treatment in February 2013, he reported experiencing low back pain for 2-3 years and that lumbago continued to be listed as an active problem in his STRs thereafter.

A telephone interview with the Veteran should be conducted. A clinical examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one.

3. Direct the claims file to a clinician to address the etiology of erectile dysfunction. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following:

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that the erectile dysfunction had its onset in service (the Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms as 2019) or is otherwise due to or caused by any of the vaccinations that the Veteran received in service?

A rationale for any opinion must be provided. 

A telephone interview with the Veteran should be conducted. A clinical examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one.

4. Direct the claims file to a clinician to address the etiology of a left knee disorder/tendinitis. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following:

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that the claimed left knee disorder/tendinitis had its onset in service or is otherwise due to or caused by physical activities during the Veteran's military service, such as marching, rucking, running, and lifting and carrying heavy ordnance and equipment or any other activities described by the Veteran?

A rationale for any opinion must be provided. The examiner should specifically address the fact that after the Veteran was assessed with left knee ilio tibial band friction syndrome in September 2012, it continued to be listed as an active problem in his STRs thereafter.

A telephone interview with the Veteran should be conducted. A clinical examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. M. Schaefer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.