Citation Nr: A25031857
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 221020-288733
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1987 to April 1991.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2022 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO). 

In an October 2022 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of left and right hip disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Left and Right Hip Disabilities 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for left and right hip disabilities, to include as secondary to his service-connected ankle disabilities. 

Generally, service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the in-service disease or injury, the so-called "nexus" requirement. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

To establish entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) probative evidence establishing a nexus (i.e., link) between the service-connected disability and the current disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) and (b); Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for non-degenerative arthritis in April 2022, which stated that the claim was for degenerative rather than inflammatory-type arthritis, and therefore the form was not applicable. The associated opinions stated that although the arthritis examination was not applicable, there was no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb. Additionally, the examiner did not opine regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravated his hip disability. Notably, the examiner separately opined that the Veteran had an impaired gait that was at least as likely as not due to the Veteran's service-connected ankle disabilities. 

As an inapplicable non-degenerative arthritis examination was conducted rather than a hip examination, the VA examination is inadequate for adjudication purposes. Additionally, VA did not obtain an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected ankle disability aggravated his hip disability. Therefore, the VA opinion is also inadequate for adjudication purposes. Providing the Veteran with an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, remand is necessary for a new medical examination and opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the diagnosis and etiology of his left and right hip disabilities. The examiner must review the claims file. 

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. 

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and/or right hip disabilities had their onset during active-duty service or are otherwise related to any in-service disease, event, or injury? 

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and/or right hip disabilities were caused by his service-connected ankle disabilities? 

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and/or right hip disabilities are aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected ankle disabilities? 

In providing the requested opinions, the clinician should address the April 2022 VA opinion that the Veteran's impaired gait was at least as likely as not due to the Veteran's service-connected ankle disabilities. The rationale for all opinions must be provided. 

If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so. 

 

 

JOHN Z. JONES

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Resor, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.