Citation Nr: A25031060
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-450898
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain, as secondary to service-connected right knee anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's left knee strain was caused by his service-connected right knee ACL tear.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for left knee strain as secondary to service-connected right knee ACL tear have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2008 to July 2014.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a February 2024 decision.  In June 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior February 2024 decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran did not waive the remainder of his window to request a docket switch pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Because the current decision represents a full grant of the benefit sought, the lack of a waiver represents only harmless error by the Board.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee strain, as secondary to service-connected right knee ACL tear, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his left knee strain is secondary to his service-connected right knee ACL tear. See March 2020 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. He asserts that his right knee ACL tear causes him to walk and stand unevenly, lean to one side, and shift his weight back and forth to alleviate pain and discomfort. See December 2021 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

By way of background, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for left knee pain in March 2020, asserting entitlement based on secondary service connection theory. See March 2020 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. In February 2021, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying service connection, citing lack of current disability. The Veteran subsequently filed a supplemental claim in December 2021, specifically asserting that he has a diagnosis of left knee strain that is secondary to his service-connected right knee ACL tear and submitted evidence supporting his claim. See December 2021 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application; December 2021 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. Accordingly, the Board will focus its discussion on the secondary theory of entitlement. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires competent and credible evidence demonstrating (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 778 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

For the following reasons, service connection for left knee strain, secondary to service-connected right knee ACL tear, is warranted.

In the June 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability. The February 2024 VA examination noted a diagnosis of left knee strain. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Thus, the first element of secondary service connection is satisfied.

Next, the Veteran is service connected for multiple disabilities, to include right knee ACL tear. See June 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet. The AOJ also recognized this as a favorable finding in its June 2024 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Thus, the second element of secondary service connection is satisfied.

Turning to the third element, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's left knee strain is caused by or related to his service-connected right knee ACL tear.

The Veteran underwent VA examinations for his left knee claim. In a January 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported worsening right knee symptoms, including stiffness, instability, swelling, throbbing pain, and constant dull pain. He further stated that overuse and compensation for his right knee had led to the onset of left knee pain. His current left knee symptoms include stiffness, soreness, and dull pain. However, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee pain is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's right knee ACL tear. The examiner reasoned that a current chronic diagnosis could not be confirmed based on the available records or the examination conducted that day. See January 2021 C&P Exam. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in June 2021. During the examination, the Veteran reported worsening right knee symptoms and stated that overuse and compensation for his right knee had led to the onset of left knee pain. It was documented that the Veteran's symptoms for his left knee include stiffness, soreness, and dull pain. However, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's left knee appeared normal, there were no service treatment records (STRs) indicating a left knee condition, and objective examination findings did not support a diagnosis. See June 2021 C&P Exam.

In December 2021, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination. During the examination, the Veteran continued to report the same symptoms and that overuse and compensation for his right knee had led to the onset of left knee pain. Additionally, he mentioned that he avoids heavy lifting and strenuous or prolonged activities. The examination report noted a diagnosis of left knee joint osteoarthritis. However, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee pain is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's right knee ACL tear. The examiner reasoned that no chronic diagnosis for left knee pain was made during service, the objective examination was normal, and the reported symptoms were purely subjective. See December 2021 C&P Exam.

In February 2022, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's records and opined that the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis/degenerative arthritis is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's right knee ACL tear. The rationale was that the orthopedic literature does not support a significant impact of one joint injury on another unless it involves severe muscle or nerve damage, limb shortening over 5cm, or a markedly altered gait such as Trendelenburg gait. The examiner found no evidence of this severity in the Veteran's records, history, or examinations and stated that while joints may share properties, disease in one joint does not spread to another. No opinion regarding secondary aggravation was provided. See February 2022 C&P Exam.

In July 2022, an addendum opinion was requested to clarify the diagnosis in the December 2021 VA examination. See July 2022 Exam Request. The July 2022 VA opinion confirmed a diagnosis of left knee strain but found insufficient evidence to support a diagnosis of left knee osteoarthritis. The examiner noted that the clinical records reflect normal or non-antalgic gait and concluded that the left knee condition is not related to the right knee disability. The July 2022 VA examiner provided a similar rationale to the February 2022 VA examiner but added that although he acknowledged records noting knee pain and the Veteran's perception of compensating for his chronic right knee issues, the examiner ultimately concluded that the right knee condition is intrinsic to the right knee itself and not responsible for the left knee. The examiner also recognized that compensatory use of the opposite limb is a natural response to pain or limitation but asserted that whether the unaffected limb can handle increased strain depends on its own properties. See July 2022 C&P Exam.

Finally, in February 2024, the Veteran underwent another VA examination.  The examination report confirmed a diagnosis of left knee strain. During the examination, the Veteran reported difficulty bending, walking, running, walking up and down the stairs, lifting, squatting, or standing for long periods. The examiner noted normal range of motion but reported evidence of pain in weight-bearing, non weight-bearing, and active and passive motion but does not result in /cause functional loss. The examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee strain is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the left knee pain during service. The examiner reasoned that the Veterans records are silent for evidence in the Veteran's STRs to show that chronic symptoms began in service or manifested within one year of the Veteran's discharge from service. 

Furthermore, the February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee strain is less likely than not secondary to his right knee ACL tear because orthopedic literature does not support a significant impact of one joint injury on another unless it involves severe muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, so that the individual's gait pattern is obviously altered. The examiner found no evidence of this severity in the Veteran's records, history, or examinations and stated that while joints may share properties, disease in one joint does not spread to another or cause damage to it. No opinion regarding secondary aggravation was provided. See February 2024 C&P Exam.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted two private medical opinions. In the December 2021 opinion authored by G.U., APRN, MN, FNP, the private clinician opined that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the Veteran's left knee condition to include strain is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee ACL tear condition with associated compensatory walking strategies, with biomechanical and kinematic changes. The private clinician diagnosed the Veteran with left knee strain and documented symptoms such as popping, cracking, crunching, snapping, buckling, stiffness, a sensation of knee giving out, pain with motion, locking, and weakness.  The clinician explained that due to the severity of the Veteran's right knee pathology and associated pain, he developed an antalgic gait with limping, which medical literature associates with secondary biomechanical changes. These changes lead to abnormal joint kinetics in the lower extremities, accelerating the development and progression of his left knee strain. The clinician cited medical literature linking knee pain to biomechanical alterations, compensatory gait patterns, abnormal joint kinematics, and shifts in weight distribution away from the normal center of gravity-factors that contribute to functional limitations and joint pathology progression. The private clinician noted that her rationale was based upon a complete review of the file. See December 2021 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted another private medical opinion authored by P.D., APRN, MSN, CEN, CPEN, TCRN, FNP-BC. The September 2023 private clinician opined that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the Veteran's left knee strain is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected right knee ACL tear with associated antalgic gait. She stated that the Veteran's right lower extremity condition has caused pain and joint impairment, leading to uneven gait or limp. The clinician concluded that the Veteran's altered gait due to his right knee condition has caused or contributed to his left knee strain. Citing medical literature, the clinician explained that an abnormal walking pattern secondary to pain often results in a limp, which is commonly associated with orthopedic issues. 

After reviewing the evidence of record, and resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board concludes that the Veteran's claim for service connection for left knee strain on a secondary basis is warranted. The Board finds the December 2021 private medical opinion established a clear nexus between the Veteran's right knee disability and the development of his left knee strain.

The Board notes that the January 2021 and June 2021 VA examinations found no diagnosis of a left knee condition at the time. However, the December 2021 private opinion later diagnosed left knee strain, which was confirmed by the July 2022 VA examiner. Thus, the January 2021 and June 2021 VA opinions are afforded no probative weight. 

The VA opinions from February 2022, July 2022, and February 2024 are afforded less probative weight because they rely on generalized medical literature rather than the Veteran's specific condition. These opinions assert that an injury to one joint does not significantly impact another unless it results in severe muscle or nerve damage, limb shortening, or an obvious altered gait. They relied on VA treatment records in November 2021 documenting normal gait. See October 2022 CAPRI Record. However, these opinions overlooked the Veteran's reported symptoms and lay statements of walking and standing unevenly, leaning to one side, and shifting weight due to pain. See December 2021 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting a veteran is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by his senses). Additionally, the July 2022 VA examiner acknowledged that medical records indicate knee pain and the Veteran's reported compensation for the right knee but still concluded that the left knee strain was unrelated, contradicting the examiner's own recognition of compensatory mechanics. Moreover, the February 2022, July 2022, and February 2024 VA opinions are silent on the discussion of the aggravation prong required for a medical opinion on a theory of secondary service connection. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013); see also Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018) (holding that causation and aggravation are independent secondary service connection concepts and should have separate findings and rationales).

Here, the Board finds the December 2021 private medical opinion most probative, as it provided a well-reasoned conclusion, fully supported by medical rationale, and considered the Veteran's medical history, lay statements, reported symptoms, and referenced relevant medical literature, connecting the right knee ACL tear to the development of left knee strain. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 300 (2008) (holding that conclusions that are factually accurate, fully articulated, and contain sound reasoning contribute to the probative value of a medical opinion). The September 2023 private opinion also supports service connection, concluding that the Veteran's altered gait due to his right knee disability contributed to his left knee strain. However, this opinion lacks the necessary foundation, as it does not indicate whether the clinician reviewed medical records or conducted an in-person examination. While the conclusion aligns with the December 2021 private opinion, the absence of supporting documentation reduces its overall probative value compared to the more comprehensive December 2021 evaluation. 

                    (Continued on next page)

Accordingly, the evidence of record is, at the very least, in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's left knee strain is secondary to his service-connected right knee ACL tear. Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for left knee strain is warranted on a secondary basis. As the criteria for secondary service connection have been met, the claim is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Gaviola, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.