Citation Nr: A25031006
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-423958
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot condition, including Achilles tendon (left foot condition) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lower back pain (lower back condition) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1975 to October 1975 and from May 9, 1991, to May 12, 1991.  The Board notes the Veteran has additional periods of service in the Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve from May 1975 to April 2002 and May 2002 to March 2014.  Dates relevant to these claims include from March 14, 1981, to March 28, 1981, from November 14, 1988, to November 20, 1988, and in 2005 from January 19 to January 20, January 27, April 13, from August 8 to August 12, and from August 29 to September 2. 

The rating decision on appeal for left foot condition and left knee condition was issued in December 2023, which was a Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision from a June 2023 rating decision that constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  The rating decision on appeal for lower back condition was issued in February 2024, which was a HLR rating decision from a September 2023 supplemental rating decision that constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran has continuously pursued his May 2023 claim of service connection for left foot condition and left knee condition through a series of Supplemental Claims and HLRs, with the most recent being the December 2023 HLR rating decision.  Additionally, the Veteran has continuously pursued his August 2023 reopened claim of service connection for lower back condition through a series of Supplemental Claims and HLRs, with the most recent being the February 2024 HLR rating decision.

The Board notes that the Veteran filed a previous claim in February 2014 for "right foot condition to include Achilles tendon".  The AOJ denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for both a right ankle sprain and a torn left Achilles tendon in the August 2014 rating decision.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran/appellant elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 (left knee and left foot conditions) and September 2023 (lower back condition) AOJ decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left foot condition, including Achilles tendon, left knee condition, and lower back condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  ?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).  Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors is required for the issues on appeal for the following reasons.

1. Entitlement to service connection for left foot condition, including Achilles tendon.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition.

The Veteran contends that he incurred left foot and knee conditions during active service from wearing steel-toe boots every day, which he has self-treated since service, including OTC medications, ice/heat, and Epsom salt soaks.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim for Left and Right Foot Condition; May 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim for Left Knee Condition.

Regarding his left foot condition, he also contends that he experiences continued pain and issues with his feet, including swelling, weakness, and popping.  He has tried to limit activities such as using stairs, high-impact activities, and running/jogging, which exacerbate his foot pain, and sports are much harder to do without increasing the pain.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim for Left and Right Foot Condition.

Regarding his left knee condition, he also contends that he experiences continued pain with motion, swelling, weakness, a feeling of the knee giving out, and popping in his left knee.  The pain in his left knee becomes worse with stair climbing, high-impact activity, prolonged standing, prolonged walking, prolonged sitting, running/jogging, squatting, jumping, quick side-to-side movements, or carrying heavy objects.  He has avoided or limited certain activities, like long car rides, sitting through a movie, and sports because of the pain in his left knee.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim for Left Knee Condition.

In the June 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made favorable findings for the Veteran's claimed left foot condition and left knee condition, including (1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability, his lay testimony is credible to note symptoms of foot pain; and (2) the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability, his lay testimony is credible to note symptoms of knee pain.  However, in the December 2023 HLR rating decision, the AOJ stated the previous favorable findings have been overturned because the lay statement of foot pain and knee pain is not sufficient to establish a disability.

Consistent with VA's duty to assist, VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service injury; (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established injury; and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to decide the claim.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84.  The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, has a low evidentiary threshold.  Id. at 83.

In support of a current disability, while the Veteran's medical records do not provide for a diagnosis of a left foot or left knee condition, in the June 2014 VA ankle condition examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left foot torn Achilles tendon with residual stiffness from 1988, which is consistent with the Veteran's reports of his chronic pain and swelling.  Specifically, the Veteran claims that the pain, swelling, weakness, and popping he experiences functionally impact his quality of life he has been self-treated with OTC medications, ice/heat, and Epsom salt soaks since service.  Therefore, the Board finds evidence suggests persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability characterized by a left foot condition, including pain and Achilles tendon residuals, and left knee condition.

In support of an in-service occurrence, the Veteran claims his left foot condition and left knee condition were caused by wearing steel-toed boots every day in service that he has self-treated since service.  The Board notes that the Veteran tore his left Achilles tendon on November 20, 1988.  See November 1988 Physical Profile Serial Report; see also August 1990 Periodic Report of Medical History.  The Board also notes that the Veteran was on active duty for special tour on November 20, 1988.  In contrast, the Board notes that the Veteran did not report other left foot or left knee conditions during his service, including in the last report of medical examination and history in March 2002 for National Guard Air Force Reserve enlistment.

While the Veteran's VA treatment records include a June 2014 VA examination for the Veteran's left ankle, including his left foot torn Achilles tendon, there is no medical opinion regarding that examination as to service connection.  Additionally, while the Veteran is not competent to diagnose himself with a specific foot or knee condition, and the Board also notes the absence of the Veteran's reports of such issues, the Board notes that he is competent and credible to report his onsets of symptoms, such as pain, the functional impacts he experiences from such pain, and his self-treatment during and since service.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 n.4, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

As the evidentiary threshold to establish whether the Veteran's claimed left foot or left knee condition may be associated with the Veteran's established injury, such as his November 1988 torn left Achilles tendon, is low, the Board finds that considering the Veteran's May 2023 statement that his chronic pain and swelling of his left foot and left knee impacts his quality of life, in combination with the Veteran's in-service treatment records and the June 2014 VA ankle examination, meets that low threshold.  Thus, the Board finds that the evidence of record meets the third element of the McLendon test.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination, nor has an opinion been obtained to determine whether the Veteran's left foot or left knee conditions are related to his in-service torn left Achilles or from wearing boots every day.  Without this information, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the service connection for the left foot or left knee condition.  While the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of left foot or left knee condition, the Board finds that the Veteran's contentions, in-service treatment records, and post-service VA ankle examination support his chronic left foot and left knee pain, in combination with his contention of the functional impact his symptoms have on his life, is sufficient to satisfy the McLendon test and warrant a VA examination and medical opinion to further assess those issues.

Accordingly, the Board finds the AOJ's failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination and medical opinion that addressed the functional impairment (to include its impact on earning capacity) of his chronic left foot and left knee symptoms and any relationship with the in-service injury of his left Achilles tendon or wearing boots every day in service, and if so, whether such rises to the level of a disability, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error; therefore, the matter must be remanded for a VA examination and medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  VA's duty to assist "includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim."  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) (internal quotation omitted).  On remand, the Veteran should be afforded a VA examination and medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed chronic left foot and left knee symptoms, including any functional impairment of his chronic pain symptoms.

3. Entitlement to service connection for lower back condition.

The Veteran contends that during active service, he injured his back in Panama when he fell off the back of the bed of a truck and was hospitalized for three days and self-medicated since service with over-the-counter (OTC) medications.  He also contends that his current lower back pain can be described as shooting pain, which has caused him to walk unevenly, and he has muscle spasms one (1) to two (2) times per month; movements like turning his body exacerbate his pain.  He tries to avoid or limit activities that aggravate and worsen his pain, such as prolonged sitting and long car rides, and when his lower back pain is at its worst, he uses ice or heat.  His low back pain rates around a three (3) out of ten (10) on most days but can be as high as a six (6) with flare-ups.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

The Board notes that in the September 2023 Supplemental rating decision, the AOJ made favorable findings for the Veteran's claimed lower back condition, including (1) the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded because the evidence of records shows participation in TERA; and (2) the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability based on the VA medical reports in 2005 show a diagnosis of low back muscle spasm.  Additionally, in the February 2024 HLR rating decision, the AOJ made an additional favorable finding that the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded because his MOS of Airlift Aircraft Mechanic includes exposure to exhaust, fuels, solvents, etc.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran indicated in the August 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim that he was hospitalized during service.  The Board notes that his STRs indicate he was in an automobile accident in Panama in May 1981 and was treated at Gorgas Army Hospital for his injuries, including hand lacerations and fractures.  See March 1981 Chronological Treatment Record; see also August 1981 Report of Medical History.  The Board notes that the Veteran does not expressly state that his claimed lower back incident is the same automobile accident noted in his STRs.  However, no hospital records are not included in the evidence of record.  Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran mentioned he received treatment from his primary care provider with Keiser in 2005 for his back muscle spasms that were not included in the record.  See June 2014 VA Back Exam.  Therefore, as the AOJ was on notice of these records prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, a remand is required to allow VA to request these potentially relevant records.

Consistent with VA's duty to assist, VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service injury; (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established injury; and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to decide the claim.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 84.  The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, has a low evidentiary threshold.  Id. at 83.

In support of a current disability, the Veteran's June 2014 VA back examination diagnosed the Veteran's lower back muscle spasms that resolved without residuals in 2005.  The Veteran's treatment records do not provide for any other diagnosis of lower back condition causing functional impairment.  However, the June 2014 VA back examination does not address the Veteran's current contentions of his lower back pain and muscle spasms.  The Veteran claims that the chronic shooting pain and muscle spasms he experiences functionally impact his quality of life, and he has been self-treating with ice/heat, and OTC medications since service.  Therefore, the Board finds evidence that suggests persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability characterized by a lower back condition.

In support of an in-service occurrence, the Veteran claims his lower back condition was caused by an automobile accident in Panama.  While the Veteran does not specifically state the date of the incident in his August 2023 statement, the Veteran's narrative does match with the Veteran's STRs for an automobile accident in Panama in March 1981, where he was treated at Gorgas Army Hospital.  The Veteran's STRs of his accident in Panama do not mention any back injuries; however, no hospital records of his treatment were included in the evidence of record.  The Board also notes that the Veteran was on active duty for a special tour in March 1981.  In contrast, the Board notes that the Veteran did not report any back conditions during his service, including in the last report of medical examination and history in March 2002 for National Guard Air Force Reserve enlistment. 

Regarding some indication that the Veteran's claimed lower back condition, including pain and muscle spasms, the Board notes that the Veteran's VA treatment records include a June 2014 VA examination for the Veteran's back.  However, the June 2014 VA examination does not address the Veteran's current lower back contentions, and there is no medical opinion for service connection regarding that examination.  Additionally, while the Veteran is not competent to diagnose himself with a specific lower back condition, and the Board also notes the absence of the Veteran's reports of such issues, the Board notes that he is competent and credible to report his onsets of symptoms, such as pain and muscle spasms, the functional impacts he experiences from such pain and muscle spasms, and his self-treatment during and since service. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 n.4, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

As the evidentiary threshold to establish whether the Veteran's claimed lower back condition "may be" associated with the Veteran's established injury, such as his March 1981 Panama automobile accident, is low, the Board finds that considering the Veteran's August 2023 statement that the chronic pain and muscle spasms of his lower back condition impacts his quality of life, in combination with the Veteran's in-service treatment records and the June 2014 VA back examination, meets that low threshold.  Thus, the Board finds that the evidence of record meets the third element of the McLendon test.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination, nor has an opinion been obtained to determine whether the Veteran's lower back condition is related to his in-service Panama incident.  Without this information, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the service connection for the lower back condition.  The Veteran has a current diagnosis of lower back muscle spasms; however, the June 2014 VA back examination does not address the Veteran's August 2023 contentions, nor is there a medical opinion with that June 2014 VA back examination.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's contentions, in-service treatment records, and post-service VA back examination support his chronic lower back pain, and muscle spasms, in combination with his contention of the functional impact his symptoms have on his life, is sufficient to satisfy the McLendon test and warrant a VA examination and medical opinion to further assess those issues.

Accordingly, the Board finds the AOJ's failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination and medical opinion that addressed the functional impairment (to include its impact on earning capacity) of his chronic lower back symptoms and any relationship with the in-service injury during the Panama automobile accident, and if so, whether such rises to the level of a disability, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error; therefore, the matter must be remanded for a VA examination and medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) (internal quotation omitted).

On remand, the Veteran's March 1981 hospitalization records in Panama, as well as any other medical records regarding Panama incidents and the Veteran's private treatment records from 2005, should be requested.  Additionally, the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination and medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed chronic lower back symptoms, including any functional impairment of his chronic pain and muscle spasm symptoms.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Attempt to obtain any hospital records from Gorgas Army Hospital related to hospitalization and/or treatment the Veteran received following a motor vehicle accident in 1981.

2. Attempt to obtain post-service private records from Keiser regarding the Veteran's claimed lower back condition, as reported by the Veteran at a June 2014 VA Back examination.  Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left foot condition, including Achilles tendon.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  A complete history should be elicited directly from the Veteran, and the opinion should include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner should respond to the following:

(a)	Identify any left foot disability by (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment. 

(b)	As to each left foot disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that disability is due to service, to include the in-service November 1988 torn Achilles tendon and reports of pain after service.

In responding to the above, the examiner should address: 

(c)	The Veteran's contentions, including (i) self-treatment with ice/heat, Epsom salt soaks, rubbing, and OTC medications during and since service, (ii) the November 1988 in-service injury of his torn left Achilles tendon, and (iii) the Veteran's statements regarding wearing boots daily in active service causing his left foot condition, including pain. 

(d)	What types of symptoms would have been caused by the in-service November 1988 torn Achilles tendon?

(e)	Is there any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the in-service torn Achilles tendon could have led to the current left foot disability?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left knee condition.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  A complete history should be elicited directly from the Veteran, and the opinion should include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner should respond to the following:

(a)	Identify any left knee disability by (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment. 

(b)	As to each left knee disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that disability is due to service, to include the in-service November 1988 torn Achilles tendon and reports of pain after service.

In responding to the above, the examiner should address:

(c)	The Veteran's contentions, including (i) self-treatment with ice/heat, stretching, rubbing, and OTC medications during and since service and (ii) wearing boots daily in active service, causing his left knee condition, including pain.

(d)	What types of symptoms would have been caused by the in-service November 1988 torn Achilles tendon?

(e)	Is there any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the in-service torn Achilles tendon could have led to the current left knee disability?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed lower back condition.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  A complete history should be elicited directly from the Veteran, and the opinion should include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner should respond to the following:

(a)	Identify any lower back disability by (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment; including any radiculopathy from the Veteran's statement of shooting pain. 

(b)	As to each lower back disability identified, whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that disability is due to service, to include a March 1981 automobile accident?

In responding to the above, the examiner should address:

(c)	The Veteran's contentions, including (i) self-treatment with ice/heat and OTC medications during and since service and (ii) the Panama incident the Veteran referred to in his August 2023 statement, including, if relevant, the March 1981 automobile accident and treatment at Gorgas Army Hospital.

(d)	What types of symptoms would have been caused by the March 1981 automobile accident?

(e)	Is there any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the March 1981 automobile accident could have led to the current back disability?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jacobs, Kathleen J., Attorney-Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.