Citation Nr: A25031124
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240518-443068
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a restoration of the 40 percent rating for lumbar degenerative disc disease with spinal stenosis (service-connected lumbar spine disability) is granted, effective May 1, 2024.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for heart disease is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for scar on head is remanded.  

FINDING OF FACT

The rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability was reduced without observation of regulatory requirements.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The reduction in rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability from 40 percent to 10 percent, effective May 1, 2024, is void ab initio, and the 40 percent rating is restored.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.105(e), 3.344.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran had honorable active-duty service with the United States Army from January 2003 to July 2007.  

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2023 and February 2024 rating decisions of a VA Regional Office (RO).  

In May 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)).  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  He acknowledged that Direct Review would entail the Board reviewing the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing requests.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 and February 2024 rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

The Board notes that evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.   Therefore, the Board may not consider this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  That stated, the newly submitted evidence will be reviewed and considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) after it completes the development ordered by the Board with respect to the issues being remanded.  

Rating Reduction

Entitlement to a restoration of the 40 percent rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability is granted, effective May 1, 2024.  

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) allow for the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability when warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedural guidelines.  The RO must issue a rating action proposing the reduction and setting forth all material facts and reasons for the reduction.  The Veteran must then be given 60 days to submit additional evidence showing that compensation should be continued at the present level and to request a predetermination hearing, provided that the request is received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice.  If no additional evidence is received within the 60-day period and no hearing is requested, a final rating action will be taken and the award will be reduced or discontinued effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the Veteran expires.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), (i).  

When VA reduces a veteran's disability rating without following the applicable regulations, the reduction is void ab initio, "from the beginning."  See Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. 288, 292 (1999).  

In this case, the Board finds that the procedural requirements under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i) for the reduction of the rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability from 40 percent to 10 percent were not properly followed.  

On December 18, 2023, the RO notified the Veteran of a proposed rating reduction for his lumbar spine disability issued in a rating decision that same month.  The Veteran was notified that he had 30 days to submit a hearing request.  On December 29, 2023, within 30 days following the December 18, 2023, notice letter, the Veteran requested a predetermination hearing.  The record does not reflect that the predetermination hearing was scheduled.  

In turn, the AOJ should have, but failed to, comply with the regulatory requirement to afford the Veteran the requested predetermination hearing before issuing its February 2024 rating decision reducing the Veteran's rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability.  Thus, the RO reduced the rating without consideration of the Veteran's testimony, which should have been obtained prior to the final reduction.  As such, the Board finds that the procedural requirements under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(i) were not met, and the Veteran was not afforded due process before his monthly benefits were reduced.  Because the procedural requirements were not met, the reduction is void ab initio, and the 40 percent rating must be restored.  See Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 325 (1995) (where VA reduces a rating without observing applicable laws and regulations, the rating is void ab initio, and the prior rating must be reinstated effective the date of the reduction).  

Accordingly, the Veteran's 40 percent rating for service-connected lumbar spine disability was improperly reduced, and the 40 percent evaluation must be restored from the date of reduction on May 1, 2024.  The appeal is granted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

After thorough review of the record, the Board finds that additional evidentiary development is warranted before a final decision may be reached for the remaining issues on appeal.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.  

See discussion in Paragraph 3

2. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.  

See discussion in Paragraph 3

3. Entitlement to service connection for heart disease is remanded.  

The Board notes that an Exam Scheduling Request sheet placed in the file on January 25, 2024, indicates that the Veteran was to be scheduled for VA examinations for his respiratory and heart claims with a request for opinions concerning the etiology of these disabilities.  Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation sheets placed in the file on February 16, 2024, indicate that the Veteran failed to report for the VA examinations scheduled on his behalf in support of his sinusitis, asthma, and heart claims.  Although the record indicates that VA examinations were likely scheduled on the Veteran's behalf in these matters, specific details concerning these examinations are not found in the claims file.  The record does not show the date or location for these examinations.  Moreover, there is no documentation of the notice letters sent to the Veteran concerning the examinations.  Notably, around the time of the purported scheduled examinations for the Veteran's sinusitis, asthma, and heart claims, the Veteran was also scheduled for examinations for migraine headaches, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), all of which are not at issue in this appeal.  The record reflects that notice letters for these examinations were sent to the Veteran, and the Veteran appeared to these examinations.  

The Board finds that it is unclear whether the Veteran was provided notice of the examinations scheduled for his claimed sinusitis, asthma, and heart condition.  Thus, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and reschedule the Veteran for examinations concerning these claimed disabilities.  

Furthermore, the Board notes that pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) medical examination and opinion is required in cases of toxic-exposed veterans where there is a claim for a disability that is not clearly due to an etiology not associated with toxic exposure, and the claim cannot otherwise be granted based on the current evidence of record.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (38); 1168, 1710(e)(1).  

A December 2023 TERA memorandum shows that there is evidence of a TERA.  Thus, a TERA examination is necessary for the sinusitis, asthma, and heart claims.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).  

4. Entitlement to service connection for scar on head is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a scar on the head.  He asserts that, while training in 2005 in Iraq, during combative physical training without a helmet, he was thrown down and struck the top of his head against the gravel ground, sustaining a laceration to the top left side of his head.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; January 2024 VA examination report for TBI.  

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his claimed scar on the head.  A January 2012 VA treatment record notes "well healed scar left parietal".  

As there is evidence that the Veteran sustained injury to the head, resulting in a scar, a remand for a VA etiology opinion for this claim is necessary.  Notably, the Veteran is service connected for PTSD with residuals of TBI, as well as for migraine headaches with residuals of TBI.  

Based on the foregoing, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed sinusitis and asthma conditions.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed respiratory condition during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service, including conceded toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) during service.  

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs.  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed heart condition.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed heart condition during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service, including conceded TERAs during service.  

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs.  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed scar on head.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed scar condition of the head during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. MacDonald, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.