Citation Nr: A25031949
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240911-472357
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1988 to February 1992 with additional service in the Army National Guard.  This case comes to the Board from a December 2023 decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Because the AOJ issued the decision after February 19, 2019, the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies to this case.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 20.4.

In February 2019 the Veteran filed his initial claim for service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability, which the AOJ denied in April 2019.  The AOJ issued the December 2023 decision in response to a supplemental claim which the Veteran filed in June 2023.   Although the December 2023 decision denied the hearing loss claim on its merits, the AOJ made the following favorable finding: "In support of your claim, new and relevant evidence has been received and your claim is now reconsidered."  Since this favorable finding is binding, see 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a), there is no need for the Board to reconsider whether new and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the previously denied hearing loss claim.

In his VA Form 10182 ("Notice of Disagreement" or "NOD"), the Veteran selected the option of direct review without the submission of additional evidence and without a hearing.  This selection means that the Board's review is limited to the evidence in the claims file at the time of the December 2023 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Although the need for further delay is regrettable, the Board must remand this case to the AOJ for further development.  To help decide this case, the AOJ obtained copies of records concerning the Veteran's medical treatment during his initial period of active-duty service in the Army (August 1988 to February 1992). The claims file includes information indicating that, after his active-duty service, the Veteran served in the Army National Guard until March 1996.

The AOJ asked the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) to provide copies of the Veteran service treatment records.  Unfortunately, the scope of the request for service treatment records was limited to records prepared during the Veteran's initial period of service between 1988 and 1992.  The only medical record in the electronic claims file pertaining to subsequent National Guard service is an October 1992 examination report prepared at the time the Veteran enlisted in the Army National Guard.  There are no other medical records of any kind concerning his service in the Army National Guard between October 1992 and March 1996.  For these reasons, the available service treatment records may be incomplete.

The Board has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error or to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  In this case, the AOJ had notice of the dates of the Veteran's National Guard service before issuing the May December 2023 decision.  Thus, there was a pre-decisional failure to satisfy VA's duty to assist the Veteran when the AOJ failed to make appropriate requests for service treatment records concerning post-1992 National Guard service.

When denying service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability, the AOJ relied on the unfavorable opinion of an audiologist who examined the Veteran in December 2023.  This report is very similar to an earlier opinion, prepared in July 2019.  Both opinions acknowledge that, based on his military occupation specialty of wheeled vehicle mechanic, it is likely that the Veteran was exposed to loud noise in service.  Both opinions reject the theory that the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral hearing loss disability is the result of in-service noise exposure because the auditory threshold tests in his available service treatment records indicate normal hearing.  For two reasons, these opinions are inadequate to support an unfavorable decision.  First, the absence of an in-service hearing loss disability is not necessarily fatal to a claim for compensation for a post-service hearing loss disability.  See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993); Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992).  Secondly, the AOJ granted this Veteran's claim for service connection for tinnitus.  Under these circumstances, an adequate opinion would address whether the Veteran's hearing loss is a secondary result of tinnitus pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Even if the Veteran's tinnitus did not cause the Veteran to develop hearing loss, an adequate opinion would also address the theory that the presence of tinnitus in service favors the conclusion that post-service hearing loss is likewise related to service.  Since both hearing loss opinions were associated with the claims file before the December 2023 decision, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by denying the claim without first seeking a new opinion.  For this reason, the AOJ should obtain an adequate opinion concerning the etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should make reasonable efforts to obtain complete copies of the Veteran's service treatment records and personnel records, including the records concerning the Veteran's service in the Army National Guard (approximately October 1992 to March 1996). These efforts should include new appropriate requests using PIES system.  The AOJ should carefully review any records obtained as a result of the post-remand records requests.  If the records obtained do not include service treatment records concerning the post-October 1992 National Guard service, the AOJ should pursue follow-up measures, including follow-up by a military records specialist, electronic mail follow-up to the VA liaison office at the NPRC, contact with the Veteran's duty station at the time of his separation from service, and any other reasonable follow-up procedures.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral hearing loss disability.  In his or her interview with the Veteran, it may be useful for the examiner to clarify a contradiction in the information concerning potentially relevant noise exposure.  According to a November 2018 VAMC audiology note, the Veteran was exposed to loud noises "in the military as a mechanic and as a civilian both occupationally and recreationally."  But according to a May 2019 audiology examination report, which includes an etiology opinion concerning tinnitus but not hearing loss, there was "no reported recreational or occupational noise exposure outside of military service."  

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the electronic claims file, the examiner must answer the following questions:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability had its initial onset in service or is otherwise related to an in-service disease, injury, or event, including the Veteran's exposure to the loud noise when performing his duties as a wheeled vehicle mechanic?

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus?

The examiner should prepare a clear rationale explaining the reasons for his or her opinion.  The examiner is advised that normal in-service auditory threshold test results are not, standing alone, a sufficient reason for an unfavorable opinion.  The examiner should also discuss the potential significance of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. Even if the examiner believes that tinnitus did not cause or aggravate the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disability, does the presence of tinnitus in service suggest that his hearing loss is related to service?  Why or why not? 

3. The AOJ must ensure that the requested examination report and opinion comply with these instructions.  If any report is deficient in any way, the AOJ must implement corrective procedures at once.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Nye, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.