Citation Nr: A25031427
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 250102-504700
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran had active service from June 1967 to December 1974.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2024 decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in January 2025. He elected the Direct Review docket.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The Veteran maintains he has tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss that are related to service.

The AOJ denied service connection for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus relying on the fact that evidence which may have supported his claim was not available, as the Veteran had not attended a VA examination.

In January 2025 correspondence, the Veteran explained that he had been scheduled for two appointments on the same day, the later of which he had he attended.  The Veteran stated that he had appeared on time for a scheduled audiological examination only to be told that he did not have an appointment. 

The record shows that scheduling of an initial audiological examination was requested on October 1, 2024. An October 2, 2024 appointment confirmation shows the Veteran confirmed scheduling of that examination.  It also shows that the Veteran was informed that if he needed to reschedule an examination, he was to do so through the examination provider.

On October 3, 2024, the scheduled examination was indicated to have been "cancelled at Claimant's request" by the examination provider. 

A couple of weeks later, the Veteran stated, he was again contacted and told that he needed to schedule an examination.  He stated that he recited the above, i.e., that he had already reported for the (cancelled) examination and was surprised an examination was necessary.  The Veteran stated he was informed he should contact VA, that he did, and was it would be noted in the record.  

VA requested another audiological examination be scheduled in December 2023. That request was cancelled a week later, the stated reason being "no show," indicating that the Veteran did not report for an examination that had been scheduled.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to obtain a VA examination). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The record is insufficient to show that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination.  Here, the record indicates that the examination the Veteran states he reported for had already been cancelled, per his request. No additional detail is provided.  As to any failure to report to a second examination, the record does not show that the Veteran was provided notice of any such examination being scheduled, much less that it was confirmed.  

The failure to provide notice to the Veteran of a scheduled examination, or cancellation thereof, is clearly good cause for his failing to report to the same.  Ineffective notice is tantamount to no notice.  

The record is thus insufficient to decide his claims, as the examinations and medical opinions necessary to do so were not obtained.  

Given the evidence tending to prove that the Veteran did not receive notice that his initial examination had been cancelled, much less cancelled at his own request, as well as the absence of evidence indicating that notice of a second scheduled examination was provided, remand is required to correct the above pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran is advised that failure to attend any future VA examination may adversely impact the outcome of his claim.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA audiological examination for his claimed bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus.  Provide the Veteran notice of the scheduled examination.  

The examiner is then asked to opine as to the following:

(a.) Indicate whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of tinnitus and/or hearing loss for VA compensation purposes.  

(b.) For each diagnosis, state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), that the Veteran's hearing loss was either incurred in service or is otherwise related to service.

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), that tinnitus was incurred in service or is otherwise related to service.

The examiner must provide reasons for all opinions rendered.

 

R. Casadei

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Dwyer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.