Citation Nr: A25031127
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230315-331100
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) services, other than employment services, to include additional education in pursuit of a second master's degree, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here on appeal, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined rating of 100 percent and was determined to have a serious employment handicap.

2. At the time of his application for VR&E benefits, the Veteran possessed a bachelor's degree in business management and a master's degree in writing, and was currently employed.

3. The Veteran was offered participation in a VR&E employment services program to help him find employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities; he declined those services.

4. The evidence persuasively establishes that, during the period here at issue, additional education and training beyond the Veteran's current level of education and work experience were not required in order for him to secure suitable employment consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for additional VR&E benefits, other than employment services, to include additional education in pursuit of a second master's degree, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 3100; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.52, 21.72, 21.283, 21.284.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from June 2010 to October 2012.  His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2023 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Chicago, Illinois.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in March 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to VR&E services

The Veteran seeks to establish entitlement to VR&E services for the purpose of obtaining a career as a teacher and to write novels.  See February 2023 VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g).

The determination as to whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50 (b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

In the present case, the Veteran's basic eligibility for VR&E benefits is not at issue.  During the period here on appeal, he was service connected for multiple disabilities with a combined evaluation of 100 percent from February 26, 2019.  He therefore met the basic threshold requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation.

Moreover, the VRC evaluated the Veteran in February 2023 and found that he met the basic eligibility requirements for Chapter 31 benefits based on having a serious employment handicap.  See February 2023 VR-64 (Chapter 31 Positive Decision Letter); February 2023 VA Form 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report). However, instead of granting additional education or training, the VRC indicated that the Veteran could achieve rehabilitation by engaging in employment services provided through an Individualized Written Rehabilitation Plan (IWRP)/ Individualized Employment Assistance Plan (IEAP).  In other words, the VRC offered the Veteran employment services as a means to obtain and maintain suitable employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities.

Again, the Veteran's entitlement to VR&E services is not at issue.  Rather, based on the VRC's findings and the Veteran's contentions, the issue before the Board is whether additional training or education would enable the Veteran to overcome his impairment to employment (i.e., his serious employment handicap) such that he would be able to obtain and maintain suitable employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities.

In his February 2023 RNI, the Veteran stated that his expectation was that the VR&E program would help him complete a second master's degree program at the University of Chicago.  He explained that the program would allow him to write a novel and serve as preparation to pursue a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.).  He noted that he had earned a bachelor's degree in business management and a master's degree in writing.  He also reported that he was presently employed at the University of Chicago, earning approximately $3,100 per month.  He described his job duties as secretarial.  Prior to his current employment, he was employed as a fitness manager from January 2008 to June 2010, an event manager from June 2011 to September 2013, and as sales and store manager from August 2018 to September 2020.  The Veteran remarked that while he was currently employed, he was missing a lot of work due to doctors' appointments.  He stated that his service-connected disabilities had affected his job performance, job opportunities, job satisfaction, missed work time, co-worker and manager relations, and sense of fulfillment.

As noted above, the Veteran was evaluated by a VRC in February 2023.  The VRC performed a comprehensive assessment of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and addressed the impact of each disability on his ability to prepare for, obtain, and maintain suitable employment.  Based on a thorough assessment of each disability, the VRC opined that the Veteran met the criteria for an employment handicap because he had a vocational impairment derived in substantial part from his service-connected disabilities, and because he had not yet overcome that impairment.

The VRC also found that the Veteran met the criteria for a serious employment handicap because his service-connected disabilities resulted in a significant vocational impairment in an identifiable, measurable, or observable, causative way.  Although the VRC found that the Veteran met the legal requirements for entitlement to VR&E services, she concluded that the Veteran only needed employment services to overcome his impairment to employability and obtain and maintain suitable employment.

In that regard, the VRC noted that the Veteran reported that he could not work a traditional 40 hour a week job because he would miss days due to his appointments.  He reported that his current employer had been accommodating, but he feared he would eventually be terminated for taking so much time off for appointments.  He further reported that he felt overqualified as a manager with his current employment and felt that he would do better with a second master's degree.  The VRC noted the Veteran already had two degrees and offered employment services whereby he could be assisted in finding other jobs, possibly remote positions, in business or writing.  However, the Veteran declined.  See February 2023 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); February 2023 VAF 28-1902f (Feasibility Determination Narrative Report).

In the February 2023 decision on appeal, the VRC stated that she could not approve the request for additional education.  More specifically, the VRC explained that she could not support the request for a second master's degree because the Veteran had overcome vocational impairments through education and consistent work history in a suitable vocation, and he declined employment services.

As noted, the issue in this case concerns the Veteran's disagreement with the denial of his request to obtain another master's degree.  Following review of the evidence properly available for consideration, the Board finds that entitlement to additional education or training to obtain or maintain suitable employment was not warranted during the period here on appeal.

Significantly, the VRC in this case found that, although the Veteran had not yet overcome his vocational impairments, his existing education-specifically, a bachelor's degree in business management and a master's degree in writing-in  addition to his extensive transferable skills and work experience, was sufficient for him to obtain and maintain employment consistent with his interests, aptitudes, and abilities that did not aggravate his service-connected disabilities.  As such, the VRC determined that the Veteran only needed assistance in the form of employment services to achieve suitable employment.  The VRC reached that conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational and educational goals.  See February 2023 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); February 2023 VAF 28-1902f (Feasibility Determination Narrative Report); February 2023VR-58 (Decision Letter).

The Board has considered the Veteran's assertions.  See March 2023 VA Form 10182 (attachment).  Specifically, he stated that he understood that requesting payment for a second master's degree was unusual and expected to be denied.  However, he argued that the VRC did not fully understand his situation, and he took exception to language in the decision letter.  For instance, he noted that he was seeking a second master's degree in philosophy, not creative writing, as indicated in the decision letter.  Additionally, he indicated that typographical errors were insulting and displayed a lack of care and seriousness.  Finally, he argued that he had never had suitable employment.

The Board understands the Veteran's frustration; however, he has not presented persuasive or credible evidence to show that, contrary to the VRC's determination, he was entitled to VR&E services for additional education during the period at issue.  Rather, the record shows that he had the education and work experience to qualify for suitable employment consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  Indeed, at the time of his application, he was currently employed.  Additionally, the Veteran has not adequately explained why he cannot teach or write novels with his current degrees.

While the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran disagrees with the VRC's findings, the Board finds that his lay assertions are entitled to less weight than the findings rendered by the VRC, who has specialized training in this area.  The VRC in this case was competent to assess the labor market and had sufficient facts and data before her to support a determination that the Veteran did not need additional education and training to obtain and maintain suitable employment and provided a sound rationale for that determination.  See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997) (an opinion rendered by a one with specialized training may be considered more probative than a non-specialist's finding).  As such, the Board assigns the VRC's findings great probative weight.  

In reaching the determination that additional VR&E services, other than employment services, are not warranted, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's desire to obtain a second master's degree.  The Board commends the Veteran for wanting to pursue further educational and training opportunities.  Although he has every right to seek career training at the level of his choosing, allowing a veteran to pursue whatever level of career training he chooses when he is capable of obtaining suitable employment frustrates the purpose of VR&E benefits.

In that regard, the Board emphasizes that the purpose of Chapter 31 VR&E services is not to provide a claimant with whatever level of career training he chooses should his interests or career objectives change.  Rather, the purpose of such services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment. 38 C.F.R. § 21.70.  Here, the Veteran was found by the VRC to have developed the knowledge, skills, and abilities to overcome his employment handicap and to obtain and maintain suitable employment, which the Veteran had already received by obtaining bachelor's and master's degrees.

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, but finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  That is to say, the evidence on the issue is not in approximate balance.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal is denied.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.