Citation Nr: A25031189
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231106-391885
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is granted.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than June 21, 2021 for the award of service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability based on service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on statutory housebound status is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and hiatal hernia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right hip disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The Veteran's competent, credible lay statements establish that he experienced low back pain during active duty service with symptomatology that has continued post service, culminating in the diagnosis of intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS). 

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's left knee disability resulted in flexion limited to 30 degrees or extension limited to 15 degrees.

4. The Veteran submitted an Intent to File a Compensation Claim (Intent to File) on June 21, 2021 and he filed a complete claim application for entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability on June 30, 2021, within one year of submission of the Intent to File.

5. Prior to February 9, 2022, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not preclude him from securing and following a substantially gainful occupation.

6. Prior to February 9, 2022, the Veteran did not have a single disability rated as 100 percent or totally disabling with a separate disability or disabilities separately rated as 60 percent disabling; the evidence did not persuasively demonstrate that his various disabilities left him housebound.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

4. The criteria for an effective date earlier than June 21, 2021 for the award of service connection for a left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

5. The criteria for an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of a TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

6. The criteria for an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of a SMC based on housebound statutory status have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from June 2007 to December 2011. His decorations include the Iraq Campaign Medal with Two Campaign Stars, the Army Achievement Medal (3rd Award), the Army Good Conduct Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Korean Defense Service Medal, the Army Service Ribbon, the Overseas Service Ribbon (2nd Award), and the Certificate of Achievement.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from multiple rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO). The Board finds that a brief recitation of the procedural history of this case is instructive for the purpose of clarifying the issues on appeal and the applicable evidentiary windows. 

In August 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking, in relevant part, entitlement to service connection for GERD, a lumbar spine disability, a right hip disability, and a left hip disability, entitlement to an increased disability rating for a left knee disability, entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for a left knee disability, and entitlement to a TDIU. In December 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision denying the aforementioned claims, and deferring the claim of entitlement to a TDIU pending additional evidentiary development. 

In March 2023, the AOJ issued a rating decision which, in pertinent part, granted entitlement to a TDIU and entitlement to SMC based on statutory housebound status, both effective February 9, 2022. 

In July 2023, the Veteran requested higher-level review of the aforementioned adjudicated issues in the December 2022 and March 2023 rating decisions, with the exception of the SMC issue. The AOJ issued a higher-level review rating decision in August 2023. The Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for GERD and a lumbar spine disability were returned to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. All other issues were denied.

Once the pre-decisional duty to assist errors were addressed, the AOJ issued a rating decision adjudicating the remaining claims of entitlement to service connection for GERD (with hiatal hernia) and for a lumbar spine disability in an October 2023 rating decision. The denials of entitlement to service connection were confirmed and continued.  

In November 2023, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) appealing the March 2023 rating decision, specifically the effective date for SMC based on housebound status, all adjudicated issues in the August 2023 higher-level review rating decision, and all adjudicated issues in the October 2023 rating decision. He selected the Direct Review docket. 

Evidentiary Windows

Regarding the March 2023 rating decision (the portion of the decision concerning an earlier effective date for SMC based on statutory housebound status) and the October 2023 rating decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of each AOJ decision was issued. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Concerning the August 2023 higher-level review decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 rating decision and the March 2023 rating decision (the portion of the decision concerning an earlier effective date for entitlement to a TDIU), which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.304. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In addition, certain chronic diseases, such as arthritis (including IVDS), may be presumed to have been incurred during service if the disorder becomes manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active duty. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. Alternatively, for chronic diseases, as defined by regulation, shown in service, the second and third elements of service connection may be established through demonstrating chronicity or continuity of symptomatology in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In determining whether service connection is warranted, the Board shall consider the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. That is, the claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in "approximate" balance, i.e., "nearly equal," but does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is denied.

VA treatment records document the Veteran's complaints of chronic bilateral hip pain, with more regular complaints regarding his left hip than his right. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination in August 2021. There, he denied functional loss or impairment in his right hip. He also denied experiencing any flare-ups of his right hip. Active and passive range of motion testing was performed with a goniometer and yielded normal results. The objective evidence did not reveal limitation in passive adduction which prevented the Veteran from crossing his legs. There was no objective evidence of pain, crepitus, or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue of the Veteran's right hip. The Veteran could perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up but procured evidence did not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination significantly limited the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time. The VA examiner did not find any additional factors contributing to the Veteran's claimed right hip disability. 

The Veteran did not have muscle atrophy or ankylosis of the right hip and/or thigh. He did not exhibit malunion or nonunion of the femur, flail hip joint, or leg length discrepancy. He never underwent any surgical procedures of the right hip. No other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms, and scars were observed in the Veteran's right hip. He denied the use of assistive devices. Functioning of the extremity was not such that no effective function remained other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with a prosthesis. When the VA examiner was asked to provide a medical opinion concerning the Veteran's claimed bilateral hip disabilities, she observed that the Veteran made no complaints of a right hip disability on the day of the examination.

Following a review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence does not persuasively demonstrate that entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is warranted. The record does not contain a formal diagnosis of a right hip disability. However, the Board acknowledges that subjectively experienced symptoms, including musculoskeletal pain are capable of lay observation. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board further acknowledges that a formal diagnosis is not necessary to establish service connection if the record establishes the presence of symptoms that are causing impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (holding that the term disability "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability"); Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 403 (2020) (concluding the holding in Saunders extends beyond pain, "to include other manifestations of a condition without a diagnosis"); Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 17 (2020) (reiterating that "to establish the presence of a disability pursuant to Saunders, there must be competent evidence specific to the claimant tending to show that his or her impairment rises to a level to affect earning capacity..."). Thus, the lack of formal diagnosis would not necessarily be a bar to service connection for the claimed disability. However, the Veteran has not established that any subjectively reported symptom of his claimed right hip disability causes functional impairment of his earning capacity. In fact, the Veteran denied functional impairment caused by his right hip disability at his August 2021 VA examination and range of motion testing yielded normal results. Further, aside from the claim for benefits, the Veteran has made no specific assertions regarding this disability. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran has not had a current right hip disability, at any time during or contemporary to the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). 

In short, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability must be denied because a current diagnosis, to include a current diagnosis predicated upon functional impairment of earning capacity, has not been established by competent evidence. The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service and this decision is not meant to detract from that service. However, for the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's claim must be denied. The benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is granted. 

The competent and credible medical evidence of record reflects that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of IVDS. Additionally, the Board finds that the Veteran has consistently described experiencing low back pain during service while engaged in lifting heavy loads and continually bending. The Board finds that the Veteran's descriptions of his in-service activities are consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of his service during multiple deployments. Further, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent to note the onset of his symptoms during active duty service, as in the context of service connection claims, "noted" is not equivalent to "documented"--even when the disease in question is complex and its diagnosis requires medical expertise, the "noting" of the condition may be established by lay evidence (including but not limited to a veteran's own statements), regardless of absence of contemporaneous medical records or other documentary evidence. Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 495-96 (1997). Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements are sufficient to establish that he experienced low back pain in service. 

Persistence of this symptomatology is critical to adjudication of this appeal, because arthritis, including IVDS, is on the list of chronic diseases enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Thus, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), service connection is established for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability if there is evidence that these symptoms of a condition "noted during service" persisted up to the point of diagnosis. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1335-36, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Here, the Veteran has competently and credibly described experiencing worsening low back pain since service and was subsequently diagnosed with IVDS. The Board resolves all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that the evidence of a current diagnosis, an in-service injury, chronicity of the lumbar spine disability while in service, and continuity of symptoms after discharge, supports a grant of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. Consideration must also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). 

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability is denied.

Limitation of flexion in the knee is assessed under Diagnostic Code 5260 which provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 45 degrees. A 20 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 30 degrees. A 30 percent rating is warranted when flexion of the leg is limited to 15 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

Limitation of extension in the knee is assessed under Diagnostic Code 5261 which provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted for extension limited to 10 degrees. A 20 percent rating is warranted for extension limited to 15 degrees. A 30 percent rating is warranted for extension limited to 20 degrees. A 40 percent rating is warranted for extension limited to 30 degrees. A 50 percent rating is warranted for extension limited to 45 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

Normal range of motion for the knee is from 0 degrees of extension to 140 degrees of flexion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

Separate ratings under Diagnostic Code 5260 and Diagnostic Code 5261 may be assigned for disability of the same joint if none of the symptomatology on which each rating is based is duplicative or overlapping. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

As the Veteran's August 2022 supplemental claim of entitlement to an increased disability rating was received within one year of the August 2021 rating decision awarding service connection, the Veteran's initial disability rating is on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1103, 3.2500(c)(1). 

VA treatment records document the Veteran's complaints of bilateral knee pain, with more regular complaints regarding his left knee than his right, and the use of Tylenol as needed. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination in August 2021. There, he reported that he experienced daily pinching and pain around his knee cap. He denied any current treatment for his left knee disability. The Veteran also denied any flare-ups of his left knee disability. Concerning functional loss or functional impairment of his left knee, the Veteran indicated that he is unable to extend his left knee without pain. The Veteran did not report a history of instability, recurrent subluxation, or frequent effusion of his left knee. Active and passive range of motion testing was performed with a goniometer and yielded normal results; flexion was to 140 degrees and extension was to 0 degrees. Pain was observed on active range of motion with flexion and extension in the sagittal plane which did not result in or cause functional loss. There was no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran could perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion. He was not examined immediately after repeated use over time but procured evidence suggested that pain caused functional loss. The VA examiner estimated that flexion would be to 140 degrees and flexion would be to 10 degrees immediately after repeated use over time. Additional factors contributing to his left knee disability include pain; he reported that he is unable to extend his left knee without pain rated 4/10.

The Veteran did not have muscle atrophy or ankylosis of the left knee. There was no recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, nor was there a ligament tear, recurrent patellar instability, recurrent patellar dislocation, shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fractures, or any other tibial or fibular impairment. Further, the Veteran did not have a meniscus (semilunar cartilage) condition. He had not undergone any surgical procedures for his left knee disability. No other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms, and scars were documented. The Veteran denied the use of assistive devices for his left knee disability. There was not functional impairment of the left knee such that no effective function remained other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis. Diagnostic testing was performed, and results were negative. Concerning the impact of the Veteran's left knee disability on his occupational functioning, he reported that when he was employed as a forklift operator his left knee caused pain and discomfort climbing up and down the forklift.

The Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's left knee disability warrants an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent. As an initial matter, while the Board acknowledges that documentation of the Veteran's use of Tylenol as needed for his left knee pain is present in his VA treatment records, the Board finds that there is sufficient evidence to rate the Veteran's left knee disability without obtaining an opinion regarding the ameliorative effects of medication, as such use does not appear to be frequent. If such use were frequent, the Board finds it reasonable that the Veteran would have reported it when asked about treatment for his disability at the August 2021VA examination, but he did not. Thus, the Board finds that it may adjudicate this issue. The competent medical evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran's left knee flexion was limited to 30 degrees to warrant an increased rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 based on limitation of flexion, nor was his left knee extension limited to 15 degrees to warrant an increased rating under Diagnostic Code 5261 based on limitation of extension. The Veteran's left knee limitation of motion has been noncompensable throughout the period on appeal. Despite this, he has been assigned a 10 percent evaluation for his reports of painful motion as required under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. See also Mitchell, supra.

There is no indication that the Veteran has functional loss greater than that contemplated by the 10 percent rating assigned with repeated use over time, during a flare-up, or due to pain. The degree of limitation of motion is contemplated in the currently assigned rating. Therefore, the Board finds that the holding in DeLuca and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 do not provide a basis for a higher rating. Without evidence of greater limitation of range of motion, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent based on such limitation for the period on appeal must be denied.

The Board has considered the potential of a separate rating under other codes relevant to the knees. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5256-5259, 5262-5263. The evidence does not show evidence of ankylosis, instability, meniscal symptoms, tibia or fibula impairment, or genu recurvatum to warrant separate ratings for these disabilities.

In summary, entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability based on limitation of motion is denied. The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service and this decision is not meant to detract from that service. However, for the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's claim must be denied. The benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Earlier Effective Dates

Generally, the effective date for the grant of service connection for a disease or injury is the day following separation from active duty or the date entitlement arose if a claim is received within one year after separation from service. Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later. The effective date of an award based on a claim reopened after final adjudication shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

The effective date for an increased rating for disability compensation will be the latest of 1) the date entitlement arose, 2) the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability occurred if a claim is received within one year from such date, or 3) the date of receipt of the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1), (2). 

4. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than June 21, 2021 for the award of service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

An earlier effective date based on filing a claim within one year of separation from service is not warranted. The Veteran does not maintain, nor does the record reflect, that the Veteran filed a service connection claim for a left knee disability by December 2012, within one year of separation from service.

On June 21, 2021, the Veteran proffered an Intent to File. He then submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ on June 30, 2021 which included a claim for a left knee disability, within one year of receipt of the Intent to File. The claim was granted in an August 2021 rating decision and the effective date given was June 21, 2021, the date of receipt of the Intent to File. 

As effective dates are assigned based on the date of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later, the issue here is whether the date entitlement arose for either disability is later than June 21, 2021. 

Because the RO granted service connection for this disability from June 21, 2021 the date of the receipt the Intent to File, it implicitly found that entitlement to this benefit had already arisen by the date of the claim. See Akers v. Shinseki, 673 F.3d 1352, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2012). This implicit finding benefits the Veteran since an effective date later than June 21, 2021 would be warranted if entitlement did not actually arise until after the date of claim. 

In short, the current effective date of June 21, 2021 for the Veteran's left knee disability is the date of receipt of the Intent to File, and June 21, 2021 is the later date between the date of the claim and the date entitlement arose. Therefore, the Board finds that entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection a left knee disability is not warranted. The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service and this decision is not meant to detract from that service. However, for the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's claim must be denied. The benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

5. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of a TDIU is denied.

VA will grant a TDIU when the evidence shows that a Veteran is precluded, by reason of service-connected disabilities, from securing or following any form of gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational experience. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. TDIU benefits are granted only when it is established that the service-connected disabilities are so severe, standing alone, as to prevent the retaining of gainful employment. If there is only one such disability, it must be rated at least 60 percent disabling to qualify for TDIU benefits; if there are two or more such disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

In addition, in Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019), the Court defined the term "unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation" as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The Court defined "employment in a protected environment" within 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) to unambiguously mean "a lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 123-24 (2024). The non-economic component of Ray includes consideration of the following: the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the Veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

With respect to an earlier effective date, a TDIU is a form of increased rating claim, and, therefore, the effective date rules for increased compensation apply. See Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1999); Hurd v. West, 13 Vet. App. 449 (2000). 

The VA regulation defining eligibility for a TDIU is 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 as discussed above. This regulation, however, does not define the procedure by which a Veteran may claim a TDIU. Instead, VA practice and case law have defined two ways formal and informal. A formal claim exists when VA receives a VA Form 21-8940. An informal claim, in contrast, is created pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Rice holds that a claim for a TDIU is part and parcel of any open rating issue (initial or increased) when unemployability is expressly raised by a veteran or reasonably raised by the record during the rating appeal, and it attaches for the entire rating period.

In this matter, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 21-8940 application for a TDIU on August 15, 2022. There is no contention that the Veteran applied for a TDIU prior to that date. The Veteran was then awarded entitlement to a TDIU effective February 9, 2022, the date that the RO determined that the Veteran was last employed, as it was factually ascertainable that he stopped working one year or less prior to receipt of the application. The issue before the Board, then, is whether a Rice TDIU provides a possible earlier effective date.

The AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in an October 2021 rating decision. The AOJ then assigned an initial disability rating, effective June 21, 2021, the date that VA received an Intent to File, which was followed up by a psychiatric claim within one year. The evidence of record at the time of the assignment of initial disability rating included competent evidence of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks occurring more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting, the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. Due to these symptoms, the Board finds that a claim of entitlement to a TDIU was reasonably raised in conjunction with this claim and during the initial rating appeal, which was subsequently initiated in August 2022. Thus, a Rice TDIU may provide an earlier effective date if all additional criteria are met.

The Veteran has met the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU throughout the appeal period. However, the record reflects that he was in fact employed full time in warehouses performing forklift operation and shipping/receiving through February 9, 2022. In order to award an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of a TDIU, the Board must find that such employment was marginal. 

To that end, the Veteran reported that his highest gross monthly income in that position was $3000 and his lowest was $2960. In 2022, the poverty threshold for one person was $14,880. See United States Census Bureau Poverty Thresholds, available at: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/income-poverty/historical-poverty-thresholds.html (last visited Apr. 1, 2025). Thus, the Veteran's employment prior to February 9, 2022 exceeded the poverty threshold for one person and the Board finds that it was not marginal on an earnings basis. 

Marginal income may also be held to exist on a fact found basis, to include, but not limited to, employment in a "protected environment," such as a family business or sheltered workshop, even when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold. The mere existence of physical or mental effects from service-connected disabilities is insufficient to find that employment was protected or sheltered. Instead, the Board must determine whether the actual employment environment is shielded in some respect from the competition in the employment market. Here, the Veteran has not submitted any evidence of accommodations by his employers or that the intent of his employers was to provide a protected work environment to support the Veteran. In light of these facts, the Board determines that the Veteran's employment was not sheltered or in a protected work environment, as the Veteran has not submitted evidence of accommodation or other indication that the employment was shielded from the employment market. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's employment was not marginal on a protected environment basis.

While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities likely had an adverse impact on his employability, the evidence does not persuasively demonstrate that he was unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment for the period prior to February 9, 2022, as he was actually employed full-time in a position that was not marginal or protected prior to that date. Thus, an earlier effective date than February 9, 2022 for the award of entitlement to a TDIU is not warranted. The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service and this decision is not meant to detract from that service. However, for the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's claim must be denied. The benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

6. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022 for the award of SMC based on statutory housebound status is denied.

SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is payable where a Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and, either has an additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable as 60 percent or more that is separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems (i.e., statutory housebound), or is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities wherein he is substantially confined to his dwelling and immediate premises as a direct result of service-connected disabilities (i.e., housebound in fact). 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

SMC at the housebound rate or based on housebound status are not available to a veteran whose 100 percent disability rating is based on multiple disabilities. Guerra v. Shinseki, 642 F.3d. 146 (Fed. Cir. 2011). However, for purposes of SMC at the housebound rate or based on housebound status, a TDIU satisfies the 100 percent rating requirement if a TDIU is predicated upon a single disability and there exists additional disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more. Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 293. In other words, a TDIU based on a single disability, but not multiple disabilities, is permitted to satisfy the statutory requirement of a total rating. Id. at 293.

As an initial matter, the Veteran has never claimed, nor does the record persuasively demonstrate that the Veteran is housebound in fact. Thus, the Board finds that an earlier effective date on that basis is not warranted. 

Further, the Board finds that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for SMC based on statutory housebound status prior to February 9, 2022. Prior to that date, he did not have a single disability rated as 100 percent disabling, nor was he in receipt of a TDIU. Therefore, there is no legal basis for the assignment of an effective date earlier than February 9, 2022. The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service and this decision is not meant to detract from that service. However, for the foregoing reasons, the Veteran's claim must be denied. The benefit of the doubt rule is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

7. Entitlement to service connection for GERD and hiatal hernia is remanded.

As discussed in the Introduction, the AOJ identified a pre-decisional duty to assist error in the development of this claim and sent it back for additional development, to include the scheduling of a VA examination and obtaining a medical opinion. The Veteran did not attend the scheduled examination. However, the record reflects that the Veteran may have been unhoused or unstable in that regard during the period when the scheduling occurred. Specific procedures for contacting unhoused veterans are set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 1.710. The AOJ must follow those procedures, unless the AOJ clearly confirms and documents that he has obtained a fixed address and is reachable by the usual means. In this case, it is unclear whether such steps were taken, and the Board finds that this reaches the level of a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination and a medical opinion in August 2021 concerning this claim. An addendum opinion was obtained in October 2021. The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file and determined that the Veteran's claimed left hip disability is less likely than not related to a specific exposure event experienced during his service in Southwest Asia, reasoning that there is no medical literature that supports an environmental exposure event as an etiology of a musculoskeletal disability. Significantly, she noted that a musculoskeletal conditions are due to injury, trauma, or overuse. The Board finds that this statement raised the possibility of entitlement to service connection on a direct basis due to similar factors during the Veteran's active duty service. As there is no medical opinion of record addressing the Veteran's claim on this basis, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be remedied by a remand. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-56 (Vet. App. 2008) (VA is obligated to consider explicitly or reasonably raised theories of entitlement).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and verify his mailing address. If, on remand, the RO determines that the Veteran is currently unhoused, then it must comply with the complete process set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 1.710(d) for all correspondence pertaining to this appeal. The AOJ must fully document its efforts to comply with this process.

2. After completing the above development, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed GERD and hiatal hernia. The examiner must review the claims file.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's GERD and/or hiatal hernia disability at least as likely as not related to service, to include his participation in toxic risk exposure activities during his service in Southwest Asia? In answering this question, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's left hip strain is at least as likely as not related to his active duty service, to include as secondary to injury, trauma, or overuse therein.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Roberts

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.