Citation Nr: A25031281
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-459425
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent disabling for right shoulder glenohumeral joint dislocation, to include arthritis, of glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints, rotator cuff tendonitis and tear is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty with the United States Army from November 1971 to November 1974.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) and requested review of a November 2022 decision.  In December 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2022 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent disabling for right shoulder glenohumeral joint dislocation, to include arthritis, of glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints, rotator cuff tendonitis and tear, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), remands are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

For the reasons set out below, the Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam inadequate for rating purposes, and the remaining evidence of record insufficient to make a fully reasoned determination on the Veteran's claim.

The VA's duty to assist the appellant includes making reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining a medical opinion when such opinion is "necessary to substantiate the claimant's claim for a benefit."  De La Rosa v. Peake, 515 F.3d 1319, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2008).

An adequate medical opinion with regard to etiology should consist of a thorough review of the claims file and discussion of the relevant evidence (including the disability in question), a consideration of the lay contentions of the Veteran, and clear conclusions with a reasoned supporting rationale.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

The March 2021 VA medical exam reviewed the Veteran's record and conducted an in-person examination.  The examiner noted the Veteran's dominant hand was right.  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses of rotator cuff tendonitis, rotator cuff tear, glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis, acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, and glenohumeral joint dislocation/recurrent dislocation.  The Veteran was recorded stating the condition has worsened, he has more pain especially when lifting, reaching above his head, and laying down.  The Veteran stated that he has to sleep in a chair and described the pain at the shoulder joint as around 9 out of 10 but 10 out of 10 at night.  The Veteran is recorded that he feels like his shoulder is going to pop out of the socket, but he grabs his arm so that it does not.  

The examiner noted the Veteran reported flare-ups with increased pain upon lifting heavy objects, reaching above head, and that flare-ups last all night long, requiring pain medication, recorded as Gabapentin.  The examiner recorded the Veteran's abnormal range of motion (ROM) as flexion endpoint 60 degrees, abduction end point 50 degrees, internal rotation endpoint 70 degrees, and external rotation endpoint 70 degrees.  The examiner noted the Veteran had pain on all ROM, with evidence of crepitus and objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint.  The examiner recorded the Veteran was observed after repetitive testing with at least three repetitions, with no additional loss of ROM.  The examiner recorded the Veteran was examined immediately after repeated use over time.  

The examiner noted that the evidence (including statements from the Veteran) suggests pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability.  The examiner noted pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance cause functional loss.  The examiner estimated the Veteran's ROM from evidence, including lay statements of the Veteran, as flexion endpoint 60 degrees, abduction end point 50 degrees, internal rotation endpoint 70 degrees, and external rotation endpoint 7060 degrees.  The examiner cited the evidence for the conclusions as "the Veteran does not report any additional loss of ROM upon repeated use over time".  The examiner recorded the Veteran was not examined during a flare-up.  The examiner noted that the evidence (including statements from the Veteran) suggests pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability.  The examiner noted pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance cause functional loss.  The examiner estimated the Veteran's ROM during a flare-up as flexion endpoint 60 degrees, abduction end point 50 degrees, internal rotation endpoint 70 degrees, and external rotation endpoint 70 degrees.  

The examiner cited the evidence for the conclusions as "the Veteran does not report any additional loss of ROM upon flare ups."  The examiner found the Veteran was positive for current residuals of recurrent dislocation of the glenohumeral joint, with infrequent episodes, and guarding of movement only at shoulder level effecting range of motion.  

In the April 2021 Veteran's statement, the Veteran states that his right shoulder hurts every day and night.  The Veteran states that he could not lift his right arm waist high.

In the July 2022 Veteran's statement, the Veteran states he has right arm pain at a level of 10 out of 10 morning and night.  The Veteran states he has flare ups daily with bad right arm pain.  The Veteran states that on an average day he can't lift his arm above his shoulder as it pops and hurts.

The Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam is competent, completed by an appropriately qualified medical professional.  However, the Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam lacks credibility, with contradictory findings as to the Veteran's own evidence of his ROM.  In addition, the Board notes the March 2021 VA medical exam records the Veteran takes Gabapentin for his shoulder pain.  However, there is no consideration of any ameliorative effects of the medication on the Veteran's ROM.  The Board finds the Veteran's evidence includes the April 2021 Veteran's statement that he cannot lift his right arm waist high.  The Board notes the March 2021 VA medical exam cites the Veteran as the only source for concluding there is no loss of ROM with repeated use over time and during a flare up.  The Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam is therefore in direct contradiction to the April 2021 Veteran's statement regarding the Veteran's observed symptom of ROM.  The Board notes the March 2021 VA medical exam lists the Veteran's ROM immediately after repeated use over time for external rotation endpoint as "7060" degrees.  The Board finds that a typing error does not, on its own, render a medical exam insufficient for rating purpose.  However, when considered alongside the inconsistency between the March 2021 VA medical exam and the April 2021 Veteran's statement as to the Veteran's evidence on his ROM, the lack of accuracy in the March 2021 VA medical exam supports finding the Veteran's evidence as to his ROM was incorrectly recorded in the March 2021 VA medical exam. 

The Board finds the Veteran competent to report his observable symptoms, such as pain, and estimating his ROM under conditions not directly observed by a medically qualified examiner.  However, the Board finds the Veteran is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  

The Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam recorded the Veteran's use of Gabapentin (a prescribed medication) for shoulder pain.  The March 2021 VA medical exam did not record how often it is taken but notes the Veteran takes for nightly flare-ups.  The Board finds the March 2021 VA medical exam did not consider the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's pain medication on the severity of his symptoms, particularly during the nightly flare-ups.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, United States Court of Appeal for Veterans' Claims, March 12, 2025.   

The Board finds the evidence of record does not contain any probative medical evidence as to the Veteran's right shoulder ROM sufficient for rating purposes.

The Board finds that the failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate medical opinion as to the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria is a failure of the VA pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

To ensure that VA has met its duty to assist, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion of the Veteran's right shoulder glenohumeral joint dislocation, to include arthritis, of glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints, rotator cuff tendonitis and tear.        

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, conducted by an appropriately qualified medical professional, to address the current severity of the Veteran's right shoulder glenohumeral joint dislocation, to include arthritis, of glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints, rotator cuff tendonitis and tear.  

(a.) The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND should be made available to the examiner prior to the examination.  The examiner should note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file has been reviewed.  

(b.) All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.  

(c.) The examiner is asked to address the ameliorative effects of any medication taken by the Veteran on the severity of the Veteran's symptoms.  

(d.) The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinion provided.  

(e.) If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(This space intentionally left blank.  VLJ signature on next page.)

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Shepherd DeRosa, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.