Citation Nr: A25031117
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-464071
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic stress disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army from September 1980 to September 1984. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for chronic stress disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (U.S. 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. However, as the service connection claim is being remanded for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic stress disorder is remanded.

In April 2024 correspondence, the Veteran contends that his in-service event may not be properly documented but that this does not mean that it did not occur. He contends that he has submitted enough evidence to warrant a VA examination.

In the August 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation, the Veteran generally contends through his representative entitlement to service connection.

The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a March 2019 chronic stress disorder diagnosis.

With regard to an in-service event, in a September 2022 lay statement the Veteran contends that during winter training while he was stationed at Fort McCoy in Wisconsin, he was involved in a bunker back blast that blew him out of the bunker and knocked him out. He states that he took a picture of it as it was happening. In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a photograph of a blast occurring and a certificate of achievement for his participation in an operation conducted at Fort McCoy in Wisconsin during the period of January 25, 1982, to February 26, 1982.

In February 2023 correspondence, the Veteran contends that he does not have the exact date of the in-service event. However, he states that he submitted a picture of the blast just as it went off and that he submitted the Forever Award Certificate of Achievement which lists the unit he was with at the time of the in-service event and the time frame he was a member of the unit. He explains that the third bunker did not have the Plexiglass like the other bunkers did. He contends that the other service member took the picture of the blast just as it was going off. 

The Veteran states that the next thing that he remembered was waking up on a hill. The Veteran explains that there were three older bunkers and that the Veteran and another servicemember did not fit in the bunkers as they were the last in line. He states that in order to take shelter that they stepped over to the third less protected bunker. He contends that he went to the medical tent where they were told that they almost had 1st degree burns, and a salve was put on them. The Veteran contends that two A-15s flew their way to view the damage from the blast. Finally, he states that they were told that there was demolition already underground that caused the large blast to blow out instead of up.

The Veteran also submitted a February 2023 lay statement from his romantic partner and an April 2024 lay statement from his mother which both describe the dreams the Veteran experiences as a result of the bunker blast.

Unlike in the legacy system, the reasons for remand by the Board in the modernized review system are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The record reflects that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination and medical opinion concerning his service connection claim. Upon review, the Board finds that the McLendon factors were met prior to the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Based on the evidence of record and as the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination and medical opinion in connection with the claim, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinion are necessary to determine the etiology of the Veteran's chronic stress disorder. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). Not obtaining a VA examination and medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand is warranted for correction of such error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA examination and medical opinion concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's chronic stress disorder. 

Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's chronic stress disorder had its onset in service, or is otherwise related to service? 

The VA examiner is asked to address and discuss the Veteran's lay statements of record, to include the Veteran's contention that he was involved in an in-service bunker blast?

A full and complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Metoyer, D'Audra I.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.