Citation Nr: A25031790
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433232
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot disability (except the service-connected bilateral heel spurs disability), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left eye disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1970 to February 1996.  He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation and Achievement Medals, Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, and Battle "E" Ribbon, among numerous others.

These matters come before Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision.  The Higher-Level Review rating decision was issued in response to?the?Veteran's request for such review of rating?decisions dated September 2023 and November 2023.

As a result of the Veteran's Higher-Level?Review election and as he has selected the Direct Review Docket when appealing the matters to the Board, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the September 2023 and November 2023 rating?decisions, respectively.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decisions unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the notice of disagreement (NOD) VA Form 10182).  38?C.F.R. §?20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this opinion.  38 C.F.R. §?20.300.  However, as a remand of these matters are warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Prior to discussing the matters on appeal, the Board recognizes that in the September 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions the AOJ made the favorable findings that the service connection claims for bilateral foot disability, left knee disability, right knee disability, left shoulder disability, right shoulder disability, and left eye disorder are all deemed reconsidered, as new and relevant evidence has been received.  As such the claims are reopened and the AOJ need not consider whether new and relevant evidence has been received when the AOJ adjudicates the issues after the Board remand and after the requested and required development is completed.  

As will be explained below, pre-decisional duty to assist errors were committed and as such the service connection claims on appeal are being remanded.  

On August 10, 2022, President Biden signed the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  As part of implementing the PACT Act, the VA released sub-regulatory guidance for claims processors to follow.  Sub-regulatory guidance is a method by which agencies may issue interpretive rules and policy statements, which are not subject to the same rulemaking process as the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.).  Much like the M21-1 and other Veterans Benefits Administration-specific (VBA) guidelines, the sub-regulatory guidance is not binding on the Board.  However, the Board is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons and bases.  See Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257 (2018); see also Nat'l Org. of Veterans' Advocates, Inc. v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 981 F.3d 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2020).  As such, if the sub-regulatory guidance includes a relevant provision, the Board is required to discuss it.  If the Board determines that the provision is not for application in a particular fact-specific situation, then the Board must explain why the provision is not for application in that situation.

The Board finds that the sub-regulatory guidance instructing claims processors to research and complete a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum needs to be applied in this case so that the VBA claims processors and the Board may determine whether exposure to toxic substances can be conceded and whether additional TERA opinions need to be requested.  The Board cannot adjudicate the Veteran's claims without this additional development since the claim cannot be granted based on the current evidence of record.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (38), 1168(a), 1710(e)(1).

VA must provide a medical examination and/or medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The threshold for finding a link between current disability and service, for the purpose of determining whether an examination is warranted, is low.  Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  In this case, as the record demonstrates current disabilities and as the AOJ raises the issue of TERA without the benefit of a TERA Memorandum, the Board finds that the evidence surpasses the low threshold established by Locklear and McLendon.

In addition, under the PACT Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  Here, if the AOJ concedes toxic exposure, a TERA is established, and a TERA specific examination is required.

Consequently, a remand is necessary to obtain a TERA memorandum and, if exposure is conceded, a TERA examination and opinion, as well as a direct service connection opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed disabilities.  

Of note, when denying the service connection claims for bilateral shoulders, bilateral knees and bilateral foot disabilities, the AOJ stated that no action was taken under the PACT Act as these conditions are based on physical trauma and the Secretary has determined there is no indication of an association between the disabilities and participation in the TERA.  See rating decisions dated September 2023 and November 2023.  That notwithstanding, if exposure is conceded the TERA examination will include the examiner addressing the exposure in relation each of the disabilities on a direct theory.  

For the reasons described above, each of the claims on appeal must be remanded to remedy the duty to assist errors committed prior to the issuance of the September 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions.  Despite explaining why remands are warranted, the Board will address each claim separately to discuss the additional pre-decisional duty to assist errors that were committed.  

Bilateral foot disability 

The Board finds that a remand is required to remedy pre-decisional duty to assist errors, as development should have been performed prior to the issuance of the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, development is required to determine whether the Veteran has a current foot disability, and whether the bilateral foot disability is considered a separate and distinct disability from his service-connected bilateral heel spurs.  

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that §§ 1110 and 1131's requirement of the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary).  A current disability is met when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA compensation is filed or during the pendency of the that claim.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 323 (2007).

The appeal stems from a claim that was filed in February 2023.  As such, the questions before the Board are whether the record reflects a diagnosis of a bilateral foot disability or functional impairment of such at any time as of February 2023; and or whether the bilateral foot disability is a separate and distinct disability from the service-connected bilateral heel spurs disability.  

When looking at evidence dated as of February 2023, there are two VA examinations, dated February 2023 and October 2023.  The February 2023 VA Foot Conditions DBQ shows a diagnosis of bilateral heel spurs "SC 11/9/17."  The Veteran described pain as at the right at the ball of his heel.  The examiner noted functional impairment of both feet.  The October 2023 VA Foot Conditions DBQ also shows a November 2017 diagnosis of bilateral heel spurs.  The October 2023 examination report notes a February 2018 x-ray that shows mild to moderate bilateral foot degenerative joint disease.  

Given the aforementioned, the Board does not have sufficient medical evidence to assess whether the Veteran has current bilateral foot disability, and or whether his foot symptoms are part of his service-connected bilateral heel spurs.  As such, a remand is needed to afford the Veteran an examination so that an examiner can confirm all current diagnoses of a bilateral foot disability and confirm whether the bilateral foot disability is considered a separate and distinct disability from his service-connected bilateral heel spurs.  

Also, of note as evident by his filings, the Veteran contends that he has a disability of the bilateral foot, separate from his service-connected bilateral heel spurs, and this contention/theory must be assessed by an examiner.  In February 2023 the Veteran filed an increased rating claim for his service-connected bilateral heel spurs and a supplemental claim for service connection for "right foot condition" and "left foot condition."

Finally, the Board acknowledges the October 2023 VA opinion wherein the examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral foot disability is not related to service.  The only rationale provided was that the Veteran is already service-connected for bilateral heel spurs.  This rationale is conclusory and provides no clarification as to whether the Veteran has a currently diagnosed disability of the feet, apart from his service-connected heel spur disability.  Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, or obtain an opinion, it must provide an adequate one.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Therefore, a remand is required to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination and to obtain an adequate medical opinion.

Bilateral knee disability 

The Veteran made no contentions in his February 2023 supplemental claim but did report as to the onset of his symptoms during the February 2023 and October 2023 VA examinations.  He reported that his bilateral knee pain started in 1986 with squatting on the flight deck and performing other work duties.  He stated that initial symptoms included extreme pain and swelling.  During the October 2023 VA examination, he reported the onset of the bilateral knee pain as occurring in 1984.  He attributed the pain to overuse while in the military due to walking, rucking, marching, and running long distances.  He contends that he was diagnosed with bilateral chondromalacia while stationed on board the USS KITTY HAWK (CV 63).  Of note, there are service treatment records (STRs) in the casefile, but it appears that not all STRs are of record as evidenced by the May 2023 letter.  In May 2023 VA sent the Veteran a letter informing him that some STRs are unavailable.  All said, despite not having a STR to confirm the Veteran's contention that he was diagnosed with bilateral chondromalacia, the examiner is charged with considering each of the Veteran's contentions when providing the requested medical opinions.  

During the February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a 2010 diagnosis of bilateral total knee replacement status post.  During the October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a November 2015 diagnosis of patellar or quadriceps tendon rupture of the left knee and a November 2010 diagnosis of degenerative arthritis of bilateral knees.  

The October 2023 VA examiner authored two Medical Opinion DBQs wherein in one DBQ the examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee disability is not related to service and based her rationale on negative evidence such as lack of chronicity and lack of evidence in service, and in the other opinion provided the same opinion and rationale for the left knee.  As such these opinions are inadequate and hold minimal probative value.  The examiner went on to state, "right knee degenerative arthritis" and "left knee degenerative arthritis" are considered to be "less likely than not caused by limping during service and/or military service."  These opinions are also conclusory and therefore inadequate, and the examiner failed to address whether there are current residuals of the total knee replacement of the right knee or of the left knee and failed to make mention of the patellar or quadriceps tendon rupture of the left knee.  Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, or obtain an opinion, it must provide an adequate one.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Therefore, a remand is required to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination of his knees and to obtain adequate medical opinions.

Bilateral shoulder disability 

The Veteran made no contentions in his February 2023 supplemental claim but did report as to the onset of his symptoms during his February 2023 VA examination.  He reported that his shoulder disability began in 1988 with lots of lifting of very heavy parts for aircraft and tanks.  He stated that the initial symptoms included pain to the left shoulder and limited range of motion.  

During the February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with a 2011 diagnosis of rotator cuff tear and labral tear of the bilateral shoulders and a 2018 diagnosis of degenerative arthritis of bilateral shoulders.  Given the preceding, the minimal threshold has been met to require VA to provide a medical examination.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).  Therefore, a remand is required to provide the Veteran with a VA examination of his shoulders and to obtain medical opinions as to the etiology of these disabilities.  

Left eye disorder

During the March 2023 Eye Conditions DBQ, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with several diagnoses of both eyes.  However, as the Veteran has specifically limited his claim to a disorder of the left eye, the Board will focus on disorders of the left eye.

The Veteran made no contentions in his February 2023 supplemental claim but reported the onset of his symptoms during the March 2023 VA examination and the examiner made specific notations in the Medical History section of the Eye Conditions Report.  The Veteran reported that in June 1975 while working on the USS KITTY HAWK, a wire he had cut smacked his left eye causing him to need to wear an eye patch.  The vision loss did not occur until March 2015, when during a routine examination the physician noted nerve damage to his left eye and referred him to Dr. Reynolds, glaucoma specialist.  "It is the opinion of Dr. Reynolds that Rick had an eye injury that led to the glaucoma in his left eye."

During the March 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with glaucoma, ocular rosacea, preoperative cataract, maculopathy and external eye disabilities of pinguecula and dermatochalasis.  

The March 2023VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left eye disorder is not related to service.  "For the claimant's claimed condition of Left Eye Condition Status Post Injury there is no diagnosis because I cannot in good faith state that" the Veteran's "injury led to his vision loss as there are no records from 1975 to substantiate a claim or physical evidence that can collaborate such a significant event.  The macula of" the Veteran's "left eye is severely compromised by his macular degeneration which may not override the extensive damage to his optic nerve caused by his glaucoma.  So is his central vision loss secondary to the glaucoma or the macular degeneration?  Perhaps a comparison between eccentric ERG and contrast ERG is warranted."  Not only do these opinions lack rationale, but it is unclear as what specific disorder of the left eye it pertains to, and the examiner uses vague and ambiguous punctuation and language such as a question mark ("?") after his statement and "Perhaps."  See Polovick v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 48 (2009) (a medical opinion is speculative when it uses equivocal language such as "may well be," "could," or "might"); Goss v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 109 (1996) (noting that the use of the phrase "could not rule out" was too speculative to establish medical nexus). For all these reasons the opinions are inadequate and hold minimal probative value.  Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, or obtain an opinion, it must provide an adequate one.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Therefore, a remand is required to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination of his left eye and to obtain adequate medical opinions  

Finally, as the left eye claim is being remanded, the Veteran will be encouraged to submit any medical documents to include the positive opinion from Dr. Reynolds that the March 2023 VA examiner notes in his report.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and his representative to request any outstanding substantive medical records, to include any positive medical opinions as to the etiology of his left eye disorder.   

2. Complete all development in the PACT Act sub-regulatory guidance to include documenting the Veteran's participation in all TERAs in the Veteran's file.

3. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) is respectfully requested to schedule an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot disability, aside from the bilateral heel spurs disability (including functional impairment), of the Veteran's left knee and right knee disabilities (including functional impairment), and of the Veteran's left and right shoulder disabilities (including functional impairment) with an appropriate clinician.

The claim file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner who performs the examination of the Veteran is the examiner who should provide the requested opinions.

4. The examiner should review the claims file (including this remand) and note such review was conducted.

Please identify all current foot disabilities, found at any time during the appeal period.

"Current" is defined as any condition identified since the filing of the claim in February 2023 to the present. "Disability" includes any diagnosable conditions as well as pain or symptoms that are not diagnosable but, nonetheless, results in functional impairment.

If a medical diagnosis cannot be given, the examiner must state whether the Veteran has any functional impairment, such as loss of range of motion, pain, or instability.

If any previously diagnosed foot disability, not considering the heel spurs, is not found on examination, the examiner must address the prior diagnoses of record and indicate whether they may have resolved or been misdiagnosed.

For each currently diagnosed foot disability, to the extent possible, the examiner is requested to opine as to when that particular foot disability first manifested.

The examiner should be directed to elicit a complete history from the Veteran, and to account for his reported history in the opinion.

Following review of the claim file and examination of the Veteran, and for each diagnosed foot disability or finding of functional impairment the examiner is asked to do the following:

(a.) Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's foot disability is a symptom of his service-connected bilateral heel spurs or whether it is a distinct disability.

(b.) If it is determined that the foot disability is a distinct disability, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's foot disability manifested during active service; or is otherwise related to an event, injury, or disease incurred during active service, to include his possible participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  

1.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity while in service is not yet presumed; and the examiner is requested to consider the synergistic, combined effect of the possible toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, when providing an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement.

(c.) If it is determined that the foot disability is a distinct disability, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that but for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral heel spurs he would not have a current foot disability.  

(d.) If it is determined that the foot disability is a distinct disability, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's foot disability would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for his service-connected bilateral heel spurs.  

(e.) If the clinician opines that the Veteran's foot disability would result in less functional impairment but for his service-connected heel spurs, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the service-connected heel spurs. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.?

The examiner is further advised that the mere absence of treatment records is not wholly dispositive as to whether the Veteran had ongoing problems with his feet since service.

Please provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

5. Please identify all current knee disabilities, found at any time during the appeal period.

"Current" is defined as any condition identified since the filing of the claim in February 2023 to the present. "Disability" includes any diagnosable conditions as well as pain or symptoms that are not diagnosable but, nonetheless, results in functional impairment.

If a medical diagnosis cannot be given, the examiner must state whether the Veteran has any functional impairment, such as loss of range of motion, pain, or instability.

If any previously diagnosed knee disability, is not found on examination, the examiner must address the prior diagnoses of record and indicate whether they may have resolved or been misdiagnosed.

For each currently diagnosed knee disability, to the extent possible, the examiner is requested to opine as to when that particular knee disability first manifested.

The examiner should be directed to elicit a complete history from the Veteran, and to account for his reported history in the opinion, to include his contention that he was diagnosed with bilateral chondromalacia while in service.  

Following review of the claim file and examination of the Veteran, and for each diagnosed knee disability or finding of functional impairment the examiner is asked to do the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's knee disability manifested during active service; or is otherwise related to an event, injury, or disease incurred during active service, to include his possible participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  

1.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity while in service is not yet presumed; and the examiner is requested to consider the synergistic, combined effect of the possible toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, when providing an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions, to include his contention that he was diagnosed with bilateral chondromalacia while in service.  

The examiner is further advised that the mere absence of treatment records is not wholly dispositive as to whether the Veteran had ongoing problems with his knees since service.

Please provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

6. Please identify all current shoulder disabilities, found at any time during the appeal period.

"Current" is defined as any condition identified since the filing of the claim in February 2023 to the present. "Disability" includes any diagnosable conditions as well as pain or symptoms that are not diagnosable but, nonetheless, results in functional impairment.

If a medical diagnosis cannot be given, the examiner must state whether the Veteran has any functional impairment, such as loss of range of motion, pain, or instability.

If any previously diagnosed shoulder disability, is not found on examination, the examiner must address the prior diagnoses of record and indicate whether they may have resolved or been misdiagnosed.

For each currently diagnosed shoulder disability, to the extent possible, the examiner is requested to opine as to when that particular shoulder disability first manifested.

The examiner should be directed to elicit a complete history from the Veteran, and to account for his reported history in the opinion, to include his contention that his shoulder disability started in service due to the lifting of very heavy parts for aircraft and tanks.  

Following review of the claim file and examination of the Veteran, and for each diagnosed shoulder disability or finding of functional impairment the examiner is asked to do the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's shoulder disability manifested during active service; or is otherwise related to an event, injury, or disease incurred during active service, to include his possible participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  

1.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity while in service is not yet presumed; and the examiner is requested to consider the synergistic, combined effect of the possible toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, when providing an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions, to include his contention that his shoulder disability started in service due to the lifting of very heavy parts for aircraft and tanks.  

The examiner is further advised that the mere absence of treatment records is not wholly dispositive as to whether the Veteran had ongoing problems with his shoulders since service.

Please provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

7. The AOJ is respectfully requested to schedule an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left eye disorders with an appropriate clinician.

The claim file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner who performs the examination of the Veteran is the examiner who should provide the requested opinions.

8. The examiner should review the claims file (including this remand) and note such review was conducted.

Please identify all current left eye disorders found at any time during the appeal period.

"Current" is defined as any condition identified since the filing of the claim in February 2023 to the present. "Disability" includes any diagnosable conditions as well as pain or symptoms that are not diagnosable but, nonetheless, results in functional impairment.

If a medical diagnosis cannot be given, the examiner must state whether the Veteran has any functional impairment, such as loss of range of motion, pain, or instability.

If any previously diagnosed left eye disorder is not found on examination, the examiner must address the prior diagnoses of record and indicate whether they may have resolved or been misdiagnosed.

For each currently diagnosed left eye disorder, to the extent possible, the examiner is requested to opine as to when that particular eye disorder first manifested.

The examiner should be directed to elicit a complete history from the Veteran, and to account for his reported history in the opinion, to include the Veteran's contention that while working on the Kitty Hawk he injured his left eye as a wire smacked his left eye, requiring him to wear an eye patch.  

Following review of the claim file and examination of the Veteran, and for each diagnosed left eye disorder or finding of functional impairment the examiner is asked to do the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left eye disorder manifested during active service; or is otherwise related to an event, injury, or disease incurred during active service, to include his possible participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  

1.	In responding to this question, the examiner is advised that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity while in service is not yet presumed; and the examiner is requested to consider the synergistic, combined effect of the possible toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, when providing an opinion based on direct theory of entitlement.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions, to include the Veteran's contention that while working on the Kitty Hawk he injured his left eye as a wire smacked his left eye, requiring him to wear an eye patch.  

The examiner is further advised that the mere absence of treatment records is not wholly dispositive as to whether the Veteran had ongoing problems with his left eye disorder since service.

Please provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Talamantes, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.