Citation Nr: A25031157
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231207-399844
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for overactive bladder, to include as secondary to service-connected gastroenteritis with irritable bowel syndrome (hereinafter "gastrointestinal disability"), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2004 to June 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a November 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In December 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), appealing the November 2023 rating decision to the Board. He elected the Direct review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

After issuance of the November 2023 rating decision, the RO associated additional evidence with the claims file. The Board cannot consider such evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301; see also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). To the extent this evidence may relate to the claim remanded below, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in adjudication of such. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Under the AMA, the Board must remand appeals to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Here, the Board's review of the record reveals duty to assist errors, as discussed in more detail below.

First, the Board finds that a theory of secondary service connection, with an indication that the Veteran's overactive bladder is associated with his service-connected gastrointestinal disability, is reasonably raised by the record. Significantly, per an April 2022 VA urinary tract conditions examination, an examiner documented that he was being evaluated by gastroenterology for other possible causes of his overactive bladder. Per April 2022 and July 2023 VA opinions, examiners noted that constipation is a possible cause of overactive bladder. Meanwhile, at a January 2023 VA intestinal conditions examination, the Veteran reported, and an examiner determined, that he experienced constipation as a symptom of his service-connected gastrointestinal disability. In light of this evidence, the Board finds that not only was a theory of entitlement to service connection for overactive bladder as secondary to his service-connected gastrointestinal disability raised at the time of the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, but the low threshold for obtaining a medical opinion as to this theory was also met at the time of the rating decision on appeal. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). The RO's failure to obtain a medical opinion as to secondary service connection for overactive bladder constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. 

Second, the Board finds that VA treatment records, to include records of non-VA treatment obtained through VA's Community Care program, are outstanding. The only VA treatment records associated with the claims file at the time of the November 2023 rating decision on appeal contain multiple instances of requests for Community Care authorization, subsequent approval of such requests, and notation of documents being scanned into VistA Imaging beginning in April 2023. See, e.g., April 2023 Community Care Consult Result Note. Review of these limited records suggests that the Veteran did not simply begin receiving care through VA's Community Care program from the start date of records associated with the claims file at time of issuance of the November 2023 rating decision, but was instead already established with such by April 2023, as shown by a note that his "Community Care Primary Care provider, DR L[], J[] CITRUS VALLEY MED ASSOCS" was requesting authorization for specialty testing in April 2023. See Community Care Request for Service Note. As potentially related to the above-detailed theory of entitlement for secondary service connection, in May 2023, his Community Care primary care provider requested a gastrointestinal referral, which a coordinator subsequently described as ordered, and unspecified documents were noted as scanned into VistA Imaging thereafter. See May 2023 Community Care Request for Service Note; May 2023 Addendum; May 2023 Community Care Consult Result Note. Although the Veteran's VA treatment records associated with the claims file at the time of the November 2023 rating decision indicated that he either received VA care prior to April 2023 or received non-VA care through VA's Community Care program prior April 2023, the RO did not undertake further efforts to obtain his VA records, which constitutes a pre-decisional error requiring remand. Similarly, although records related to treatment received through VA's Community Care were noted as scanned into VistA Imaging and therefore in VA's actual possession prior to issuance of the November 2023 rating decision, the RO failed to associate them with the claims file at the time of issuance of that rating decision, which constitutes a pre-decisional error requiring remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's Loma Linda VAMC treatment records from March 2022 to November 2023, to include records both establishing Dr. J.L. of Citrus Valley Medical Associates as his Community Care primary care provider and from Dr. J.L. prepared in the course of his VA Community Care treatment, generally. 

2. Obtain all non-VA medical records that were scanned into the Veteran's Loma Linda VAMC electronic medical record, which may be located in VistA Imaging.

3. DO NOT PROCEED WITH THE FOLLOWING UNTIL THE ABOVE DEVELOPMENT IS COMPLETE, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE.

4. Obtain an addendum medical opinion as to the Veteran's overactive bladder. After complete review of the claims file, an examiner should respond to the following:

Is the Veteran's overactive bladder at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) proximately due to or aggravated by his service-connected gastroenteritis with irritable bowel syndrome, to include his constipation as a symptom of such?

The Board notes that, 

"	in April 2022 and July 2023, VA examiners noted that constipation is a possible cause of overactive bladder;

"	at an April 2022 VA examination, an examiner documented that the Veteran was being evaluated by gastroenterology for other possible causes of his overactive bladder; and

"	at a January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported, and an examiner determined, that he experienced constipation as a symptom of his service-connected gastrointestinal disability.

The examiner must address the possibility of aggravation and the above-detailed evidence suggesting a possible relationship between constipation, which the Veteran experiences from his service-connected gastrointestinal disability, and his overactive bladder.

The opinion must be accompanied by a rationale consistent with the evidence of record and a discussion of generally accepted medical principles.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Tierno

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.