Citation Nr: A25031226
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240120-409917
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

The appeal seeking entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, and bilateral hand neuropathy is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for glaucoma with severe visual impairment is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) did not adjudicate claims of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, or bilateral hand neuropathy in the August 2023 rating decision, or in any other rating decision in the year prior to the date on which the January 2024 VA Form 10182 was received. 

2.  The Veteran was not exposed to an herbicide agent during his service.

3.  The Veteran's glaucoma was not manifested in service, and it is not shown to be etiologically related to an in-service event, injury, or disease.

4.  The Veteran's hypertension was not manifested in service or within one year following his separation from service, and it is not shown to be etiologically related to his service.

5.  The Veteran's diabetes mellitus was not manifested in service or within one year following his separation from service, and it is not shown to be etiologically related to his service.

6.  The Veteran's left and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy were not manifested in service or within one year following his separation from service, and they are not shown to be etiologically related to his service, or to have been caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for dismissal of the appeals of the issues of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, or bilateral hand neuropathy, from the January 2024 VA Form 10182, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104, 20.202. 

2.  Service connection for glaucoma with severe visual impairment is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

3.  Service connection for hypertension is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

4.  Service connection for diabetes mellitus is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

5.  Service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

6.  Service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from June 1973 to October 1983.

These matters are before the Board on appeal from an August 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) rating decision.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

1.  Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, and/or bilateral hand neuropathy is dismissed.

By way of background, a January 2006 rating decision was issued denying the Veteran service connection for cold injury, bilateral hands.  He was sent notification of the decision on January 30, 2006.  Similarly, an October 2012 rating decision was issued denying the Veteran service connection for sleep apnea.  He was sent notification of the decision on October 26, 2012.  Finally, upon close review of the claims file, there is no rating decision adjudicating a claim from the Veteran regarding service connection for any "skin disorder".  The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, appeal to the Board, in January 2024, noting that he was appealing a "7/1/23" rating decision regarding, in pertinent part, service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, and bilateral hand neuropathy.  However, the Board notes that the AOJ did not adjudicate those matters in a "7/1/23" rating decision, or in any other rating decision in the year prior to the date the January 2024 VA Form 10182 was received.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7104.  As the AOJ did not address service connection for sleep apnea, a skin disorder, or bilateral hand neuropathy in the "7/1/23" rating decision alleged to be on appeal, or any other rating decision in the year prior to the January 2024 VA Form 10182's receipt by VA, there is no case or controversy regarding these matters for the Board to adjudicate.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review these matters at this time, and they are dismissed.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal connection between the disease or injury in service and the current disability.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A disease first diagnosed after discharge may be service connected if all the evidence, including pertinent service records, establishes that it was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Certain chronic diseases, to include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and organic diseases of the nervous system, may be service connected on a presumptive basis if manifested to a compensable degree within a specified period of time post-service (one year for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or an organic disease of the nervous system).  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  Nexus of a chronic disease listed in § 3.309(a) to service may be established by showing continuity of symptomatology following service.  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338-40 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Lay evidence may be competent evidence to establish incurrence.   See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  Competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question is one requiring medical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

VA has also established a presumption of service connection for certain diseases found to be associated with exposure to an herbicide agent.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1116, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Absent affirmative evidence to the contrary, such diseases will be service connected even if there is no evidence of the disease during service, provided that herbicide exposure is established.  Id.; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d).  The term "herbicide agent" means a chemical in an herbicide used in support of the United States and allied military operations in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962 and ending on May 7, 1975 (the Vietnam Era).  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).  A veteran who, during active military service, served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam Era is presumed to have been exposed to such herbicide agents.  38 U.S.C. § 1116(f); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).  The Department of Defense (DoD) has identified specific units it has cited that served in areas along the DMZ in Korea where herbicides were used between April 1968 and July 1969.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iv).  VA's Adjudication Procedure Manual, M21-1MR, contains a list of several Battalions of Infantry, Cavalry, Armor, and Artillery Divisions identified as specific units that served in areas along the DMZ in Korea where herbicides were used between April 1968 and July 1969.  If a veteran alleges service along the DMZ in Korea and was assigned to one of the cited units during this period, then that veteran's exposure to herbicides on a factual basis is conceded.  Id.  Once exposure to herbicides has been established by the evidence of record, the presumption of service connection found in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) for herbicide-related diseases is applicable.

The Board notes that the Veteran's service personnel records (SPRs) do not show that the Veteran was deployed to Vietnam.  Although the Veteran's SPRs indicate that the Veteran served in Korea from 1979 through 1980, the Board notes that this period of service is years later than the period of time during which VA recognizes herbicide agents were used in Korea (i.e., April 1968 to July 1969).  Thus, a presumption of herbicide exposure is not warranted on those theories.  The Veteran also stated that he was exposed to an herbicide agent while serving at Fort Hood, Texas.  Specifically, the Veteran claims herbicide exposure due to cleaning equipment returning from Vietnam.  The Veteran reported that an Air Cavalry unit returned to Fort Hood from Vietnam and it was their equipment that he cleaned.   A June 2012 memorandum from the Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) Coordinator provided that Fort Hood was not identified by the Department of Defense for the use of herbicides outside of Vietnam.  Moreover, it was found there was a lack of evidence to corroborate the Veteran's account of herbicide exposure during his active military service.  The Board finds that the responses from the JSRRC Coordinator regarding Agent Orange exposure in Fort Hood weigh against the Veteran's statement that he handled equipment contaminated with Agent Orange.  There is no evidence that he was otherwise exposed to an herbicide agent.  His bare statements asserting such exposure are not sufficient in themselves to establish this fact, as he may have misremembered his activities and duties at Fort Hood, misunderstood the nature of what he was handling, or misrepresented this history in support of the claim.  Moreover, there is no presumption of contamination for equipment used in Vietnam; the presumption applies to biological organisms, namely soldiers.  Certainly, there is no presumption that any equipment used in Vietnam remained contaminated after removal from that country.  The Veteran has offered no evidence other than his unsupported belief that the equipment at issue was contaminated with an herbicide agent.  His statements therefore have little probative value.  Based on the places, types, and circumstances of the Veteran's service, and considering the information provided by the JSRRC Coordinator, the evidence does not support herbicide exposure.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Accordingly, as herbicide exposure is not established, service connection may not be established for any disability on the basis that it is linked to such exposure, presumptively or otherwise.

2.  Entitlement to service connection for glaucoma with severe visual impairment is denied.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for glaucoma on the basis that his disability is linked to exposure to an herbicide agent during active military service.  The Veteran's current treatment records reflect a diagnosis of glaucoma, as such the first element of service connection, a current disability, is met.

Turning to the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Board notes that the evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran's glaucoma was incurred or aggravated during service.  The objective medical evidence of record fully supports that conclusion.

The record does not otherwise support service connection for glaucoma.  The Veteran's STRs are silent for any complaints, findings, treatment or diagnosis related to glaucoma while on active duty.  The first evidence in the record of glaucoma occurred several years after service, in June 2006.  However, the Board does note that the Veteran suffered from conjunctivitis (pink eye) in August 1979.  The Board notes there is no further mention of the Veteran's pink eye after August 1979 in his STRs, presumably because it was resolved.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements regarding his glaucoma, all of which he is competent and credible to report, and to which he is entitled to a degree of probative weight.  However, all of the Veteran's statements regarding symptomology pertain to the determination of whether a current disability exists.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran currently has glaucoma.  The question for the Board is whether there is a nexus between his claimed glaucoma and his military service.  The Veteran has not provided details alleging any in-service event or diagnosis that could be related to his current claimed glaucoma.  As discussed above, the STRs do not support the Veteran's claim of onset of his disability during service, and indeed his glaucoma was not diagnosed until many years after his separation from service.  Thus, any assertions that he may make as to onset during service with subsequent continuity of symptoms are not supported by the objective evidence of record.

The objective medical evidence ultimately outweighs the Veteran's lay contentions that his disability is related to service.  Although the Veteran has established a current disability, the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding of an in-service event, injury or disease, or that the Veteran's glaucoma is causally related to his service.  Service connection for glaucoma is not warranted, and the appeal is denied.

3.  Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for hypertension on the basis that his disability is linked to exposure to an herbicide agent during active military service.  His current treatment records reflect a diagnosis of hypertension; the first element of service connection, a current disability, is therefore met.  

Turning to the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, the Board notes that the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's hypertension was incurred during his service.  The objective medical evidence of record fully supports that conclusion.  As noted above, the evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active service, to include his service time stationed at Fort Hood.  Accordingly, as herbicide exposure is not established, service connection may not be established for hypertension on the basis that it is linked to such exposure, presumptively or otherwise.

The record does not otherwise support service connection for hypertension.  Review of the Veteran's STRs documents no evidence of complaints, findings, treatment or diagnosis related to hypertension while on active duty.  The first evidence of hypertension is years after service.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements regarding his hypertension, all of which he is competent and credible to report and entitled to a degree of probative weight.  However, all of the Veteran's statements regarding symptomology pertain to the determination of whether a current disability exists.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has hypertension, but the question for the Board is whether there is a nexus between his claimed hypertension and his military service.  

The Veteran has not provided details alleging any in-service event or diagnosis that could be related to his claimed hypertension.  His STRs do not support his claim that his hypertension first manifested during service; indeed, he was not diagnosed with hypertension until many years after his separation from service.  The absence of post-service complaints, findings, diagnosis, or treatment for many years after service is one factor that tends to weigh against a finding of continuous symptoms after service separation.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Thus, any assertions that he may make as to onset during service with subsequent continuity thereof are not supported by the objective evidence of record.  

Regarding the presumption in favor of chronic diseases and the continuity of symptomatology, the Board notes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension.  For VA purposes, diagnosis of hypertension is a chronic disease, thus warranting consideration under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  However, for the presumption under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 to apply, the disability must manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service.  In this case, the earliest medical evidence regarding hypertension was in 1995.  Therefore, the objective medical evidence indicates that the Veteran's hypertension did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service.  Because the Veteran's hypertension did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service, and there is no evidence of a chronic disability in service, the presumption in favor of chronic diseases under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a) is not warranted.

The objective medical evidence ultimately outweighs the Veteran's lay contentions that his disability is related to service.  Although he has established a current disability, the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding of an in-service event, injury or disease, or any nexus to his service.  For these reasons, service connection for hypertension is not warranted, and the appeal in the matter is denied.

4.  Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is denied.

The Veteran's treatment records reflect a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in 1988.  The first element of service connection, a current disability, is met.  Turning to the second element of service connection, in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, the Board notes that the evidence is against finding that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus was incurred during service.  The STRs are silent for complaints, findings, treatment, or diagnosis of diabetes mellitus while on active duty.  

The Veteran contends that in 1982 his unit underwent body-fat testing, at which time the doctor purportedly advised the Veteran that he could potentially have diabetes; he explained that his unit was thereafter transferred and he did not follow-up with the doctor.  The Board finds that the Veteran's account of what a doctor purportedly told him in service to lack credibility.  There is no mention in the STRs of consideration of diabetes, a disease which would affect the Veteran's ability to remain in service and which would have therefore been documented.  The absence of such a notation, when the Veteran clearly indicates that a service physician broached the topic, undermines his claim.  Second, it is unclear why a physician would rely on a body fat analysis to make any determination regarding diabetes, instead of more traditional methods of identify the disease such as blood or urine analysis.  Third, even assuming that a physician would consider diabetes based on a body fat analysis, the Board finds it unlikely that the physician would not then order blood or urine testing to determine whether the Veteran in fact had diabetes.  For these reasons, the Board finds the Veteran's account to lack credibility.  

Moreover, the medical treatment records since the Veteran's diagnosis in 1988 are absent for any report of an in-service diagnosis of diabetes mellitus until the Veteran's pursuit of service connection for diabetes.  The STRs do not support the Veteran's claim of onset of his disability during service.  In fact, the Veteran was not diagnosed until nearly four years after his separation from service.  There is no contemporary evidence in the intervening years suggesting the onset of diabetes in service or within a year of discharge.  

As explained previously, the Board finds the evidence weighs against finding that the Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active service, to include when he was stationed at Fort Hood.  Accordingly, as herbicide exposure is not established, service connection may not be established for diabetes mellitus on the basis that it is linked to such exposure, presumptively or otherwise.  

Regarding the presumption in favor of chronic diseases and the continuity of symptomatology, the Board notes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus.  For VA purposes, diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease, thus warranting consideration under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  However, in order for the presumption under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 to apply, the disability must manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service.  In this case, it appears that the earliest medical evidence regarding diabetes mellitus was in 1987, with a diagnosis in 1988.  The objective medical evidence indicates that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of his discharge from service, and there is no evidence of a chronic disability in service, thus, the presumption in favor of chronic diseases under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a) is not warranted in this case.  

The objective medical evidence ultimately outweighs the Veteran's lay contentions that his disability is related to service.  Although the Veteran has established a current disability, the evidence weighs persuasively against finding that his diabetes mellitus is causally related to his service or was manifested within an applicable presumptive period.  For these reasons, service connection for diabetes mellitus is not warranted, and the appeal in the matter is denied.

5., 6.  Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

The Veteran contends that his left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy were caused or aggravated by his claimed diabetes mellitus.

A disability may be service connected on a secondary basis if it is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury; or, if it is aggravated beyond its natural progress by a service-connected disease or injury.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a),(b).

As to the first element of secondary service connection, current disability, the record indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of diabetic neuropathies of both lower extremities.  Therefore, this element is met.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran is not service connected for his diabetes mellitus, and service connection for diabetes mellitus is denied herein, thus the Veteran's claim for secondary service connection for his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is without merit.  

Regarding direct service connection, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he was exposed to Agent Orange during his military service.  As explained above, the evidence weighs against the finding that the Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active service, to include his service time stationed at Fort Hood.  Accordingly, as herbicide exposure is not established, service connection may not be established for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy on the basis that it is linked to such exposure, presumptively or otherwise.

The record does not otherwise support service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  The Veteran's STRs are silent for complaints, findings, treatment or diagnosis related to bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy while on active duty.  The first medical evidence of bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was many years after service, in November 2018.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements regarding his bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, all of which he is competent and credible to report and entitled to a degree of probative weight; however, all the Veteran's statements regarding symptomology pertain to the determination of whether a current disability exists.  The question before the Board is whether there is a nexus between his claimed bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and his military service.

The Veteran has not provided details alleging any in-service event or diagnosis that could be related to his claimed bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  As discussed above, the STRs do not support the Veteran's claim of onset of his disability during service; indeed, bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was not diagnosed until many years after his separation from service.  Thus, any assertions that he may make as to onset during service with subsequent continuity of are not supported by the objective evidence of record.

The objective medical evidence ultimately outweighs the Veteran's lay contentions that his disability is related to service.  Accordingly, the criteria to award entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to the diabetes mellitus, has not been established, either through medical or probative lay evidence.  The evidence also weighs against a finding of an in-service event, injury or disease, or that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is causally related to his service.  The Board finds that service connection for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, is not warranted, and the appeal in the matters is denied.

 

R. Feinberg

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Schechner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.