Citation Nr: A25031875
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-445058
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent prior to April 25, 2012, and in excess of 20 thereafter for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, for accrued purposes, is remanded.  

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent prior to July 11, 2019, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, for accrued purposes, is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

At the outset, the Board the expresses its condolences to the Appellant for her loss and is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service to our country.

The Board also understands and appreciates the frustration the Appellant may feel in the time spent in attempting to be successful in the increased rating claims on appeal.  However, as will be explained below, to ensure her due process an additional remand is required.

Of note, the increased rating claim for depressive disorder was in the same appeal stream with the increased rating claims for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities in the legacy system, but in March 2023 the Appellant did not file documentation opting into the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) with respect to the depressive disorder claim.  As such, the increased claim for depressive disorder is not before the Board herein pursuant to the AMA.  

Also, of note, the Board acknowledges that in the VA Form 10182 and in the argument submitted concurrently, the Appellant's representative appears to attempt to appeal the issue of an earlier effective date for special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. 1114(l) and under 38 U.S.C. 1114(p).  These claims were not adjudicated in either the March 2023 supplemental statement of the case (SSOC) or June 2023 rating decision Higher Level Review (HLR) review of such.  Therefore, these issues are not on appeal before the Board.  Also, the SMC claims were granted in an April 2020 rating decision, so if the Veteran or the Appellant disagreed with the assigned effective dates, the proper way to address such contentions was to timely submit a notice of disagreement.  

Procedural History 

There is a vast procedural history in this case, and the Board will focus on the history pertinent to the issues on appeal.  The Veteran filed for service connection for low back disability on July 22, 2011, and the AOJ denied this claim in a November 2012 rating decision.  The Veteran timely and continuously appealed this rating decision, and in January 2018 the Board granted service connection for a lumbar spine condition.  

In implementing the January 2018 Board decision, in a March 2018 rating decision the AOJ granted service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, assigning a 10 percent rating with an effective date of July 22, 2011, and a 20 percent rating with an effective date of April 25, 2012; and radiculopathy of the right lower extremity assigning a 10 percent rating effective July 22, 2011.  In a May 2018 notice of disagreement, the Veteran contested the assigned ratings and requested the highest possible ratings for his bilateral radiculopathy.  In a July 2019 rating decision, the AOJ increased the rating for radiculopathy of the right lower extremity from 10 percent to 20 percent, effective July 11, 2019.  

In November 2019, the Board denied the increased rating claims.  The Veteran appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In August 2020, the Court granted the parties' August 2020 joint motion for partial remand (JMPR) and vacated the November 2019 Board decision to the extent that it denied the increased rating claims.  

Sadly, in November 2020 the Veteran passed away.  The record illustrates that the Appellant was married to the Veteran at the time of his death.  As will be in the Discussion section, whether the Appellant is considered a "surviving spouse" and whether she has been properly "substituted" as a claimant are dispositive threshold elements in this appeal, and the AOJ has failed to adjudicate these issues.  

After Board remands in March 2022 and August 2022, the AOJ issued a supplemental statement of the case (SSOC) in March 2023, continuing the assigned ratings for bilateral radiculopathy.  In March 2023 the Appellant submitted a request for Higher Level Review (HLR), requesting HLR of the March 2023 SSOC with respect to the increased rating claims for bilateral radiculopathy.  As a result of filing the HLR the Appellant withdrew the increased rating claims from the Legacy system and opted into the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In June 2023 the AOJ issued a HLR rating decision and in June 2024 the Appellant submitted a VA Form 10182, appealing the June 2023 rating decision to the Board, electing the Direct Review docket.  

As a result of the Appellant's Higher-Level?Review election and as she has selected the Direct Review docket when appealing the matters to the Board, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the March 2023 SSOC.  See 38?C.F.R. §§?20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the March 2023 AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182).  38?C.F.R. §?20.301.  The Appellant has not filed such a request.

When appealing the matter to the Board the Appellant filed VA Form 10182, electing the Direct Review docket.  The Appellant checked off the box on the Form to indicate that she was attaching additional sheets, and although she did submit additional documentation, the documentation submitted was argument, and not additional evidence.  That notwithstanding, in an apparent abundance of caution, with strict adherence to Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023), in June 2024, the Board sent the Appellant a letter acknowledging that she submitted additional documents with her VA Form 10182, and that because she selected Direct Review these documents could not be considered.  The letter also explained that she could request the Evidence Submission or Hearing dockets, stating that typically requests to change dockets must be filed at the Board within 60 days of the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or within one year of the VA decision being appealed, whichever date is later.  To date the Appellant has not communicated any desire to switch dockets and as it has been more than 60 days since she filed the VA Form 10182, more than a year since the issuance of the June 2023 HLR rating decision on appeal, and more than 30 days since the June 2024 letter was mailed to the Appellant.  As such, the Board will proceed with addressing this appeal under the selected Direct Review docket.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this opinion.  38 C.F.R. §?20.300.  However, as a remand of these matters are warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Discussion 

As will be explained below, the AOJ committed pre-decisional duty to assist and duty to notify errors when denying the increased rating claims for accrued benefits.

Prior to discussing the threshold elements, the Board will discuss the heart of the case.  The Veteran contended that the currently assigned ratings for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities warranted higher ratings, more specifically the highest ratings.  See May 2018 notice of disagreement.  

As such the Board is charged with assessing whether higher ratings are warranted anytime between July 22, 2011 (date the service connection claim was filed) and November 2020. 

While in the Legacy system the Board remanded the claims, in March 2022 and August 2022 to obtain adequate retrospective medical opinions concerning the nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected radiculopathy in each of his lower extremities between July 22, 2011, and the date of his death.  

In the August 2022 remand, the Board described in detail why the March 2022 medical opinions were inadequate, and therefore the Board will not review the March 2022 opinions again.  Despite the August 2022 Board remand, the AOJ did not perform any additional development, let alone secure adequate medical opinions prior to issuing the March 2023 SSOC.  Therefore, a remand is required to obtain retrospective medical opinions as to the level of severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities from July 22, 2011 to November 2020, and remedy the pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  In addition to duty to assist errors, the AOJ also committed duty to notify errors.  

First, the Board wants to stress that a finding that the Appellant is the surviving spouse of the Veteran and a finding that she has been properly substituted in the pending increased rating claims are favorable findings and the Board in no way would disturb such favorable findings.  Unfortunately, on review of the record the AOJ has failed to make these threshold findings, despite adjudicating the Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) benefits claim and the accrued benefits claims relating to the increased rating claims. 

In a June 25, 2021 rating decision the AOJ adjudicated service connection for cause of the Veteran's death (DIC claim) and denied that claim without addressing whether the Appellant is deemed the surviving spouse of the Veteran.  In the June 28, 2021 decision the AOJ stated, "As the veteran's surviving spouse, you are an eligible substitute claimant" and though favorable findings were made, the AOJ did not make any findings regarding whether the Appellant is the surviving spouse of the Veteran or make any mention of whether her request to be substituted was considered.  In connection to the issues on appeal herein the AOJ has issued two SSOCs, in March 2022 and March 2023, and the AOJ failed to make any findings regarding whether the Appellant is considered the Veteran's surviving spouse and whether she has been properly substituted in this appeal.

The Board recognizes that both the Veteran's representative and the Board have made representations that the Appellant's request for substitution has been granted and that she is the surviving spouse, and that the AOJ actually referred to a letter in the evidence section intimating that a decision on the request for substitution has been made.  In an August 2021 letter authored by the Veteran's representative he contends that "Her eligibility as a substitute claimant was granted in the June 28, 2021 rating decision."  In the March 2022 Board remand, the Board stated "This request to substitute was granted by VA in June 2021."  In the August 2022 Board remand the Board stated, "The appellant is his surviving spouse and substitute claimant."  In the September 2021 rating decision, under the Evidence section the AOJ listed, "substitution determination letter dated June 28, 2021."  That notwithstanding, these findings have not been made in the first instance by the AOJ and on remand the AOJ must make such findings and provide the Appellant with proper notice of such.  

Accrued benefits are "periodic" monetary benefits to which an individual was entitled at death under existing ratings or decisions or those based on evidence in the file at dated of death.  Id.  An accrued benefits claim incorporates any prior final adjudication on claims brought by a veteran, because it derives from the veteran's claims.

For entitlement to accrued benefits, the veteran must have had a claim pending at the time of his death for such benefits or else be entitled to them under an existing rating or decision.  See Jones v. West, 136 F.3d 1296, 1299 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Taylor v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 126, 128-29 (2007).  The application for accrued benefits must be filed within one year after the date of death.  38 U.S.C. § 5121(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000(c).

At the time of the Veteran's passing in November 2020, his increased rating claims for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities were pending as the Court granted the JMPR and vacated the November 2019 Board denials of the increased rating claims.  Although the Board dismissed the claims in February 2021 due to the death of the Veteran, the Appellant filed her request for substitution in May 2021, well within a year of the Veteran's passing.  Despite the aforementioned, the AOJ failed to address the Appellant's request for substitution.  

Persons eligible to substitute as claimant or to receive accrued benefits upon the death of a veteran include, in the following order: (1) the veteran's spouse; (2) the veteran's children (in equal shares); or (3) the veteran's dependent parents (in equal shares).  38 C.F.R. § 3.1000(a)(1).

The term "surviving spouse" is defined as a person who: (1) Was the lawful spouse of a veteran at the time of the veteran's death; (2) lived with the veteran continuously from the date of marriage to the date of the veteran's death, except where there was a separation which was due to the misconduct of, or procured by, the veteran without fault of the spouse; and, (3) has not remarried.  38 U.S.C. § 101(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.50(b)(1); see Gregory v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 108 (1993).  

For VA benefits, "marriage" means a marriage valid under the law of the place where the parties resided at the time of the marriage, or the law of the place where the parties resided when the right to benefits accrued.  38 U.S.C. § 103(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(j).

There is marriage certificate of record indicating that the Veteran and the Appellant were legally married in 1984, and the death certificate describes the Veteran's marital status as married and lists the Appellant's name as his surviving spouse.  Also, according to the Appellant, she lived continuously with the Veteran from the date of marriage to date of his death.  See May 2021 VA Form 21P-534.  Despite this, the AOJ failed to make a finding as to whether the Appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.  

Therefore, the March 2023 and June 2023 denials do not meet the criteria as outlined in 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b).

A claimant is entitled to receive notice of a decision by the Secretary, which must include particular information, as provided by statute.  38 U.S.C. § 5104.  Notice under 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b) must include the following: (1) Identification of the issues adjudicated; (2) A summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary; (3) A summary of the applicable laws and regulations; (4) Identification of findings favorable to the claimant; (5) In the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial; (6) An explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision; and, (7) If applicable, identification of the criteria that must be satisfied to grant service connection or the next higher level of compensation.

The AOJ did not provide an explanation as to all elements needed to be successful, failing to address the threshold element of whether the Appellant is the surviving spouse and failing to consider the Appellant's request for substitution and make a finding as to whether her request to substitute has been granted.  As such, the claimant was not put on notice of what additional evidence or argument could be presented to support an appeal.

Without adequate notice of the basis for the denial, a claimant cannot make an informed decision as to whether or not to accept or appeal the decision or know what evidence they need to submit in order to substantiate their appeal.  See Ingram v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 232, 252 (2007) (discussing the legislative history of 38 U.S.C. § 5104 and the importance of clear and informative notice of decisions).  Moreover, the Board cannot meaningfully review the AOJ's determination.  This is a duty to notify error and failure to satisfy a statutory duty under 38 U.S.C. § 5104.

On remand, the AOJ must provide the Appellant with complete notice of the decision as required by 38 U.S.C. § 5104, including identification of whether or not the accrued benefits (request for substitution) meet the criteria under 38 U.S.C. § 1521(a), 38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.100, and to include whether she meets the definition of "surviving spouse" under 38 C.F.R. § 3.50(b)(1).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate clinician, preferably with an examiner who has not been involved in these claims, for an opinion to determine the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (from July 2011 to November 2020) and for an opinion to determine the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity (from July 2011 to November 2020).  

2. The examiner is requested to note in his/her report that a full review of the Veteran's electronic claims file, to include this remand, was completed.

(a.) The examiner should provide a full description of the disabilities and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity (from July 2011 to November 2020), currently rated under Diagnostic Code 8720.  

(b.) To the extent possible the examiner is asked to provide a retrospective opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity and opine as to the level of severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity throughout the appeal period (from July 2011 to November 2020).

(c.) To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the radiculopathy of the right lower extremity alone and discuss the effect of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity had on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living, specifically from July 2011 to November 2020.  

(d.) The examiner is requested to opine as to when the record of evidence, to include the medical evidence and to include consideration of the lay statements of record that describe the symptoms, first illustrates symptoms of radiculopathy of the right lower extremity consistent with a 20 percent disabling rating.

(e.) The examiner is requested to opine as to whether the record of evidence, to include the medical evidence and to include consideration of the lay statements of record describes symptoms consistent with the next higher ratings of 40 percent, 60 percent, or 80 percent under the applicable diagnostic codes; and if the examiner finds that the evidence supports a rating higher than 20 percent at any time during the appeal period the examiner is requested to clearly state when the evidence first illustrates symptoms of radiculopathy of the right lower extremity consistent with a rating higher than 20 percent.  

(f.) The examiner should provide a full description of the disabilities and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity (from July 2011 to November 2020), currently rated under Diagnostic Code 8520.  

(g.) To the extent possible the examiner is asked to provide a retrospective opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity and opine as to the level of severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity throughout the appeal period (from July 2011 to November 2020).

(h.) To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the radiculopathy of the left lower extremity alone and discuss the effect of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity had on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living, specifically from July 2011 to November 2020.

(i.) The examiner is requested to opine as to when the record of evidence, to include the medical evidence and to include consideration of the lay statements of record that describe the symptoms, first illustrates symptoms of radiculopathy of the left lower extremity consistent with a 20 percent disabling rating.

(j.) The examiner is requested to opine as to whether the record of evidence, to include the medical evidence and to include consideration of the lay statements of record, describes symptoms consistent with the next higher ratings of 40 percent, 60 percent, or 80 percent under the applicable diagnostic codes; and if the examiner finds that the evidence supports a rating higher than 20 percent at any time during the appeal period, the examiner is requested to clearly state when the evidence first illustrates symptoms of radiculopathy of the left lower extremity consistent with a rating higher than 20 percent. 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

3. After completing the above, the AOJ should readjudicate the increased rating claims on appeal.  When readjudicating the increased rating claims, in connection to the accrued benefits claim, the AOJ must adjudicate the pending and unaddressed Request for Substitution received by VA on May 17, 2021, from the Appellant and provide all appropriate notification of the decision reached as to that issue and must specifically make findings regarding whether the Appellant is considered the Veteran's "surviving spouse."

If the request for substitution is denied, the AOJ should send the Appellant and her representative notice of the denial and afford her a full opportunity to perfect an appeal as to the Substitution issue.

If the request for substitution is favorable, the AOJ should provide all notification to the Appellant regarding her rights as a Substitute, provide her all appropriate and complete notice of any decisions to include the readjudication of the increased rating claims for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The AOJ must provide the Appellant with written notification of its decision that comports with 38 U.S.C. § 5104.

The notice shall include but is not limited to a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of the elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing accrued benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 1521(a), 38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.100.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Talamantes, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.