Citation Nr: A25031310
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-468331
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1982 to December 1983.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 higher-level review decision of a December 2023 rating decision.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA 10182 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency or original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran's service treatment records show that he reported having a medical history of a "trick" or locked knee and that he had right knee surgery prior to his enlistment.  A November 1977 letter from Dr. R.N. also indicated that the Veteran underwent a Hauser procedure on his right knee in December 1976 due to recurrent dislocations of the right patella.  He stated that the Veteran should be physically capable of undergoing basic training as far as the right knee was concerned.  

Notably, a December 1981 enlistment examination found the Veteran's lower extremities to be normal, and a right knee disorder was not noted upon clinical evaluation itself.  It was also noted that the surgery had satisfactory results in that report.  History provided by a veteran of the pre-service existence of conditions recorded at the time of the entrance examination does not, in itself, constitute a notation of a preexisting condition. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(b)(1); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466; Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App.238, 246 (1995).  Thus, the presumption of soundness applies, and clear and unmistakable evidence would be needed to rebut that presumption.

A December 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with right knee joint osteoarthritis and recurrent patellar dislocation, but she opined that the disorders, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, were clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  She noted that the Veteran had claimed that his right knee disorder was aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  However, the examiner found that his service treatment records were negative for any right knee disorder other than noting his prior surgery and that the post-service medical records did not document a right knee disorder until 1999, which would have been 16 years following his separation from service.  Therefore, she concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the preexisting disorder was permanently aggravated by service.

Nevertheless, the Board notes that the December 2023 VA examiner's opinion did not address the Veteran's claim that physical training worsened his preexisting right knee disorder. See e.g., July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  Moreover, there are medical records showing that he was seen for his right knee prior to 1999. See October 1998 VA treatment records (had been taking Vicodin for osteoarthritis pain in his joints, including his knees, for a few months). See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based upon an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional medical opinion was needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any right knee disorder that may be present.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

There is evidence indicating that the Veteran underwent right knee surgery prior to his military service; however, a clinical evaluation was normal at the time of his December 1981 enlistment examination.  Thus, the presumption of soundness applies.

The examiner should opine as to whether any current right knee disorder clearly and unmistakably preexisted his military service. (The term "clear and unmistakable" means that the evidence is undebatable).

If so, he or she should state whether there was an increase in the severity of the preexisting disorder during the period of service and whether any increase was due to the natural progression of the disorder or whether it represented a chronic worsening of the underlying pathology.  The examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements that the physical training in service worsened his right knee disorder. See e.g., July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

If the examiner determines that a right knee disorder did not clearly and unmistakably preexist the Veteran's service, he or she should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder manifested in service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, including any symptomatology, injury, or training therein.

The examiner should discuss how any current disorder generally presents or develops.  If the examiner finds any gap in time between the Veteran's military service and the onset of the disorder to be probative, he or she should provide an explanation of its medical significance.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deverter, Rebecca M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.