Citation Nr: A25031109
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-437005
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for sinusitis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sinusitis has manifested by more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for sinusitis are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 2002 to October 2006.

This issue comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 Rating Decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for sinusitis.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a compensable disability rating for his sinusitis. See November 2023 Third Party Correspondence.

The Veteran's sinusitis is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, diagnostic code (DC) 6513. Under DC 6513, maxillary sinusitis is to be rated in accordance with the General Rating Formula for Sinusitis (general rating formula). The general rating formula provides a noncompensable rating for sinusitis that is detected by X-ray only. A 10 percent rating is assigned for one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. A note to the general rating formula provides that an incapacitating episode of sinusitis means one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

The Veteran submitted a statement in November 2023 concerning his history with sinusitis. See November 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran reported dealing with sinusitis for numerous years, to include postnasal drip, stuffy nose, and facial pressure which seem to get worse when he moves his head around or bends over. He also reported symptoms of cough, headaches, tiredness, difficulty breathing on one or both sides of his nose, nasal congestion, noisy breathing, and snoring. He takes numerous over the counter medications for his sinus conditions. Finally, he reported despite his efforts he stills has episodes with severe flare ups that happen 8 or more times per year with symptoms lasting for such a long period of time it makes his life miserable to say the least. See November 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. 

The Veteran was afforded numerous VA examinations in connection with his sinusitis claim. The September 2022 VA examiner found the Veteran had sinusitis but no symptoms at the time. The examiner found the Veteran did not have any non-incapacitating or incapacitating episodes of sinusitis. Additionally, the examiner found that the Veteran's sinusitis impacts the ability for him to work since he reported missing 0-1 work week time list in last 12 months due to the condition. Finally, the examiner did not find the condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work. See September 2022 C&P Exam. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in October 2022. The examiner here found the Veteran had symptoms of pain of affected sinus and episodes of sinusitis. However, the examiner found the Veteran did not have any non-incapacitating or incapacitating episodes of sinusitis. See October 2022 C&P Exam. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in January 2024. At this examination, the examiner did not find any symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis. Furthermore, the examiner did not find the Veteran had non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis nor any incapacitating episodes of sinusitis. Finally, the examiner did not find the Veteran's sinus condition impacted his ability to work. See January 2024 C&P Exam. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records do contain treatment for nasal congestion on at least one occasion. See CAPRI Records.

The Board finds the Veteran competent to report his symptoms of his sinusitis. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board also finds the Veteran credible. There are no inconsistent statements in the record nor any other indication to doubt the Veteran's lay evidence. Thus, the Board assigns great probative weight to the Veteran's reports. 

The VA examinations do not contain any indication that they reviewed the Veteran's reports of symptoms. If the examiners found they disagreed with the medical severity of the symptoms described, they should have done so in their reports. The lack of any mention towards the statements make it appear to the Board that the statements were not reviewed. As such, the Board assigns the VA examinations little probative weight. 

Therefore, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence on record supports a compensable disability rating of 30 percent as the condition has manifested by more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. 

A higher rating is not warranted as the Veteran has not had radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding of an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent, there is no benefit of the doubt to resolve in the Veteran's favor. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). 

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pulaski, Michael F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.