Citation Nr: A25031593
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240426-438295
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left fibula fracture is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral scratched cornea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.   The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left fibula fracture at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2.   The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.   The criteria for service connection for a left fibula fracture have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.   The criteria for service connection for avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2001 to August 2022.  

In a January 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for, among other things, bilateral scratched cornea; left fibula fracture, avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal right foot, fused talus on right foot; and gout.  In April 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, choosing to continue his appeal for entitlement to service connection for bilateral scratched cornea, left fibula fracture, and right 5th metatarsal disability via Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Direct review is the appeal option to the Board in which a Board decision is issued based on evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  The Board cannot hold a hearing or accept into the record additional evidence in its direct review.

Under AMA, remand is not permitted except for certain pre-decisional errors.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.303, 20.802.

The Board is bound by the following favorable findings in the decision: the AOJ determined that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, i.e., the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that he had a laceration of his eye that resolved with no residuals.

Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

To establish service connection on a direct basis, the record must contain: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When a claimant seeks benefits and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the claimant prevails.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

Analysis 

The Veteran contends that he has left fibula fracture and avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal of the right foot that are due to military service.

The Veteran's STRs do not document complaints, treatments, and diagnosis for left a fibula but contains complaints, treatments, and diagnosis for metatarsal condition.  On May 12, 2022, the Veteran telephone the clinic regarding a follow up of his condition.  The Veteran stated that he had a fractured 5th metatarsal.  The examiner gave a provisional diagnosis of nondisplaced fracture of 5th metatarsal bone, right foot.  The Veteran was referred to ortho.  During his March 2022 Report of Medical History, Retirement exam, the Veteran stated that he experienced pain in the knee, periodically, and foot trouble.  Regarding the foot trouble, he stated that he had gout in his right big toe.  

In his August 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that in May 2012, he rolled his ankle during physical training (jogging).  He underwent an x-ray and was treated at a local urgent care center where he was diagnosed with a closed fracture of the left fibula.  He stated that he had follow-up care with the Beale Air Force Base Clinic.  He added that he still had pain and weakness in the left ankle, the ankle seemed unstable and rolled much easier than the right ankle.  Also, in his August statement, the Veteran stated that his metatarsal disability happened during physical training (jogging) in May 2022 in Fort Worth, TX.  He stated that he had not had medical treatment on his foot after retirement.  He added that he had limited mobility and occasional pain in the right foot and ankle.  

In December 2023, imaging revealed normal left tibia-fibula.  The radiologist stated that the bones were intact with no evidence of fracture or destructive lesion.  The radiologist also noted no stress fractures, shin splints, or old healed fractures.  The joints were normal with no arthritic change, and the soft tissues were normal.

Additionally, the Veteran's December 2023 right foot imaging was negative.  The radiologist stated that the AP, lateral, and oblique views of the right foot showed no evidence of fracture or other significant bone or soft tissue abnormality.  There was no significant radiographic evidence for arthritis.

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left fibula fracture.  At the time of the exam, the Veteran denied current knee issues.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a currently diagnosed left fibula fracture condition.

Additionally, in January 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot.  The examiner stated that there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs, and or symptoms to support a diagnosis.

The Board finds the VA examiner's opinions to be adequate, reliable, and affords them probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 303-304 (2008).  The examiner considered the Veteran's contentions, and the opinion is based on the results of diagnostic imaging.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).    

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a currently diagnosed left fibula fracture or avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot disability.  Regarding the claimed left fibula condition, neither the Veteran's STRs nor his post-service treatment records document diagnosis for left fibula fracture.  The VA examiner also stated that the Veteran did not have a currently diagnosed left fibula fracture condition.  Additionally, imaging revealed normal left tibia-fibula.  The radiologist noted no stress fractures, shin splints, or old healed fractures.  The joints were normal with no arthritic change, and the soft tissues were normal.  Regarding the Veteran's claimed fracture of 5th metatarsal, his STRs do document complaints, treatments, and diagnosis for nondisplaced fracture of 5th metatarsal bone, right foot.  However, the examiner stated there was no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs, and or symptoms to support a diagnosis.  Imaging also revealed no evidence of fracture or other significant bone or soft tissue abnormality.  Based on the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a left fibula fracture or avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, disability.  As such, element one under Shedden is not met.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); see also Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143-44 (1992).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran and his representative's statements that the Veteran suffers from left fibula fracture and avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, disabilities that are due to service.  Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, see Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011), as to the specific issue in this case, diagnoses and nexus between the diagnoses and active service is outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (lay persons not competent to diagnose cancer).

Therefore, the record persuasively weighs against the claims for service connection for left fibula fracture and avulsion fracture of 5th metatarsal, right foot, and the appeal is denied.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran contends that he has bilateral eye condition that is due to military service.

In his August 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that in 2006 or 2007, while at work on an aircraft at Langley Air Force Base Clinic, metal shavings got into his eyes, and since the injury, he has had random shooting pain in both eyes, and both are hypersensitive to bright light.  

Based on the in-service injury, in December 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his disability.  The Veteran complained of pain in both eyes, sensitivity to light, and flashes of light, and floaters along with dry eyes.  The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a currently diagnosed right or left eye scratched cornea diagnosis because the condition had resolved.

Here, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported pain in both eyes, sensitivity to light, and flashes of light, and floaters along with dry eyes.  However, the examiner determined that the Veteran's eye condition had resolved without addressing whether the Veteran's reported bilateral eye pain, sensitivity to light, flashes of light, floaters, and dry eyes constitutes an eye condition that is related to his in-service injury.  As such, the Board finds that VA committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain an adequate medical exam.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his eye condition.  The complete record, to include a copy of this remand and the claims folder, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  The examination report must include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner is asked to identify any eye condition that has been present during the period on appeal.

For each diagnosed condition, the examiner must determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's eye condition had its onset in service or is otherwise related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, to include as due to metal shavings in his eyes.

The examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and progression of his condition.  The supporting rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.  If any opinion cannot be offered without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should clearly explain why this is the case and identify any additional evidence that may allow for a more definitive opinion.  Citation to appropriate medical principles would be helpful in the Board's analysis.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.