Citation Nr: A25031607
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-421806
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2003 to May 2004, June 2010 to July 2011, September 2016 to August 2017, and in April 2020. 

These matters are before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal of a July 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination to consider the nature and etiology of his claimed OSA in September 2022. At that time, he was diagnosed with OSA, but the examiner opined against an in-service etiology of the disorder, reasoning that OSA was first diagnosed after the Veteran's active-duty service. In a March 2023 addendum opinion, a VA examiner opined that OSA was unlikely related to the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs), reasoning that the OSA was most likely related to obesity and male sex. In a July 2023 addendum opinion, a VA examiner addressed the theory that obesity served as an intermediate step between PTSD and OSA. The examiner opined that the Veteran's obesity was "multi-factorial and ... not solely due to his service-connected [PTSD]."

Each of the above medical opinions is inadequate for adjudication. The September 2022 examiner failed to address the Veteran's reports, noted in the "medical history" section, that, during active-duty service, his wife told him that he would stop breathing while he was asleep. The March 2023 opinion failed to provide any clear rationale to explain why the Veteran's OSA was more likely related to obesity and male sex than to his TERAs, instead providing only a conclusory opinion, despite acknowledging that the Veteran's exposure to particulate matter was a risk factor for development of OSA. Finally, the July 2023 opinion failed to consider whether the PTSD aggravated the Veteran's obesity.  Additionally, the July 2023 examiner stated that a risk factor for OSA was nasal congestion, and a September 2022 VA examination noted that a symptom of the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis was a stuffy nose. This evidence raised the theory that OSA may be caused or aggravated by the Veteran's allergic rhinitis, but the examiner did not address this theory.

Failure to obtain adequate medical opinions was a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. Remand is required to obtain adequate medical opinions addressing these questions. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Request a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of OSA. An in-person examination is not necessary unless the examiner determines it is required. Based on a thorough review of the claims file, including the Veteran's lay evidence, the examiner should state:

(a.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service injury or illness, to include the Veteran's reports that his wife told him he would stop breathing while he was asleep during active-duty service?

(b.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the synergistic, combined effect of TERAs in Southwest Asia, including exposure to fine, particulate matter, considering the total potential exposure through all military deployments?

(c.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by the Veteran's allergic rhinitis? 

(d.) Is OSA at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by the Veteran's allergic rhinitis?

(e.) Is obesity at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by the Veteran's PTSD?

(f.) Is obesity at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by the Veteran's PTSD?

(g.) If so, was the Veteran's obesity a substantial factor in causing OSA? 

(h.) Would OSA not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD?

The VA examiner must provide separate findings and rationales relating to causation and aggravation for each primary disability.

The examiner is advised that aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent" worsening of the nonservice connected disability.

The examiner is also advised that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 allows for service connection of conditions that would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability even if the worsening of the condition occurs due to the natural progression of that condition. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (2023).

(Continued on the next page)

?

 A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered. 

Please be aware that lay evidence does not lack credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bametzreider, Paul J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.