Citation Nr: A25031018
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-453731
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for shin splints is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for iron deficiency is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran does not have a shin splints disability for VA purposes.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for shin splints have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2017 to September 2021.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023 and December 2023 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO).  On the Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) VA Form 10182, received in July 2024, the Veteran requested a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  In this regard, the Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the decision.

For the claim for service connection for shin splints decided herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the remaining claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

1. Entitlement to service connection for shin splints.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for shin splints.  He reports experiencing sharp shin pain every day when standing or walking for long periods.  See April 2023 Claim.

The evidence of record does not reveal any complaints or treatment related to shin splints during or following the Veteran's active duty service.  The claims file does include a July 2023 VA knee examination which noted that the Veteran had not had a diagnosis for, and never had been diagnosed with, shin splints.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for shin splints is not warranted.  In this regard, the evidence of record does not show complaints or treatment related to shin splints during service and does not show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with shin splints at any point following his active duty service.

The Board recognizes the Veteran's April 2023 statement in which he reported experiencing sharp shin plain following long periods of standing and walking.  In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the Federal Circuit held that "'disability' pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1110 refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity" and "pain in the absence of a presently-diagnosed condition can cause functional impairment," en route to its conclusion that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability."  

However, a subsequent VA examination specifically found that he did not have, and had never been, diagnosed with shin splints, and there is no evidence, including lay statements, showing that any reported symptoms of pain have resulted in the functional impairment of earning capacity.  In making this determination, the Board find the VA knee examination most probative as diagnostic testing was conducted, included testing related to whether the Veteran had manifestations of shin splints.  Had the Veteran's reported symptoms of painful shins risen to the level of functional impairment as contemplated by Saunders, such would have been documented during that portion of the examination, or by the Veteran's post-service treatment records. 

Thus, the Board finds that all three Shedden requirements have not been met and the claim is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 58 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

The Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate examination.  

Initially, the service treatment records (STRs) show that bilateral ankle pain was noted as part of the Veteran's past medical history in July 2021.

The Veteran underwent a VA ankle examination in July 2023.  The examiner only noted a diagnosis for status post left ankle sprain.  The examination additionally appears limited to the service connection claim for left ankle disability.  In this regard, range of motion (ROM) testing shows that the right ankle was listed as an unclaimed joint.  Additionally, diagnostic testing pertaining to the right ankle is not complete.  While the examiner did note ROM for the right ankle, the section pertaining to whether the right ankle was manifested by pain was not filled out, and the examiner did not provide any response for the remainder of the sections pertaining to the right ankle.

Despite the incomplete right ankle examination, the examiner provided a positive nexus opinion on the basis that the Veteran had right ankle pain and a sprain in December 2020, and that he continued to have ankle pain.  In a September 2023 addendum, another examiner concluded that there was no objective evidence to warrant a diagnosis for status post right ankle strain.

The Board finds the July 2023 examination and September 2023 addendum inadequate as the Veteran was never provided with an adequate physical examination.  Therefore, any opinion based on a finding that there was no objective evidence of a right ankle disability is based on an inadequate examination.  In consideration that the STRs include a notation for bilateral ankle pain towards the end of the Veteran's active duty service, an adequate examination was necessary to adjudicate this issue on appeal, and a remand is warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain missing VA treatment records.  In this regard, an August 2022 treatment record shows the Veteran reported that he had been working with a counselor at the Tallahassee VA Mental Health Clinic (TCC), although he denied having a formal diagnosis.

The claims file does not include any treatment records from TCC.  Accordingly, in order to properly adjudicate this issue on appeal, efforts should have been made to obtain the Veteran's identified VA treatment records, and a remand is warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

3. Entitlement to service connection for iron deficiency is remanded.

The evidence of record includes the Veteran's STRs, which are silent for iron deficiency and anemia.  Post-service medical records include an August 2022 VA treatment record noting that anemia was part of the Veteran's past medical history, and that a repeat complete blood count (CBC), iron panel, vitamin B-12, and underlying hematological disorder screen would be conducted in six months.  Thereafter, a December 2022 medical record noted anemia as an active medical problem.

The medical evidence strongly supports a finding that the Veteran was assessed with anemia within one year following his separation from service.  According to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1523 (32nd ed. 2012), "iron deficiency anemia" is a type of hypochromic microcytic anemia caused by low or absent iron stores and serum iron concentration.  Parenthetically, in his July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran reported having been anemic.  

Therefore, at the time of the September 2023 rating decision, there was medical evidence that the Veteran had a disability related to his service connection claim for iron deficiency.  However, the remainder of the evidence is unclear whether the Veteran's anemia is a chronic condition, and the most recent VA treatment record associated with the claims file at the time of the rating decision on appeal is dated January 2023.  

Therefore, the Board finds that a duty to assist existed at the time of the September 2023 rating decision to obtain updated VA treatment records and a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's anemia as it pertains to his service connection claim for iron deficiency.  A remand is therefore warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's treatment record from the Tallahassee VA Mental Health Clinic (TCC).

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed right ankle disability.  The examiner should provide the following opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed right ankle disability is etiologically related to his period of service?

The examiner is asked to consider the July 2021 STR noting bilateral ankle pain as part of the Veteran's past medical history.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed iron deficiency, to include anemia.  The examiner should provide the following opinions:

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's has a diagnosed iron deficiency, to include anemia, that is etiologically related to his period of service?

The examiner is asked to consider VA medical records, including an August 2022 record dated within one year following the Veteran's separation from service, documenting anemia as part of a past medical history, and a December 2022 record noting anemia as an active medical problem.

Reasons should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified.

 

 

A. Dean

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lamb, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.