Citation Nr: A25031128
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-408658
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder, anxiety, and depression, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from October 2008 to December 2010. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including anxiety, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder, anxiety, and depression, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her acquired psychiatric disorder is related, at least in part, due to her premature labor and the loss of her child during her active-duty service. See July 18, 2018, VA 21-0781a, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD; July 10, 2023, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Development Claim (Compensation). 

The Veteran's treatment records contain several psychiatric disorder diagnoses or persistent or recurrent symptoms of anxiety, depression, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. In Clemons, the Court found that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental health disability that could reasonably be encompassed by the Veteran's description of the claim. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). As a result, the Board has expanded the Veteran's claim to include any acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran has not received a VA examination to evaluate her acquired psychiatric disorder.

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. 

Failure to obtain a VA examination for her acquired psychiatric disorder is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In this instance, because the Veteran has diagnoses or persistent or recurrent symptoms for an acquired psychiatric disorder, has provided lay statements regarding an in-service event which has been corroborated by her personnel records, and there is some indication of a potential relationship between the in-service event and her acquired psychiatric disorder, remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the etiology of any diagnosed psychiatric disorder. The entire claims file must be made available to the examiner. The examiner is asked to:

(a.) Clarify all acquired psychiatric disorders diagnosed. If the examiner feels that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for an acquired psychiatric disorder, a complete explanation for why this is so must be provided.

(b.) Next, for each diagnosed disability, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to service, to include the Veteran's premature labor and loss of her child at 22 weeks gestation. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. M. Lowman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.