Citation Nr: A25031042
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220208-218704
DATE:   April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

Sleep apnea is not related to service or a service-connected disability. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.310. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant is a veteran (the Veteran) who had active-duty service from June 1989 to June 1995. 

This appeal comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 31, 2024, Order of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (Veterans Court). The appeal originated from a July 2020 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the February 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On April 26, 2022, the Veteran, through his representative, withdrew the hearing request.

In a January 2024 decision, the Board denied this claim. The Veteran appealed that decision to the Veterans Court. In an October 31, 2024, Order, pursuant to an October 21, 2024, Joint Motion for Remand, the Veterans Court vacated the Board's decision in part, and remanded this issue to the Board for additional development consistent with the Joint Motion. The rating for pseudofolliculitis barbae was appealed, but was abandoned in the Joint Motion. 

As the Veteran withdrew his request for a Board hearing, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 16, 2020, agency of original jurisdiction decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

SERVICE CONNECTION-LAW AND REGULATIONS

VA law provides that, for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, in the active military, naval, or air service, during a period of war, or other than a period of war, the United States will pay to any veteran thus disabled and who was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable from the period of service in which said injury or disease was incurred, or preexisting injury or disease was aggravated, compensation, except if the disability is a result of the veteran's own willful misconduct or abuse of alcohol or drugs. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. 

Entitlement to service connection on a direct basis requires evidence of (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). 

Service connection on a secondary basis requires (1) evidence of a current nonservice-connected disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) evidence establishing that the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the current nonservice-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998). 

For specific enumerated diseases designated as "chronic" there is a presumption that such chronic disease was incurred in or aggravated by service even though there is no evidence of such chronic disease during the period of service. In order for the presumption to attach, the disease must have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of separation from active duty. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). 

Presumptive service connection for the specified chronic diseases may alternatively be established by way of continuity of symptomatology under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b). However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that the theory of continuity of symptomatology can be used only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized as chronic in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Generally, lay evidence is competent with regard to identification of a disease with unique and readily identifiable features which are capable of lay observation. See Barr v. Shinseki, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A lay person may speak to etiology in some limited circumstances in which nexus is obvious merely through observation, such as sustaining a fall leading to a broken leg. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir 2007). 

Lay persons may also provide competent evidence regarding a contemporaneous medical diagnosis or a description of symptoms in service which supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. However, a lay person is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions, i.e., those which are not capable of lay observation. Lay statements are not competent evidence regarding diagnosis or etiology in such cases. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (concerning rheumatic fever); Jandreau, at 1377, n. 4 ('sometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer'); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).

After the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. A VA claimant need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in order to prevail. Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim. Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518, 519 (1996), Gilbert at 54.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. 

The parties to the October 21, 2024, Joint Motion agreed that the Board inaccurately characterized the June 2022 VA medical examiner's opinion on causation to include aggravation. The Board stated that "the [June 2020] examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused or aggravated by his service connected TBI." However, no part of that examination report appears to address aggravation. The June 2020 VA examiner's rationale was limited to causation and risk factors. Nevertheless, the Board found the June 2020 report highly probative, and concluded that service connection as secondary to the service-connected traumatic brain injury was not warranted. 

In so finding, the parties agreed that the Board must address whether an aggravation theory was raised by a June 8, 2022, statement, and, if so, whether the medical evidence is sufficient to resolve that theory. The Veteran stated: "My brain injury has given me severe headaches 3-5 times a week for years.... I get a lot of restlessness from this and have trouble sleeping."

The parties agreed that, on remand, the Board must discuss the Veteran's statement and assess whether it raises an aggravation theory. If it finds that the issue of aggravation is expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by other evidence of record, it should discuss that theory of service connection and whether a separate medical opinion on aggravation is necessary. 

A review of the evidence pertinent to service reveals no complaints, treatments, or diagnoses regarding sleep apnea. The condition was not noted on the examination at entry. A report of medical examination performed on January 25, 1995 (service separation) includes normal findings for the throat and for all systems examined. A report of medical history completed by the Veteran on July 1, 1992, and January 25, 1995, include the Veteran's denial of frequent trouble sleeping or shortness of breath. The Veteran was separated from active service on June 5, 1995. 

The Veteran filed his initial post-service claim for VA disability benefits in June 2013. Although he did not include this disorder in his claim, private treatment records indicate that he had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea at that time. The Veteran filed subsequent claims in the years after, but did not file for sleep apnea until the current June 2020 claim. There he claimed that sleep apnea was "Caused by an in-service event, injury, or exposure" but then noted that it was "Secondary to Traumatic Brain Injury."

The Veteran now asserts that obstructive sleep apnea is secondarily aggravated by traumatic brain injury. A VA traumatic brain injury examination report dated July 16, 2014, includes subjective symptoms of pain and tenderness in the right frontal region, but no mention of sleep impairment or interference being symptoms of traumatic brain injury. There was no impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work. 

A June 10, 2015, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had obstructive sleep apnea and was on CPAP. He reported no excessive sleepiness, "sleeps well" and that headaches sometimes wake him. 

A VA traumatic brain injury examination report dated July 30, 2015, reveals that symptoms associated with traumatic brain injury were limited to headaches and pain over the Veteran's scar. 

A DBQ completed by the Veteran in September 2018 includes his report that subjective symptoms of traumatic brain injury include headaches a few times a week for several hours, disturbed sleep-awakening with headaches a few time a week, and tinnitus. 

A VA traumatic brain injury examination report dated September 27, 2018, shows that the Veteran reported only headaches under subjective symptoms. There was no impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work. 

The Veteran's spouse submitted a statement in December 2018 reporting her knowledge of painful headaches which cause the Veteran to miss work, bad dreams causing a mental status change, including being mean and volatile, throwing things, yelling, nightmares, kicking, and swinging in his sleep. 

A VA traumatic brain injury examination report dated April 3, 2020, reveals the Veteran's report of memory and concentration problems resulting from his traumatic brain injury. He did not report any sleep problems. Objective testing showed mild functional impairment. Subjective symptoms did not interfere with work, activities of daily living, or close relationships. These included headaches associated with light sensitivity and nausea. Sleep problems were not reported as being associated with the traumatic brain injury. There was no impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work. 

A VA sleep apnea examination report dated June 11, 2020, includes a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea with date of diagnosis in 2010. The examiner was asked whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was proximately due to or the result of traumatic brain injury. The examiner opined that "The condition claimed is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition." 

In providing a rationale, the examiner noted: 

Some studies propose that the resultant sleep disorder from TBI is dependent on the area of the brain that was injured, and on the type of TBI (direct vs. indirect) and severity of the injury. Injuries to the brainstem, posterior hypothalamus and upper cervical spinal cord may cause disordered breathing such as OSA.

Also significant according to the examiner was the time between injury and development of the sleep apnea. The opinion continued: 

A review of the STR to determine the nature of this Veteran's TBI reveals that he was hit on the head with a beer bottle, i.e. he did not sustain a high-level injury such as that of an MVA or a blast injury, nor did he [lose] consciousness (a measure of the severity of a TBI). This argues against brain damage sufficient to effect the biochemical and neurophysiologic changes that might lead to a central or obstructive sleep apnea. Most of the studies reviewed by this examiner reveal that disordered sleep resulting from TBI (insomnia, fatigue and sleepiness, narcolepsy, sleep apnea [obstructive and/or central], periodic limb movement disorder, and parasomnias) are exhibited between 3-6 months after the TBI. This Veteran's diagnosis of OSA was made 15 years post-separation from service. Per Up-to-Date, an online medical resource for clinicians, the primary causes of sleep apnea are obesity, smoking, males, older age, and craniofacial features contributing to airway obstruction. Specifically speaking to this Veteran's risk factor, the STR shows that he weighed 237 lb at his separation exam (BMI 36). In searching his non-gov't records, it was found that his weight before bariatric surgery was 340 lb (BMI 51.69), or morbidly obese. Amongst morbidly obese patients (BMI >40), prevalence of OSA as high as 98 % has been reported.

The opinion is then summarized: 

Therefore, considering all of the evidence as discussed above, most notably the mild nature of this Veteran's TBI, the time frame from the injury to diagnosis (15 yr), and the presence of the primary risk factor of morbid obesity at the time of diagnosis, it is less likely than not (<50% probability that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea resulted from his service-connected TBI.

A July 8, 2020, VA treatment record notes that headaches impact the Veteran's sleep by waking him in the middle of the night. He noted his sleep was normal in his teenage years but "got messed up" from his time in the military. His sleep patterns are variable and inconsistent per his report. "sometimes his sleep is 'fine' but other times he will wake up at 1 AM and cannot fall back asleep."

A VA traumatic brain injury examination report dated October 21, 2020, notes that subjective symptoms included headaches. The Veteran described having ongoing nightmares, severe headaches frequently, and is not as easygoing or patient as he once was...he said, "It's a culmination of losing sleep, headaches, pain..." He was always overrunning his sick time. He says that at time his headaches would cause him to pull his bus over to the side and he'd have to put his head down on the wheel while passengers were still onboard. 

Another statement from the Veteran's spouse submitted in January 2021 notes that the Veteran does not sleep well. He has sleep apnea and he often has nightmares, both contribute to his depression.

The Veteran submitted a statement in June 2022. He reported "My brain injury has given me severe headaches 3-5 times a week for years. The pain is sharp and seems like it's everywhere around my head. I get a lot of restlessness from this and have trouble sleeping." He also reported "My headaches from my brain injury were so bad it got to a point where I would lay down on the job and would fall asleep and miss appointments. There were other times I'd fall asleep behind the wheel of the car and that wasn't safe."

After a review of all of the evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are not met. 

The Board has previously explained why service connection is not warranted on a direct basis. The examination at service separation was normal and the Veteran denied frequent trouble sleeping and shortness of breath. The first diagnosis of sleep apnea came many years after service, and the Veteran has not asserted that sleep apnea had onset in service. 

The medical evidence appears to be clear that obstructive sleep apnea is not a symptom of traumatic brain injury, either in general, or in this case. The medical evidence set out above includes multiple traumatic brain injury examinations which do not list sleep problems as a symptom of the Veteran's traumatic brain injury. The Board also finds notable the fact that the regulatory provisions governing secondary service connection and aggravation include conditions that are considered to be associated with traumatic brain injury. These five conditions do not include obstructive sleep apnea. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(d). 

Regarding secondary service connection, under VA law, service connection can be granted for secondary causation of a disorder by a service-connected disability, or for any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b). The sole basis for the October 2024 Joint Motion pertains to secondary aggravation. The parties agreed that the Board mischaracterized the June 2020 medical opinion, and that the Board must discuss whether secondary aggravation was reasonably raised by the record at the time of the decision on appeal, and therefore whether there was a duty to assist error in not obtaining a medical opinion on aggravation. The Board finds that such a theory of entitlement was not reasonably raised by the record at the time of the decision on appeal, but has only been subsequently raised by the Veteran's counsel. 

Significant to the Board's finding is the nature of the condition diagnosed in this case. Obstructive sleep apnea is not simply sleep impairment. It is a physical or structural interruption of normal breathing during sleep. "Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the throat muscles relax and block the airway. This happens off and on many times during sleep."

See https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/obstructive-sleep-apnea/symptoms-causes/syc-20352090.

The assertion that the Veteran's headaches, as the primary symptom of traumatic brain injury, interfere with his sleep or disturb his sleep does not equate to an assertion that his headaches worsen his obstructive sleep apnea. The cause-and-effect relationship with respect to sleep disturbance is reasonably obvious. Pain of any kind would be expected to interrupt sleep. However, it is not reasonably apparent how headaches would affect the throat or the airway or its musculature in such a way as to worsen obstructive sleep apnea. Therefore, the assertion of sleep disturbance due to headaches does not reasonably raise a claim of aggravation of obstructive sleep apnea by headaches. 

The June 2020 VA examiner provided a detailed explanation for why the Veteran's traumatic brain injury did not cause his obstructive sleep apnea. The Board finds that, while the rationale provided does not directly address aggravation, it can be reasonably extended to aggravation. According to the examiner, the Veteran did not have the type or degree of head injury that would result in brain damage "sufficient to effect the biochemical and neurophysiologic changes that might lead to a central or obstructive sleep apnea." If the type and degree of head injury is not sufficient to cause obstructive sleep apnea, it is unclear how it could worsen obstructive sleep apnea. 

Nevertheless, the central question is whether the evidence reasonably raised the claim such that additional development should have been undertaken. Although the medical evidence discussed above does not reasonably raise such a claim, the lay evidence must also be considered. 

The Veteran has described sleep impairment due to headaches. The DBQ completed by him described disturbed sleep-awakening with headaches a few time a week. However, this is not a description of the symptoms of sleep apnea. It is a description of headaches awakening him. It does not reasonably raise a claim of secondary aggravation of obstructive sleep apnea by headaches. 

Similarly, the other lay assertions of the Veteran and his spouse are descriptions of sleep impairment or disturbance, and they do not reasonably raise a claim that his traumatic brain injury or headaches worsened his obstructive sleep apnea. They describe headaches that cause the Veteran to awaken. 

The Veteran's spouse described nightmares as resulting from headaches. Symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea were not described. The June 8, 2022, statement discussed in the Joint Motion describes restlessness resulting from headaches which gives him trouble sleeping. These are obvious relationships which do not implicate a worsening of obstructive sleep apnea. Such a worsening is not otherwise apparent from the record. The Veteran's sleep apnea was described as mild by the February 2019 sleep study. Sleep impairment and obstructive sleep apnea are not synonymous. The lay assertions in this case describe sleep interruption and sleep impairment due to pain. They do not describe or reasonably suggest a worsening of obstructive sleep apnea by the traumatic brain injury. 

The Board finds that, in light of the nature of the condition diagnosed and the type and severity of head injury identified by the June 2020 VA examiner, the evidence does not reasonably raise a claim of secondary aggravation of obstructive sleep apnea by the Veteran's traumatic brain injury and/or headaches. 

Moreover, in light of the lack of any medical evidence suggestive of such a role of aggravation, the Board finds that the need for a medical opinion was not triggered under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see also Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (a conclusory generalized lay statement suggesting a nexus between a current disability and service would not suffice to meet the standard of subsection (B) of McLendon, as this would, contrary to the intent of Congress, result in medical examinations being "routinely and virtually automatically" provided to all veterans claiming service connection).

In sum, the Board finds that the medical and lay evidence do not reasonably raise a claim that the Veteran's service-connected traumatic brain injury and headaches worsened his obstructive sleep apnea. While the Veteran's traumatic brain injury and headaches cause sleep interruption and impairment, at the time of the decision on appeal, there was no reasonably raised allegation of secondary worsening of sleep apnea by a service-connected disability that would have necessitated further development. Accordingly there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

In light of the above findings of fact, the Board concludes that service connection for the claimed obstructive sleep apnea is not warranted. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 53.

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Cramp, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.