Citation Nr: A25031890
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-456486
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary hypertension is denied.

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) for pulmonary hypertension is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's pulmonary hypertension did not have its onset during military service or within one year following separation from service; and it was not caused by military service.

2. The Veteran does not have a radiogenic disease which would qualify for presumptive service connection due to radiation exposure, nor is he considered a radiation exposed Veteran.

3. The Veteran did not serve in an area which would qualify for presumptive service connection due to burn pits and other toxins.

4. The Veteran is not service-connected for the condition for which he asserts renders him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for pulmonary hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1119, 1120, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.309, 3.311.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) for pulmonary hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1967 through February 1971 in the United States Air Force.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The rating decision on appeal was a higher-level review of an earlier March 2024 decision that denied service connection for the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension.

In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement: VA Form 10182 with the June 2024 higher-level review decision. The Veteran selected the direct review docket. As the rating decision on review is a high-level review decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the VA Regional Office's March 2024 rating decision was issued. If evidence was submitted during the period after the March 2024 rating decision was issued, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges that the time frame in which a veteran may change dockets under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) appeal system has not elapsed. 38 C.F.R.          § 20.202(c)(2). In a January 2025 letter, the Veteran was notified of his right to switch dockets. However, in a February 2025 Correspondence, the Veteran explicitly waived the remaining time frame to switch dockets. See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024) (holding that since a claimant who selected the direct review docket on the Notice of Disagreement may opt to change dockets during the time frame presented in 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), the Board may not adjudicate a direct review appeal during that period).? 

Service Connection

Entitlement to service connection for pulmonary hypertension is denied.

Legal Criteria

VA provides compensation for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. This is referred to as "service connection." 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Direct Service Connection

Generally, in order to be entitled to direct service connection there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999). When these elements are satisfied, service connection may be granted on a direct basis.

Presumptive Service Connection - Ionizing Radiation Exposure

This appeal implicates additional legal theories of entitlement to service connection. First, the appeal implicates the theory associated with exposure to ionizing radiation while in service.

A Veteran may establish service connection for certain cancers due to exposure to ionizing radiation in two ways: (1) by the presumption of service connection for radiation-exposed Veterans under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112(c) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d) and (2) by meeting certain conditions specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.311 for Veterans with radiogenic diseases.

The first regulatory provision, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d), provides a presumption of service connection for radiation-exposed Veterans with certain listed disabilities. The regulation defines "radiation-exposed Veteran" as one who "participated in a radiation risk activity," 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d)(3)(i), and lists specific radiation-risk activities, 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d)(3)(ii). 

Under the second regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.311, the Veteran must first establish that he suffers from a "radiogenic disease" that manifested within a certain time period. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b)(2), (5). Once the Veteran has established a diagnosis of a radiogenic disease within the specified period and claims that the disease is related to radiation exposure while in service, VA must obtain a dose assessment and request exposure data from the Veteran's service branch. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b)(1), (2). The VA Regional Office is then required to refer the case to the Under Secretary for Benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b).

Nevertheless, if a condition is not recognized by the regulation as a "radiogenic disease," the claim must be referred to the Under Secretary for Benefits when a Veteran "has cited or submitted competent scientific or medical evidence that the claimed condition is a radiogenic disease." 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(b)(4); Parrish v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 391, 395 (2011). The Under Secretary for Benefits may request an advisory opinion from the Under Secretary for Health because consideration of the claim "relies heavily on medical and scientific findings and analysis." 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(c)(1). In each instance, the Under Secretary for Benefits shall consider the claim with reference to the factors specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(e). The Under Secretary for Benefits is not required to discuss each of the factors in subsection (e). Hilkert v. West, 12 Vet. App. 145, 149 (1999) (holding that failure to discuss every factor is by no means a failure to consider the factors). The final determination of the Under Secretary for Benefits is then sent to the requesting VA Regional Office, which considers the opinion as evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.311(f). 

Presumptive Service Connection - Burn Pit Toxin Exposure

This appeal also implicates, in passing, potential presumptive service connection of pulmonary hypertension due to exposure to burn pits and other toxins. 

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), exposure to burn pits and other toxins is presumed for "covered veterans," i.e., those who served in specific locations on or after specific dates. 38 U.S.C. § 1119. Any veteran who, on or after August 2, 1990, performed active military, naval, air, or space service while assigned to a duty station in and/or airspace above Bahrain; Iraq; Kuwait; Oman; Qatar; Saudi Arabia; Somalia; the United Arab Emirates; the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia; the Gulf of Aden; the Gulf of Oman; the Persian Gulf; the Arabian Sea; or the Red Sea will be presumed to have been exposed to burn pits and other toxins, as will any veteran who, on or after September 11, 2001, performed active military, naval, air, or space service while assigned to a duty station in and/or airspace above Afghanistan; Djibouti; Egypt; Jordan; Lebanon; Syria; Yemen; or Uzbekistan. 38 U.S.C. § 1119. Certain diseases will be presumed related to service for veterans with in-service toxic exposure, including burn pits and other toxins exposure. 38 U.S.C. § 1120.

Evidentiary Standards

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). It follows that when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The law requires the Board to address its reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the Veteran. Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128 (2000). The Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence within the period on appeal and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim.

Factual Background

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints or diagnoses for pulmonary hypertension in service.

In February 2020, the Veteran submitted a Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet. He asserts that he was exposed to constant microwave radiation at his duty station at Goose Air Force Base due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) within the communications center. The Veteran states that the electronic crypto gear was in the same room, a small and confined area, where he worked. Further, the Veteran asserts that he was deployed to Vietnam for approximately a month and a half, in 1968. During this deployment, the Veteran states that he was assisting in bomb damage assessment, where he asserts exposure to radiation occurred.

Attached to the February 2020 Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet, the Veteran submitted a Statement in Support of Claim where he details the microwave radiation exposure he experienced in service. Importantly, the Veteran states that the Radiation Risk Activity Worksheet deals with ionizing radiation, which he states does not apply to him.

During its substantial development of the Veteran's prior claim for prostate cancer due to radiation exposure, the VA Regional Office requested a radiation exposure memorandum from the Department of the Air Force. This was received by VA on January 26, 2021. In this memorandum, the Veteran's potential exposure is discussed in detail. To begin, the memorandum states that there is no external or internal occupational radiation exposure data for this Veteran. Further, the memorandum states, with respect to radiofrequency radiation, the consensus of scientific advisory bodies is that there are no long-term effects from low-level exposures to radiofrequency radiation.

A January 2021 VA treatment record reveals that the Veteran was diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension.

Also, during development of the Veteran's claim for service connection of his prostate cancer, the VA Regional Office requested an advisory opinion from the Under Secretary of Benefits. This opinion was received by VA on February 5, 2021. Within this opinion, VA found that the Veteran's occupational exposure to ionizing radiation, though not reported specifically, does not meet, or exceed an annual dose estimate of 5 rem, or a lifetime dose estimate of 10 rem. The opinion concluded that that, based on scientific evidence, there is no reasonable possibility that the Veteran's prostate cancer was the result of exposure to ionizing radiation during service.

The Veteran submitted a statement in March of 2021 asserting that his pulmonary hypertension is due to a protein S deficiency. He further states that this deficiency is rare and likely caused by low doses of radiation over time which caused mutations in his blood.

In June 2021, the Veteran attended a Compensation and Pension (C&P) examination. During this examination, the Veteran's diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension was confirmed. The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by military service. In reaching this opinion, the examiner rationalized that the Veteran's service records do not indicate a pulmonary or clotting issue while in service and his symptoms did not appeal until 2020, culminating in a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension in 2021. Further, the examiner rationalized that that the pulmonary hypertension related to mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which is likely related to the Veterans history of being a smoker. When completing the Respiratory Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, the examiner noted the Veteran's pulmonary history, which included a diagnosis of mild COPD 5-6 years prior, then the development of pulmonary emboli in 2020, which led to a diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension in 2021.

In February 2024 a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's records to provide a toxic exposure risk activity medical opinion. The examiner opined that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic risk exposure activity. In providing this opinion, the examiner rationalized that there was no medical evidence of a causal relationship between pulmonary hypertension and the toxin exposure reported. The examiner cited to an article from the Mayo Clinic to support her conclusion. 

Analysis

First, in regards to direct service connection, the evidence establishes that the Veteran has a medical diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension. His condition was first diagnosed around 2021. See January 2021 VA treatment records (received by VA on February 8, 2021). Further, the VA Regional Office made a favorable finding in the July 2021, March 2023, March 2024, and June 2024 rating decisions stating that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability. 

The evidence of record does not show, however, that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension had its onset during military service, or within one-year following separation from service. The service treatment records are silent for any complaints or diagnoses of pulmonary hypertension. Further, the Veteran does not contend that his condition manifested in service. Rather, the Veteran contends that the in-service incurrence is his exposure to radiation and, later, a contention that it is the result of his in-service exposure to burn pits and other toxins. As will be discussed in more detail below, the Board finds that the Veteran was not exposed to ionizing radiation or burn pits and other toxins in service. Thus, without an in-service incurrence or aggravation, direct service connection is not warranted.

In a VA toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum dated April 25, 2023, VA found that the Veteran did participate in a TERA and that his MOS indicates exposure to radiation. However, in a November 5, 2024, higher level review return on the Veteran's claim for service connection of another disability, VA found the April 25, 2023, TERA memorandum to be insufficient as it disregards the prior development and memorandums from VA in January and February of 2021. A new TERA memo was requested to determine whether the Veteran did in fact participate in a TERA and whether radiation exposure due to his MOS was possible, in light of the prior memorandums discussed above. A new TERA memorandum was issued on November 19, 2024, finding that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA.

Even if the Board were to assume that the April 2023 TERA memorandum was the most accurate reflection of the Veteran's exposure, satisfying the second element of an in-service event, the Veteran has not established a nexus between his pulmonary hypertension and his asserted radiation exposure.  First, he is not shown to have the training and credentials to determine the etiology of his pulmonary hypertension. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The medical evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension is caused by his asserted radiation exposure. The June 2021 VA examiner found that the Veteran's condition was likely related to mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD) connected to his history as a heavy smoker. Further, the February 2024 VA examiner likewise found that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension was less likely than not related to military service. This examiner's rationale was that there is no medical evidence of a causal relationship between the condition and toxin exposure, citing to a Mayo Clinic article.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309, the Veteran must first be considered a "radiation-exposed Veteran."  A radiation-exposed veteran is one who participated in a "radiation-risk activity."  

Specific activities are listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d)(3) which qualify as a "radiation-risk activity." The Veteran has neither alleged participation in any of the listed activities nor does the record reflect his participation in such activities.

Further, the statute requires that the Veteran have been diagnosed with a radiogenic disease as listed in 38 C.F.R. 3.309(d)(2). Pulmonary hypertension is not listed as a radiogenic disease for which presumptive service connection may be granted due to exposure to ionizing radiation.

Under 38 C.F.R. 3.311, since pulmonary hypertension is not a listed radiogenic disease, the VA Regional Office may request an advisory opinion from the Under Secretary for Benefits. However, since there is already an advisory opinion for this Veteran's exposure level on record, this is unnecessary. As is stated in the February 5, 2021, opinion, this Veteran's potential estimated exposure level would fall well below the minimum standard for both annual exposure and lifetime exposure levels.

While the Veteran may be sincere in his belief that he was exposed to ionizing radiation while in service, his belief is not factual evidence. His assertions are lay speculation on a matter that requires scientific expertise, informed by contemporaneous recordings of official information. He does not cite to supporting factual data which would allow the Board to factually establish exposure levels beyond that which was estimated by the advisory opinion issued in February 2021. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). In sum, the Board finds that there is no competent, credible, and probative evidence in the claims file that establishes that this Veteran was directly exposed to ionizing radiation during his military service at Goose Air Force Base.

Turning to the Veteran's contention that he was exposed to radiation during a mission to conduct bomb damage assessment in Vietnam, the Veteran's military records do not indicate that he was deployed to Vietnam during his service. The Veteran contends that this is not recorded in his records due to the short length of the time in Vietnam. However, the Veteran's military records shows that he served as a communications specialist in Canada and the Continental United States. The Veteran's Air Force Form 7 reflects foreign service in Canada from January 17, 1969, to April 17, 1970. Further, the Veteran's personnel records do not indicate any temporary duty assignments (TDY). Thus, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence of record weighs against a finding that the Veteran served in Vietnam.

Further, the Veteran's military records do not show the Veteran had service in a location with presumed burn pits and other toxins exposure. Rather, the Veteran served in Canada and the Continental United States. Thus, the Veteran is not a "covered Veteran" for whom burn pits and other toxins exposure is presumed pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1119. Further, in making this contention, the Veteran did not point to any credible or probative evidence that he was exposed to burn pits and other toxins outside of the presumptive locations. Thus, the Board finds that the evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran was exposed to burn pits and other toxins during military service, and presumptive service connection on this basis is not warranted.

In sum, there is no evidence of record that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension  condition had its onset during military service or was otherwise causally related to military service; the Veteran is not considered to have been a radiation-exposed Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); he has not submitted or cited competent scientific or medical evidence that his pulmonary hypertension is a radiogenic disease for consideration under 38 C.F.R. § 3.311; and the evidence of record does not establish the Veteran's service in a qualified area for exposure to burn pits presumption under 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Accordingly, service connection for pulmonary hypertension is not warranted.

Total Disability Rating

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

Legal Criteria

VA compensates Veterans for their service-connected disabilities through its rating schedule, which is designed to reflect the average impairment in earning capacity that a Veteran with a certain type of disability would experience. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019). VA recognizes, however, that there will be situations in which a Veteran is not 100 percent disabled as a result of service-connected disabilities but nonetheless is unemployable. Id. 

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability ratings to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id.

Further, it is the established policy VA that all Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful employment by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. In cases where a Veteran asserts that they are unemployable due to service-connected disabilities but fail to meet the percentage standards for schedular consideration, the claim shall be submitted to the Compensation Service Director for extra-schedular consideration. 38 C.F.R.     § 4.16(b). The standard for determining whether to refer a claim for extra-schedular consideration is whether there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities." Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019).

Factual Background

The Veteran seeks a TDIU rating for pulmonary hypertension. On March 29, 2021, the Veteran filed an Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability: VA Form 21-8940. See March 29, 2021, Correspondence. On the form, the Veteran lists pulmonary hypertension as the disability which prevents him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. The form notes that the Veteran's pulmonary hypertension began to affect his full-time employment in February 2020 and that he became too disabled to work in February 2021.

Analysis

The Veteran has the following disabilities that are service connected: prostate cancer (rated 40 percent, from August 10, 2022); tinnitus (rated 10 percent from September 1, 2020); bilateral hearing loss (rated 0 percent, from September 1, 2020); erectile dysfunction associated with prostate cancer (rated 0 percent from August 10, 2022); and prostatectomy scars (rated 0 percent from August 10, 2022).

Based on the forgoing, the Veteran does not qualify for schedular consideration of TDIU. The Veteran has at least one of his service-connected disabilities rated at 40 percent or more; however, the Veteran does not have sufficient other disability ratings to reach a combined rating of 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Further, the Board finds that a referral to the Director of Compensation Service is not warranted in this case. As described in Ray v. Wilkie, the correct standard for referral is whether there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities." 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019).

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that there is not sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, and therefore referral of the claim is not warranted.

The Veteran's application for TDIU specifies that he is unemployable due to his pulmonary hypertension. Since the Board has denied service-connection for pulmonary hypertension, a TDIU cannot be considered based on this condition. The Veteran has not asserted that any of his service-connected disabilities impact his ability to maintain gainful occupation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Given the forgoing, there is not sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities. Accordingly, referral of the claim for extra-schedular consideration for  TDIU is not warranted. Moreover, as the service-connected disabilities do not render the Veteran unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment, a TDIU is likewise not warranted.

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Crain, N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.