Citation Nr: A25031268
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-440562
DATE:   April 4, 2025

ORDER

The appeal of the issue of entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is dismissed. 

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is granted.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as anxiety, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for residuals of mononucleosis, to include fatigue, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a neck condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time the Veteran filed his May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, a prior higher-level review request as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD was pending final adjudication.

2. In an October 2024 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted entitlement to service connection for GERD, which further renders the issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD moot.

3. The Veteran's migraine headaches are related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500 (b), 20.104; Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1977).

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for migraine headache have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2009 to July 2009, with additional service in the Army National Guard.

In a September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for GERD.  In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2023 decision.  In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, anxiety, residuals of mononucleosis, a low back condition, and a neck condition.  The Veteran appealed this rating decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182.

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 7105, the Board may dismiss any appeal that fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500, within a year from the date of issuance of a decision a claimant may elect one of three review options: a request for higher-level review; a Board appeal; or a supplemental claim.  Where the claimant has elected one of those review options, they may not, while that review is pending final adjudication, file for review under a different available option.  Id. at 3.2500(b).

Here, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for GERD was denied in a September 2023 rating decision.  In March 2024, the Veteran requested review of this decision by filing a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request:  Higher-Level Review (HLR).  While final adjudication of this requested review was pending, the Veteran included the issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD in his May 2024 VA Form 10182.  Such concurrent election of review options is prohibited.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (b).

Moreover, in an October 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for GERD.  In light of the October 2024 rating decision, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for GERD is no longer before the Board as his claim was granted in full.  See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1977) (noting that a grant of service connection extinguishes appeals before the Board).

Thus, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal, and it is dismissed.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, which he asserts started in service.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

A. Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). 

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F. 3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (table); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  This benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is nearly equal but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

B. Facts and Analysis 

Here, the Veteran has been diagnosed with migraine headaches.  See August 2023 VA Examination Report.  As such, the Board finds the current disability element is established.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167. 

Service treatment records show that the Veteran reported headaches on numerous occasions.  Moreover, the Veteran reported that he first started getting headaches in service that continued to the present day.  The Veteran is competent to describe symptoms that he experienced in service or at any time after service when the symptoms he perceived, that is, experienced, were directly through the senses.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience; lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994).  Accordingly, the second Shedden element has also been satisfied.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167.

The question then becomes whether a nexus, or relationship, between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service symptoms has been shown.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023.  He reported headaches starting in basic training.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches and opined that they were at least as likely as not related to service based on the Veteran's in-service complaints, as well as medical literature.  There are no contrary opinions of record.

In an August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for headaches.  A January 2024 report of general information shows that the August 2023 rating decision was never promulgated.  A February 2024 report of general information shows that "[a]n award letter was never sent."  A March 2024 report of general information indicates that the AOJ should "take action" to send an award letter showing the grant of entitlement to service connection for headaches.  

Inexplicably, in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches.  The AOJ indicated that service treatment records did not show treatment for headaches and that the August 2023 VA examiner rendered a positive opinion.  

Here, the August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches were related to service.  There are no probative contrary opinions of record, nor is there sufficient basis for the Board to reject this supportive opinion and to further develop the claim.  Cf. Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (holding that, because it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against an appellant's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases for its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).

In the present case, the evidence shows that the Veteran currently has migraine headaches, that his symptoms of headaches began during service, and that his current headaches are related to his in-service complaints.  For these reasons, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for service connection for migraine headaches, as directly incurred in service, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for an anxiety condition.  He asserts that he has "had pretty bad [a]nxiety" since leaving service.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

Pursuant to  McLendon  v. Nicholson, a VA examination must be provided when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing an event, injury or disease occurred in-service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or current symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination regarding these issues.  As the McLendon elements necessitating an examination were met prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds a duty to assist error occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision and a remand is warranted to correct this deficiency.  McLendon, supra.

4. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of mononucleosis, to include fatigue.

The Veteran seeks service connection for residuals of mononucleosis.  He asserts that he has been "extremely fatigued" since an in-service mononucleosis infection.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

Service treatment records show that the Veteran was diagnosed with infectious mononucleosis in March 2009.  

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination regarding these issues.  As the McLendon elements necessitating an examination were met prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds a duty to assist error occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision and a remand is warranted to correct this deficiency.  McLendon, supra.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition.

See discussion at section 6 below.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a neck condition.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a low back and neck condition.  He asserts that his low back and neck conditions are due to carrying excessive weight and ruck marching.  

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination regarding these issues.  As the McLendon elements necessitating an examination were met prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds a duty to assist error occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision and a remand is warranted to correct this deficiency.  McLendon, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature, onset, and likely etiology of any and all acquired psychiatric disorders diagnosed proximate to the period on appeal.  If the claims file is not available for review by the selected examiner, all relevant records and a copy of this remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner, and the examiner shall indicate in the addendum report that the relevant evidence was reviewed.  This evidence includes:

- Service treatment records

- VA treatment records

- The Veteran's lay statements

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should provide opinions as to EACH of the following:

(a.) Provide diagnoses for any acquired psychiatric disorders found to be present during the pendency of this appeal. 

(b.) With respect to each acquired psychiatric disorder found to be present and/or diagnosed proximate to or during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disorder had onset in, was caused by, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service.  Please explain why or why not.

The examiner's report must reflect consideration of the Veteran's entire documented medical history and assertions and all lay evidence.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.  The examiner must provide a thorough rationale for each opinion given.

2. Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature, onset, and likely etiology of any and all mononucleosis residuals diagnosed proximate to the period on appeal.  If the claims file is not available for review by the selected examiner, all relevant records and a copy of this remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner, and the examiner shall indicate in the addendum report that the relevant evidence was reviewed.  This evidence includes:

- Service treatment records

- VA treatment records

- The Veteran's lay statements

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should identify any current residuals from the Veteran's in-service mononucleosis infection, to include fatigue.  

If the examiner determines that a current symptom is not a residual of mononucleosis, the examiner should fully explain that finding.

The examiner's report must reflect consideration of the Veteran's entire documented medical history and assertions and all lay evidence.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.  The examiner must provide a thorough rationale for each opinion given.

3. Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature, onset, and likely etiology of any and all low back conditions diagnosed proximate to the period on appeal.  If the claims file is not available for review by the selected examiner, all relevant records and a copy of this remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner, and the examiner shall indicate in the addendum report that the relevant evidence was reviewed.  This evidence includes:

- Service treatment records

- VA treatment records

- The Veteran's lay statements

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should provide opinions as to EACH of the following:

(a.) Provide diagnoses for any low back conditions found to be present during the pendency of this appeal. 

(b.) With respect to each low back condition found to be present and/or diagnosed proximate to or during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disorder had onset in, was caused by, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service, to include carrying excessive weight and ruck marching.  Please explain why or why not.

The examiner's report must reflect consideration of the Veteran's entire documented medical history and assertions and all lay evidence.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.  The examiner must provide a thorough rationale for each opinion given.

4. Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature, onset, and likely etiology of any and all cervical spine (neck) conditions diagnosed proximate to the period on appeal.  If the claims file is not available for review by the selected examiner, all relevant records and a copy of this remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner, and the examiner shall indicate in the addendum report that the relevant evidence was reviewed.  This evidence includes:

- Service treatment records

- VA treatment records

- The Veteran's lay statements

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should provide opinions as to EACH of the following:

(a.) Provide diagnoses for any neck conditions found to be present during the pendency of this appeal. 

(b.) With respect to each neck condition found to be present and/or diagnosed proximate to or during the pendency of the appeal, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the condition had onset in, was caused by, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service, to include carrying excessive weight and ruck marching.  Please explain why or why not.

The examiner's report must reflect consideration of the Veteran's entire documented medical history and assertions and all lay evidence.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.  The examiner must provide a thorough rationale for each opinion given.

5. Following the completion of the foregoing the AOJ should readjudicate the Veteran's claim.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kipper, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.