Citation Nr: A25031160
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 241226-506339
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), including as secondary to his service-connected other specified trauma and stressor disorder, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the evidence is in at least approximate balance that the Veteran's current OSA is related to his in-service severe snoring and sleep issues, as well as his service-connected psychiatric disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for OSA, including as secondary to the Veteran's psychiatric disability, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the U.S. Navy from August 1969 to April 1973.

A March 26, 2014 rating decision denied service connection for OSA, under the Legacy appeals system. The Veteran filed a valid Notice of Disagreement on April 3, 2014. A September 18, 2018 Statement of the Case (SOC) again denied service connection for OSA. The Veteran filed a valid VA Form 9 on October 19, 2018 to appeal the claim to the Board and received a BVA hearing on October 4, 2021. A July 8, 2022 BVA decision remanded the OSA claim to secure additional VA medical opinions, and therefore remedy the related duty-to-assist errors. After attempting to remedy those errors, an August 29, 2023 SSOC again denied service connection for OSA. The Veteran received an updated SSOC on October 2, 2023 which contemplated the Agency of Original Jurisdiction's (AOJ) finding that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during his service-which again denied service connection for OSA.

As part of the legacy appeals system, the appeal stream automatically returned to the Board, and on March 27, 2024, the Board again remanded the OSA claim to secure addendum VA medical opinions. After attempting to remedy those duty-to-assist errors, a November 19, 2024 Supplemental Statement of the Case (SSOC) again denied service connection for OSA.

The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board by requesting the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review Lane for a reevaluation of the evidence considered by the AOJ. See December 2024 VA Form 10182. This action by the Veteran properly converted the Veteran's claim from the Legacy appeals system to the AMA appeals system. As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed on the date of the rating decision on appeal-here, the November 19, 2024 SSOC. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the respective AOJ decision. See id. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.

Service Connection, Including Secondary Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and; (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection is also warranted for disability that is "but-for" due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury, and where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but-for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364-66 (2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held a "but-for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) a current disability; (2) a primary, service-connected disability; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the service-connected disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1988).

Compensation may be established for any incremental increase in disability or any additional impairment of earning capacity in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected disabilities above the degree of disability existing before the increase regardless of its permanence. See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019). There is no requirement for objective measurement or numeric quantification for VA to ascertain an increase in disability for compensation purposes. See id. Compensation may also be established for "the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability." See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). It follows, that when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is granted.

The Veteran contends that although he believed his "trouble going to and staying asleep" was related to his service-connected psychiatric disability, his current OSA is related to his service aboard the submarine the USS Billifish. See September 2012 VA Form 21-4138. Veteran's counsel also expressed general support for the Veteran's claim and arguments. See February 2024 Appellate Brief; March 2025 Appellate Brief.

The Board finds that the Veteran has the primary, service-connected psychiatric disability of "other specified trauma and stressor related disorder." See, e.g., March 2024 Rating Codesheet.

The Board next considers whether the evidence of record establishes that the Veteran has a current disability diagnosis of OSA.

In April 2011, the Veteran secured a sleep study which reported the Veteran experienced "19 obstructive apneas, 0 central apneas, 0 mixed apneas, and 152 hypopneas resulting in an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 24.8 events/hr" that night, and used these findings to formally diagnose the Veteran with OSA. See April 6, 2011 Private Treatment Record. The treating physician also noted that the Veteran experienced "moderate respiratory events" during sleep, and observed "moderate snoring." See id.

During his July 2023 VA Sleep Apnea Examination, the Veteran reported that him experiencing "excessive sleepiness" led to him securing his April 2011 sleep study. The July 2023 VA examiner appeared to accept the 2011 private sleep study and its diagnosis of OSA as valid, and concluded there were no significant diagnostic test findings nor results within other than the Veteran's OSA diagnosis.

The Veteran's VA treatment records also reflect the Veteran had a history of OSA as early as May 2014, and his care has continued to the present. See, e.g., May 6, 2014 CAPRI; November 23, 2015 CAPRI; April 14, 2022 CAPRI; March 7, 2023 CAPRI.

Considering the above, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence of record establishes that the Veteran has a current disability diagnosis of OSA.

The Board now considers whether the Veteran experienced a qualifying incurrent of OSA during service.

In his July 1969 entrance examination, the Veteran reported he experienced no "frequent trouble sleeping." See July 29, 1969 STR. See also September 2, 1969 STR (re-examining Veteran's physical health for Nuclear Field Training). As no clear and unmistakable evidence shows the Veteran's sleep issues pre-exist service, the presumption of soundness attaches in this case. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). The Veteran's separation examination of record appears incomplete, as it does not contain the same option to indicate whether a servicemember experiences frequent trouble sleeping or not. See March 26, 1973 STR. Otherwise, the Veteran's STR's are silent as to his claimed sleep issues during service, except for a January 1970 note that he "can't get to sleep" and has "several problems he worries about." See January 19, 1970 STR.

Two of the Veteran's crewmates from aboard the USS Billifish submitted lay testimony to support the Veteran's OSA claim. One recalled that he and the Veteran "were in the same duty section, in port and out at sea" from 1971 to 1973, and that "trying to get any sleep at the same time [as the Veteran] was nearly impossible because he snored so loudly." See October 12, 2021 BH Buddy Statement ("Everyone in the forward berthing compartment complained about his snoring. We were shuffled around to other bunks farther away but it did no good. . . . And it didn't matter when you tried to sleep, if he was in his bunk you wouldn't get any sleep yourself."). That crewmate also reported sleeping on the mess decks rather than the berthing compartments to avoid the Veteran's snoring and "get better sleep there." See id. Another crewmate who bunked below the Veteran aboard the Billifish attested the Veteran's snoring was so severe "I remember wondering if he was alright." See October 13, 2021 BF Lay Statement ("With the racket he made I remember not getting a lot of sleep. One word comes to mind. Legendary."). The Board finds the Veteran's credible and competent to describe their recollection of the Veteran snoring during service, and that it reflects the Veteran's own lay testimony about his sleep issues. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (non-expert witnesses are competent to report that which they have observed with their own senses); September 2012 VA Form 21-4138 ("I have always had trouble going to and staying asleep.").

Considering the probative evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence supports the Veteran incurring his history of severe snoring and interrupted sleep during service.

The Board next considers whether a medical nexus can be established with the evidence of record between the Veteran's in-service severe snoring and interrupted sleep and his current OSA disability.

In lay testimony received by VA in September 2012, the Veteran attested that he has long "had trouble going to and staying asleep" and originally attributed this to his service-connected psychiatric disability, but that after he underwent a sleep study in May 2011 he traced his symptoms to "when onboard my sub as we only slept for 2-3 hours at a time and never knew if it was day [or] night." See September 2012 VA Form 21-4138. Although laypeople are considered competent to report what they have observed with their own senses to VA, they cannot provide medical nexus evidence without training or education in a pertinent medical field. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 470; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307-08 (2007). Because the evidence of record does not indicate the Veteran has medical training or education related to OSA or other sleep disorder diagnoses, the Board can only assign probative value to this lay testimony to establish continuity of symptomology since his service.

In a July 2023 VA medical opinion; the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA is not related to service because the Veteran's first recorded OSA symptomology "was not reported till 2011" at the time of his formal diagnosis, "38 years after separation, with no evidence of OSA in those intervening years." The Board finds this opinion has minimal probative value because it improperly bases its negative rationale on the apparent lack of STR evidence. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (holding an examiner cannot rely on the absence of evidence in the service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).

In a September 2023 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA was less likely than not related to his toxic risk exposure activities (TERA) during service because "there is no substantial medical literature to support that any toxic exposure can lead to OSA," with factors associated with OSA instead characterized by an anatomically restricted airway, respiratory diagnosis, or cardiac diagnosis. The Board finds this opinion probative to a nexus between the Veteran's in-service TERA and his OSA, reduced because a subsequent TERA opinion and two memorandums deemed the Veteran's chemical exposures sufficient to qualify as a TERA. See November 2024 VA TERA Memorandum; September 2023 VA TERA Memorandum; May 2024 VA Medical Opinion.

In a May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA was less likely than not related to his service because the evidence of record did not demonstrate chronicity of symptomology-showing "no record of chronic or recurrent sleep problems beginning in the service" nor any "sleep troubles noted in the STR's or immediate post-separation period." The Board finds this opinion highly probative to the medical nexus at issue, but construes it as positive, as the evidence of record clearly records such chronic or recurrent sleep problems beginning during the Veteran's service aboard the Billifish. See, e.g., October 12, 2021 BH Buddy Statement; October 13, 2021 BF Lay Statement; September 2012 VA Form 21-4138. See also January 19, 1970 STR.

In another May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA was less likely than not related to his in-service TERA's because they deemed "exposure to toxins" not qualifying for a TERA designation, and stated the Veteran's current diagnosis "does not meet criteria for [a] DSM-V sleep disorder." The Board finds this opinion probative to a nexus between in-service TERA and the Veteran's OSA, reduced because a subsequent TERA opinion and two memorandums deemed the Veteran's chemical exposures sufficient to qualify as a TERA. See November 2024 VA TERA Memorandum; September 2023 VA TERA Memorandum; May 2024 VA Medical Opinion. 

In a third May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA was at least as likely as not related to his service-connected psychiatric disability because "it is in my medical opinion that the original trouble sleeping he reported in the service due to worry in 1970 is secondary to his other stressor and trauma related disorder" and his sleep-related symptoms "are consistent with symptoms of trauma disorder." The Board finds this opinion probative to the nexus between the Veteran's psychiatric and OSA disabilities.

In a fourth May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA was less likely than not related to his psychiatric disability because only "central apnea" would be related to a central nervous system issue such as PTSD, and the Veteran's factors of obesity, "an extensive smoking history," and "advanced age" are more likely the cause of his OSA. The Board affords this opinion minimal probative weight because it uses the incorrect secondary service causation standard for its opinion, and does not consider obesity as an intermediate step between the psychiatric and respiratory disabilities. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020) (holding that obesity, as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection, can be established on either a causal or aggravation basis); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1364-66.

In a fifth May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA "was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression" by the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability because only "central apnea" would be related to a central nervous system issue such as PTSD, the Veteran's factors of obesity, "an extensive smoking history," and "advanced age" are more likely the cause of his OSA, and because no "evidence [of] aggravation has ever been objectively verified." The Board affords this opinion minimal probative weight because it uses the incorrect causation standard for aggravation under secondary service connection, and because it does not consider obesity as an intermediate step between the psychiatric and respiratory disabilities. See Walsh, 32 Vet. App. 300; Spicer, 61 F.4th 1364-66.

In another May 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not related to his in-service TERA of exposure to "industrial solvents, lead, and fuels associated with the Veteran's MOS as Maintenance Mechanic," as the "risk factors outside of the military service" of obesity, smoking, and age "far outweigh" the Veteran's identified exposures. The Board finds this opinion probative to a nexus between the Veteran's in-service TERA and his OSA.

In a November 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current OSA is less likely than not related to his TERA of exposure to diesel fumes, asbestos, benzene, chlorine, ammonia, hydrogen sulfide, paints, welding, lead, and solvents related to his MOS as a mechanic because "the claimant's sleep issues have been deemed as sleep apnea, which is beyond the scope of this psychologist; however his other sleep symptoms from nightmares and hypervigilance stems from" the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability, and "there is no evidenced (sic)" based on "https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/." The examiner also found the Veteran's own and buddy lay testimony on his in-service OSA symptoms irrelevant because such descriptions of snoring are "not related to TERA." The Board finds this opinion has minimal probative to a nexus between the Veteran's in-service TERA and his OSA per the examiner's own admission within, but appears to have some positive, probative value supporting a nexus between the Veteran's psychiatric and OSA disability.

In another November 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined the Veteran's current OSA is less likely related to his in-service TERA because his OSA is more likely related to his current obesity, and the Veteran's chemical exposures related to his MOS are not known to cause "apnea that persists decades after the exposure ceases." The Board finds this opinion probative to the medical nexus between the Veteran's TERA and his OSA, reduced because the examiner does not consider obesity as an intermediate step leading to disability. See Walsh, 32 Vet. App. 300.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Giving the benefit of the doubt to the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's OSA is related to his in-service severe snoring and sleep issues, as well as his service-connected psychiatric disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Therefore, entitlement to service connection for OSA, including as secondary to his psychiatric disability, is granted.

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Galik, E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.