Citation Nr: A25031929
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-430418
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps on active duty from April 1973 to December 1973.

The issue comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the remanded claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric condition, to include alcohol use disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran generally contends that he suffers from a mental health condition related to his active service.

VA must consider all theories of entitlement either expressly raised by the claimant or which are reasonably raised by the record.  See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  VA's duty to assist applies to the entire claim, which includes assistance in developing more than one theory in support of that claim.  See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).  Further, based on a sympathetic assessment of the veteran's claim, the Board may recharacterize an issue on appeal, or expand or restrict the scope of a particular claim to ensure the veteran is compensated for the full benefit sought.  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 53 (2011); see Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

In the present case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's current claim for depression and anxiety.  During the Veteran's November 2023 VA mental health conditions examination, the Veteran reported previous symptoms of depression.  The Veteran reported going through a lot of stress during active service and noted that he was a totally different person when he ended his military service.  Additionally, the Veteran reported that his alcohol use consisted of drinking a six-pack on each Friday and Saturday every week.  The Veteran's November 2023 VA examination provided the Veteran a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder.  Notably, the Veteran's claims file is absent of a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's acquired alcohol use disorder as it relates to the Veteran's reported in-service symptoms or traumatic stressor events.  

The Board recharacterizes the Veteran's claim as entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric condition, to include alcohol use disorder.  See Clemons, 23 Vet. App. at 5-6; see also Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009).

VA has a duty to provide the Veteran a thorough medical examination, one which considers the Veteran's prior medical history and describes the disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability is fully informed.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

As the RO did not address the Veteran's theory of entitlement involving the Veteran's diagnosis of unspecified alcohol use disorder, remand is required to correct VA's pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and provide an adequate medical opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed psychiatric condition.  See Clemons, 23 Vet. App. at 5-6; see also Barr, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a psychiatric examination with an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder.  The claims file should be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.  A copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner.

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to include diagnosed alcohol use disorder, had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  Conclusions offered must not be based solely on the lack of records.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. V. Bona

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.