Citation Nr: A25031376
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 231030-390449
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

A disability rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol use disorder, moderate, (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected PTSD does not more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities, including PTSD, do not render him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 4.15, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant is a Veteran who served in the Army National Guard of California from January 2007 to February 2011 with periods of active-duty service in the United States Army from August 2007 to November 2007 and December 2008 to January 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, inter alia, the RO denied an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD and deferred entitlement to TDIU for a medical opinion.   

The Veteran appealed to the Board with an October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement); the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

A request for a TDIU (whether expressly raised or implied by the record) is not a separate claim for benefits.  Rather, it is an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating, either as part of the initial adjudication of a claim or as part of a claim for an increased rating.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).  Once the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is raised, it is "part of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability." Id. Once entitlement to a TDIU is at issue as part of a claim for an increased rating, a claimant need not appeal a denial by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) for the issue to remain in appellate status.  Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373 (2019); Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356 (2018).  Thus, when the AOJ fails to grant the benefit in full (i.e., entitlement to a TDIU for the entire period on appeal), that portion of the claim that remains unresolved is still on appeal.  As the RO denied entitlement to TDIU in an October 2024 rating decision (following the current decision on appeal), the issue of TDIU remains on appeal as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for PTSD.

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD. 

The Veteran seeks a rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD.  The appeal period begins on October 19, 2022, the date of receipt of the claim, and the Board will also consider the one-year look back period.  38 C.F.R.§ 3.400(o)(2).

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411, the General Rating Formula for Rating Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  

Under the General Rating Formula, a noncompensable rating is warranted where a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.  Id.

A 10 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  Id.

A 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation, due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbance of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

To the extent that the medical evidence reflects diagnoses of other psychiatric disorders, where it is not possible to distinguish the effects of nonservice-connected conditions from those of a service-connected condition, the reasonable doubt doctrine dictates that all symptoms be attributed to the Veteran's service-connected disability.  See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptomatology contemplated for each rating.  The use of such terminology permits consideration of items listed as well as other symptoms and contemplates the effect of those symptoms on the Veteran's social and work situation.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

In other words, in applying the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The analysis must include a determination as to whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD.

The Veteran underwent VA examinations in-person in February 2022 and February 2023, with an additional examination via telehealth in September 2023.  During the February 2022 examination, the Veteran was noted to be pleasant and cooperative; speech was normal in rate and tone; mood was mildly dysphoric with restricted affect; thought processes were logical and goal directed; judgment and insight were fair; and he denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  In February 2023, the Veteran was noted to be cooperative; oriented to person, place, and time; hygiene and eye contact were fair; thought content was appropriate; no evidence of delusional thinking; reality appeared intact; mood appeared depressed.  Both examiners noted the Veteran did not appear to be responding to internal stimuli, that the Veteran denied suicidal intent or plan, and that the Veteran's suicide risk level was not at elevated acute risk.

Both the February 2022 and the February 2023 examiners noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once per week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, impaired impulse control, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  The February 2023 examiner additionally noted suicidal ideation and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  Both examiners concluded that these symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The September 2023 examiner noted diagnoses of PTSD and alcohol use disorder that was in full remission, as the Veteran last had a drink in July 2023.  The Veteran reported forgetting things, losing track of days, having flashbacks and missing an exit while driving, feeling threatened by people when in a crowded room, being scared by loud noises, and being irritable.  He slept 3-4 hours per night.  He reported that in January 2023, he heard his daughter was hit at daycare and he was so upset about it that he thought about running his car into incoming traffic, but that he changed his mind.  He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  There were no abnormalities noted on behavioral observation.

The examiner noted symptoms included of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, disturbances in motivation and mood, and neglect of personal hygiene.  The examiner concluded that the symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.

VA treatment records show the Veteran re-established care for his mental health with the VA in February 2023 due to poor sleep, mood, and anxiety.  At that time, he disclosed a suicide attempt in January 2023 where he crashed his car into a ditch after an incident with his daughter in daycare.  He denied suicidal or homicidal ideations at the time of the visit.  

In March 2023, the Veteran reported nightmares, intrusive thoughts, and feeling depressed most days.  He noted being a wildland firefighter seasonally from 2020-2022 before he quit his job over people problems at work where he would perceive that others were slacking, and he would "chew them out."  In April 2023, the Veteran said that he enjoyed his job as a Wildland Firefighter, but that he felt like he needed to be around more for his family. 

Treatment records in April 2023 revealed depression scale on the PHQ-9 scale of 13, indicative of moderate depression.  On behavioral observation, the Veteran had appropriate attire, eye contact, and thought processes; speech was spontaneous; he was oriented in al spheres; attention/concentration was within normal limits; memory was unimpaired; insight was adequate; judgment was intact; and suicidal and homicidal ideation were denied.

Regarding occupational impairment, an addendum opinion was provided in April 2023.  The Veteran has stated that he worked a seasonal job in the forest service in 2022 and was fired.  He reported issues at work including arguments, irritability, and decreased concentration.  In September 2023, the Veteran stated that he was unemployed since the year prior and that he was a firefighter but resigned due to issues at work.  It is unclear whether the Veteran was fired from his job, or if he left his position to care for his children.

Regarding social impairment, he originally reported being married for two years but having a rocky relationship due to his financial issues and his mental health.  He stated he has lived separately from his wife and was co-parenting their two children, with whom he has a good relationship.  He was taking care of his children full-time.  He denied participating in social organizations, hobbies, or interests, and that he socialized infrequently with friends.  He has reported being closed off with his family and not sharing much about his private life.  He noted seeing a spiritual leader in his church.  

Given the above, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD does not more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment.  There is no evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; persistent danger of hurting self or others; grossly inappropriate behavior; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Finally, the Veteran has conducted himself appropriately at all VA encounters of record, with no defects to grooming, orientation, thought processes, insight, or judgment noted by the February 2022, February 2023, and September 2023 psychiatric examiners.  He maintains a relationship with his girlfriend and with his children. This is all consistent with his social and occupational functioning not equating to total.

Given the above, the evidence persuasively suggests that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms from his service-connected PTSD, taken together, do not more nearly approximate total occupational impairment; rather, his symptoms, both listed and unlisted, are consistent with the 70 percent rating criteria and below.  Accordingly, a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for the service-connected PTSD is not warranted, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

2. Entitlement to TDIU

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned when a veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component simply means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id.; see Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993) (the ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he can find employment). Factors such as age or impairment by non-service-connected disabilities are not to be considered. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19. 

A total rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when it is found that a Veteran is unable to obtain or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities and has a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or two or more service-connected disabilities when one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability or disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

This TDIU was raised as part and parcel of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for PTSD, so the period on appeal for a TDIU also goes back to October 19, 2022.

For this entire period on appeal, the Veteran has been in receipt of service connection for PTSD, rated as 70 percent disabling; migraine, rated as 30 percent disabling; tinnitus, rated as 10 percent disabling; left eye orbital blowout fracture, rated as 10 percent disabling; and bilateral hearing loss, rated as 0 percent disabling.  The Veteran had an overall combined rating of 80 percent for this period.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the criteria for schedular consideration of a TDIU.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The Board finds that the competent evidence of record does not establish that a TDIU is warranted.

Regarding educational background, the Veteran reported on his VA Form 21-8940 that he completed high school and had no other education or training before he became too disabled to work.  However, an April 2023 intake form for VA's compensated work therapy (CWT) - a vocational rehabilitation program helping work-ready Veteran's with mental health conditions find and keep competitive jobs - shows the Veteran reported a bachelor's degree in social work.

Regarding occupational history, the Veteran reported on his VA Form 21-8940 that he last worked as a Wildland Firefighter with the United States Forest Service in 2021 and became too disabled to work in November 2019.  

A February 2023 treatment record confirms that his work as a firefighter was seasonal and, in the off-season, he feels on-edge, depressed, and anxious due to financial concerns. He expressed interest in seeking employment that would work with his schedule as a single father.

In March 2023 VA treatment notes, the Veteran reported that he was a wildland firefighter seasonally from 2020 to 2022.  He stated that he quit his job because he would "chew out" people he perceived were slacking on the job, even though he was not a supervisor.  At that time, he said he had applied for and interviewed for several jobs, and that he was looking for work and was referred for CWT.  He reported he spent his days taking care of his children, housekeeping, and driving back and forth to drop off and pick up his children and wife.  

In April 2023 treatment records, the Veteran reported he enjoyed his job as a wildland firefighter, but he felt like he needed to be around more for his family.  He stated he worked at the job from 2018 to 2022.  The Veteran additionally reported that he has always had issues with authority, which made it difficult for him to hold on to a job because he "bump[s] heads with management" and he was "quick to snap" at his coworkers.  The Veteran began CWT in April 2023.  In May 2023, he stated that he planned to go back to fighting forest fires, as he missed the comradery.

In conjunction with a caregiver assessment in August 2023, the Veteran reported that he was able to care for his young children (2, 5, and 10 years old at the time), but that he struggled with episodic poor mood and migraines which affected his ability to engage with them.  The application for caregiver support services was denied, noting that the Veteran did not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on an inability to perform an activity of daily living and/or a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.

With the CWT program, the Veteran was working with engineer services grounds crew at a VA hospital beginning approximately in July 2023.  However, the Veteran was discharged from the CWT program in September 2023 because he admitted to forging his supervisor's signature on several of his timecards.

With respect to the Veteran's PTSD, the February 2022 and February 2023 VA examiners indicated that the Veteran has several PTSD symptoms to include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once per week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, impaired impulse control, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  The February 2023 examiner additionally noted suicidal ideation and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  Both examiners concluded that these symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The September 2023 VA examiner noted symptoms included of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, disturbances in motivation and mood, and neglect of personal hygiene.  The examiner concluded that the symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  

With respect to the left eye orbital blowout, the evidence of record does not indicate the Veteran experienced functional impairment related to his left eye orbital blowout fracture, besides the migraines he related to the blowout.

With respect to the Veteran's migraines, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2021.  The Veteran reported that his "ordinary" migraines occurred once per week and lasted approximately two days, but that he could usually "push through" and continue his regular schedule.  He stated that he gets a "bad" migraine one to two times per month where he needs to isolate in a dark room for about 3 days.  The Veteran reported being a single parent and last being employed in 2008 in an engineering department.  He noted losing 2-4 weeks of work in the last 12 months.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine, but that he did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches impacted his ability to work in that he cannot work during a migraine when it escalates.  VA treatment records do not reveal any complaints of migraines or headaches prior to April 2023 when the Veteran requested to be seen for migraines.  He stated that he noticed headaches since 2009 that had gotten worse in the last year and a half, and that over-the-counter medications did not help the pain.  

With respect to the Veteran's tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in April 2022, and September 2023. In April 2022, the Veteran reported it was difficult to understand what other people were saying to him.  He was diagnosed with tinnitus and sensorineural hearing loss in the frequency range of 500-4000Hz and in the frequency range of 6000 Hz or higher in both the left and right ear.  He additionally reported recurrent tinnitus in both ears, and the functional impact was that it made it difficult for him to sleep.  At his September 2023 examination, he reported that he had constant ringing in both ears, presenting him challenges engaging in conversations and also resulting in headaches.  He said the ringing in his ears made it hard to sleep.  The Veteran reported that it was hard to understand what others say to him due to his hearing difficulties, and that he had problems listening in multiple situations where there is noise.  His diagnoses tinnitus and of sensorineural hearing loss in the frequency range of 500-4000Hz in both the left and the right ear were continued.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus do not impact ordinary conditions of his daily life, including his ability to work.  The evidence of record reveals no other complaints of hearing loss or tinnitus or evidence of functional impairment on employment.

Review of the evidence shows the Veteran's mental functioning is impaired by his PTSD. There are more serious symptoms that would typically be expected to impair his ability to secure and maintain employment such as impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, impaired impulse control, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. However, the Veteran's occupational history demonstrates that during periods where these symptoms were present, he was still able to maintain his job as a seasonal firefighter. By his own account, he left that job because it conflicted with family-life, and he wishes to return as he misses the camaraderie.

The Veteran's physical impairments stem from hearing loss, tinnitus, and migraines. Similar to the impact of his mental impairments, the functional impact of these conditions does not preclude the Veteran from maintaining employment consistent with his occupational history as a seasonal firefighter, and he did maintain such employment while affected by these conditions.

The competent evidence of record does not establish that it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded him from securing and maintaining employment consistent with his occupational experience, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

Mike Sobiecki

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. A. Feroce

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.