Citation Nr: A25031208
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240311-422786
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Restoration of a 20 percent rating for left elbow impairment of supination and pronation, effective March 1, 2024, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The reduction of the rating from 20 percent to 10 percent for left elbow impairment of supination and pronation was improper as the record does not demonstrate there has been a sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to restoration of a 20 percent rating for left elbow impairment of supination and pronation, effective March 1, 2024, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1989 to August 1995. This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 higher-level review (HLR) decision of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The HLR decision was based on the record in the December 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD)), appealing only the above issue. The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket; the Board may only review evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. No additional evidence for the claim was submitted.

In February 2024, the Veteran's representative requested the curriculum vitae (CV) of the VA examiners. In Francway v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit held that "[o]nce the request is made for information as to the competency of the examiner, the veteran has the right, absent unusual circumstances, to the curriculum vitae and other information about qualifications of a medical examiner," "mandated by VA's duty to assist." 940 F.3d 1304, 1308 (2019). However, the Board has no duty to assist under the AMA. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Further, because the request for the examiner's CV was not received prior to the December 2023 rating decision, there is no duty to assist error. The Board has referred the representative's request to the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) for processing. Additionally, no challenge to the examiner's competence was actually raised.

The regulations allow for a reduction of a service-connected disability rating when warranted by the evidence but only after following certain procedural requirements and substantive guidelines. 

Where the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, special due process protections under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) are triggered. See Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 139, 143 (2010). The Veteran has not argued, and the evidence of record does not show, a failure of compliance with the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). Therefore, the Board will proceed with its decision on the merits.

The 20 percent rating for left elbow impairment of supination and pronation was in effect from November 29, 2022, to March 1, 2024. Although the rating was in effect for less than five years, and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b), which provide additional regulatory hurdles to rating reductions, do not apply, careful consideration must still be given in light of the extraordinarily short period to accomplish the five-year period. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c) provide that ratings in effect for less than five years can be reduced upon a showing that the disability has improved. A reexamination disclosing improvement will warrant a reduction in rating. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

In Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) identified general regulatory requirements applicable to all rating reductions, including those which have been in effect for less than five years. Id. at 417. Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, it is essential, both in the examination and in the evaluation of the disability, that each disability be viewed in relation to its history. Id at 420. Similarly, 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, establishes that "[i]t is the responsibility of the rating specialist to interpret reports of examination in light of the whole record history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of the disability present." Id. The Court has held that these provisions "impose a clear requirement" that rating reductions be based on the entire history of the veteran's disability. Id.

Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 4.13 provides that the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the condition, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in use of descriptive terms. Additionally, in any rating reduction case, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has occurred, but that such improvement reflects improvement in ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. See Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 42021; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10. A claim as to whether a rating reduction was proper must be resolved in the Veteran's favor unless VA concludes that the evidence weighs against the claim. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421.

This is in stark contrast to a case involving a claim for an increased (i.e., higher) rating, in which it is the Veteran's responsibility to show the disability has worsened. A rating reduction case focuses on the propriety of the reduction and is not the same as an increased rating issue. See Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991).

The 20 percent rating was based on a January 2023 VA examination of the left elbow. The Veteran was diagnosed with lateral epicondylitis and degenerative arthritis of his left elbow. The Veteran reported experiencing pain with movement and treating the pain with rest, ice, and over-the-counter pain medications. He reported he had difficulty lifting objects heavier than 10 pounds, grasping, holding, and driving longer than 30 minutes at a time. He reported flareups 2 to 3 times a month that were moderate to severe in nature and lasted 2 to 3 weeks. Flareups were caused by increased use of the left elbow including pushing, pulling, holding, and driving. They were alleviated by rest and medication. Initial range-of-motion (ROM) testing was normal, but the Veteran exhibited pain on flexion and extension during active, passive, and weight-bearing. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue throughout the elbow and described as mild. Observed repetitive use testing revealed normal ROM. Repeated use over time would limit ROM to an estimated 135 degrees of flexion, 5 degrees of extension, 75 degrees of supination, and 70 degrees of pronation. Flareups would further limit ROM to 125 degrees of flexion, 10 degrees of extension, 65 degrees of supination, and 60 degrees of pronation. No other symptoms or abnormalities were found. The examiner described the Veteran's functional limitations on many occupational tasks that involve manual labor as use of the left arm is difficult secondary to pain.

VA medical records indicate the continued to complain of left elbow pain.

In an October 2023 VA examination of the left elbow, the Veteran was diagnosed with left elbow impairment of supination and pronation, lateral epicondylitis, and degenerative arthritis with limitation of flexion. The Veteran reported experiencing pain and swelling a couple of time a month, which was irritating at night, and during repetitive movements at work. He reported wearing a compression sleeve and taking aspirin daily for his symptoms. He denied flareups. Initial ROM testing was normal, but the Veteran exhibited pain on flexion, extension, supination, and pronation during active and passive ROM. There was objective evidence of crepitus. Observed repetitive use testing revealed normal ROM. Repeated use over time would limit ROM to an estimated 140 degrees of flexion, 0 degrees of extension, 80 degrees of supination, and 75 degrees of pronation. The Veteran reported losing 0-1 week worth of work due to his disability. The examiner described the Veteran's functional limitations as during use of repetitive movements of supination and pronation, when dumping trashcans at work, and pain with use of flexion.

While the January and October 2023 examiners gave differing estimations as to the limited ROM the Veteran experiences during repeated use over time, the complaints of pain during pronation and supination are new, additional complaints. The use of a compression sleeve and evidence of crepitus was also new. Considering the ROM measurements are estimations during repeated use over time, the Veteran has continued to complain of the same symptoms and functional limitations, and there is evidence of new symptoms, the Board does not find there has been sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life, particularly where an examiner specified the functional impairment impacted pronation and supination at work. Accordingly, the reduction of the rating for left elbow impairment of supination and pronation was improper. Effective March 1, 2024, the rating based on left elbow impairment of supination and pronation is restored to its prior 20 percent rating.

The Board notes that the Veteran is in receipt of compensation under other Diagnostic Codes for evaluation of flexion and extension of the left elbow, neither of which were reduced in the December 2023 rating decision. Additionally, increased ratings for his left elbow disability were appealed separately under the Evidence docket.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L.M. Barletta

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.