Citation Nr: A25031105
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-461600
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) with alcohol use disorder is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period of the appeal, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) with alcohol use disorder manifested with, at worst, occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, and not with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

2. The weight of the evidence supports a finding that prior to April 15, 2021, the Veteran was not unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities and does not raise a reasonable possibility that the Veteran may be unemployable due to the service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) with alcohol use disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

2. The criteria for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) or for a referral for extraschedular consideration to TDIU have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 4.3, 4.15, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1972 to August 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

A February 9, 2024, rating decision denied service connection for anxiety disorder.  On February 23, 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested review of the February 2024 rating decision.  In June 2024, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal on the merits, implying that the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received in support of the claim.

In August 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) appealing the June 2024 rating decision and elected the Hearing docket.  In November 2024, the Veteran appeared at a hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  A hearing transcript has been associated with the claims file.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ rating decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider that evidence in this decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) with alcohol use disorder.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In order to rate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  A claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  This review is undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

The Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder has been rated under Diagnostic Code 9400, used for rating generalized anxiety disorder.  Diagnostic Code 9400 is rated based on the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  For the sake of brevity, the Board will refer to the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability as just GAD but is considering all symptoms attributable to either GAD itself or alcohol use disorder.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 30 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 10 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 0 percent rating is warranted when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

The symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Considerations in rating a mental disorder include the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating must be based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on an examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  Although the extent of social impairment is a consideration in determining the level of disability, the rating may not be assigned solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted for service-connected anxiety disorder.

December 21, 2023, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran's raw employment readiness score was 159, where 135 and below indicated vocational counselling needed before placement, 136 to 149 indicated some counselling may be needed, and 150 and above indicated an acceptable attitude for work.

December 28, 2023, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran reported feeling "9.5 out of 10," "feeling great," and spending time with family.  The Veteran denied a depressed mood and was sleeping 8 to 9 hours a night, feeling rested in the morning, and denied any changes in appetite or energy.  The Veteran also denied exacerbation of anxiety symptoms and any symptoms pertaining to mania, hypomania, psychosis, depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder, or posttraumatic stress disorder.  A mental status examination noted that the Veteran was well-groomed, had fair insight and judgment, was attentive, and had fair concentration.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation, intent, or plans.  The records also note that the Veteran travelled independently on public transportation or drove his own car.  The Veteran denied any problems reading.

January 2024 VA Medical Center records document a meeting with a vocational rehabilitation specialist.  The Veteran was found to have adequate hygiene, appropriate dress, normal behavior, normal motor activity, normal speech, intact memory, good judgment, alert and attentive level of consciousness, euthymic mood, good insight, full range of affect, coherent and logical thought process, no abnormality of perception, and no unusual thought content.  The Veteran was not then working, but denied difficulties maintaining employment, and denied ever having been terminated from a job.  The Veteran reported most recently having worked in customer service at a grocery store and having resigned from that position.  The Veteran expressed a preference for a full-time job during mornings and afternoons, and opined that the disabilities would not affect work.  The Veteran denied having any concerns regarding securing employment, and when asked to list strengths and abilities, listed teamwork, good attendance, initiative, follow-through, good people skills, and an ability to work in a diverse environment.  The Veteran reported learning best by reading.

April 2024 VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran continued to drive without accidents, near misses, or getting lost, and was independent in activities of daily living.

May 7, 2024, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran was attending group therapy and compensated work therapy and had applied for a part-time job at a grocery store.

May 13, 2024, VA Medical Center records document a mental health diagnostic study.  Over the preceding 30 days, the Veteran reported 0 nights having trouble falling or staying asleep; 0 days feeling depressed, anxious, angry, or very upset throughout most of the day; 0 days drinking any alcohol or using illegal or street drugs or prescription medications; 18 days spending much of the time at work , school, or doing volunteer work; and 30 days with contact or spending time with family members or friends supportive of recovery.  The Veteran responded "not at all" when asked how much he had been bothered by arguments or problems getting along with any family members or friends, and reported being considerably satisfied with progress towards achieving recovery goals.

At a June 2024 VA examination, the Veteran's anxiety disorder was found to manifest with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran reported that alcohol and drug use affected social interactions and relationships, but that more recently he was able to interact with others more successfully and that family relationships had improved.  The Veteran also reported having been married 44 years and having a good relationship with the spouse.  Regarding work, the Veteran denied that the psychiatric disability interfered with the ability to work and be gainfully employed.  The Veteran also reported persistent depression since separation, and often feeling depressed, anxious, irritable, and frustrated due to tinnitus, and that tinnitus interfered with sleep and caused chronic fatigue, sleepiness, irritability, and difficulties focusing and concentrating.  The examiner found that the Veteran's anxiety disorder manifested with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The Veteran was appropriately dressed and groomed, affect and mood were unremarkable, the Veteran had good eye contact with the examiner, rapport was easily established, and engagement was good.  The Veteran denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation, behavior, plan, or intent, and the examiner found that the Veteran was not at elevated acute risk regarding suicidal ideation.

At a November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran reported no longer driving or driving as much, indicating that the spouse provided transportation.  The Veteran reported getting along well with people for the most part, but disliking crowds and having chronic sleep impairment or difficulty sleeping at night.  The Veteran reported staying awake all day, but having a low energy level, doing small things around the house, and focusing and concentrating on simple tasks.  The Veteran reported some difficulty using a television remote and an inability to follow written instructions, such as to assemble furniture.  The Veteran endorsed nearly a year of sobriety, but stated that anxiety remained the same sober.  The Veteran endorsed being unable to work due to a lack of concentration and not wanting to be around coworkers.  The Veteran reported having an aquarium with freshwater fish, loving that hobby, and that having such a hobby was very beneficial.  The Veteran also reported going to church approximately twice a month.  The Veteran reported last having worked at a grocery store and said that job didn't last long and being unable to keep it.  The Veteran stated that there were interpersonal problems with coworkers and customers, and difficulty with following instructions and completing tasks due to having a short temper.

In December 2024, within 90 days of the Board hearing, the representative submitted VA Medical Center records covering from June 24, 2024, to September 13, 2024.

June 2024 VA Medical center records note that the Veteran reported being "good," and still in the VA compensated work therapy program and planning to work at a grocery store following completion of that program.

July 2, 2024, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran attended a group therapy session and appeared euthymic, alert, and cooperative, with casual dress and appropriate hygiene.  The Veteran appeared to be fully oriented and exhibited intact mental processes, with speech on-topic and direct with signs of linear construction.  The Veteran's affect appeared stable, energy level moderate, and no psychotic symptoms were reported or observed in session.

July 3, 2024, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran reported, in the past 30 days, 0 nights having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep; 0 days feeling depressed, anxious, angry, or very upset throughout most of the day; 0 days drinking any alcohol or abusing drugs; 12 days spending much of the time at work, school, or doing volunteer work; and 30 days in contact or spending time with family members or friends supportive of recovery.  The Veteran responded "not at all" to a question asking about arguments or problems getting along with family members or friends.

July 17, 2024, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran had applied to a part-time job to work two days a week and wanted to stay busy, feeling that idle time increased bad choices.

August 6, 2024, VA Medical Center records note the Veteran attended a group therapy session.  The Veteran appeared euthymic, alert, and cooperative, was dressed appropriately, exhibited appropriate hygiene, and appeared fully oriented and exhibited intact mental processes.  Eye contact appeared appropriate, and speech was on-topic and direct with signs of linear construction.  The Veteran's affect was stable, and energy level appeared moderate, with no psychotic symptoms reported or observed in session.

August 21, 2024, VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran reported, in the past 30 days, having 30 nights with trouble falling asleep or staying asleep; 0 days feeling depressed, anxious, angry, or very upset throughout most of the day; 0 days drinking any alcohol or abusing drugs; 0 days spending much of the time at work, school, or doing volunteer work; and 30 days in contact or spending time with family members or friends supportive of recovery.  The Veteran responded "not at all" to a question asking about arguments or problems getting along with family members or friends.

After thorough review of the claims file and resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the psychiatric disability warrants no more than a 50 percent rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disability did not meet, or more nearly approximate, the criteria for a 70 percent rating or higher during the appeal period.

The Board finds that occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas has not been shown throughout the appeal period.  The weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran's anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder manifested with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

Considering the Veteran's level of functional impairment, a June 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran reported being able to interact with others more successfully than in the past and that family relationships have improved.  As of June 2024, the Veteran had been married for 44 years and stated that the marital relationship was good.  The Board finds that the Veteran's level of social impairment does not rise to the level of inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, as the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran has, at a minimum, maintained some social relationships, such as with spouse or family members.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's testimony during a November 2024 Board hearing.  The Veteran reported more severe symptoms than shown by contemporary medical records prior to the June 2024 rating decision on appeal.  In the November 2024 hearing, the Veteran reported that a psychiatric disability resulted in an inability to work and difficulty or inability to follow written instructions, such as for assembling furniture.  In December 2023, the Veteran denied difficulty reading.  January 2023 VA Medical Center records note that the Veteran endorsed learning best by reading.  Prior to the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran participated in VA compensated work therapy and repeatedly expressed both a desire and a plan to obtain a part-time job and spend more time in productive activities to keep busy.  Additionally, at the June 2024 VA examination, the Veteran denied that the psychiatric disability caused any issues with the ability to work and be gainfully employed.  The Board assigns the November 2024 Board hearing testimony less weight than medical records contemporary to the period before the June 2024 rating decision as those medical records are numerous and recorded the Veteran's current impressions rather than recollection of symptoms.

The Board notes that the Veteran has not displayed many symptoms generally consistent with a 70 percent rating during the appeal period, including: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting), or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The Board also notes that the Veteran has never displayed gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); or memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name commensurate with a 100 percent rating.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017).  

In considering whether the Veteran was entitled to a higher rating, the Board has carefully considered the contentions and assertions that a psychiatric disability was of such severity as to warrant increased schedular ratings.  In making a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence found to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for the rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  The Veteran is competent to report symptoms, such as anxiety, and depressed mood, because that requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  However, the Board finds that the overall disability picture does not demonstrate symptoms or occupational and social impairment that more nearly approximate a higher rating under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Accordingly, after resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder have not been met.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the assignment of any higher rating.  The Board finds that the criteria for a higher rating are not met or more nearly approximated, and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  The Board is appreciative of the Veteran's faithful and honorable service.  However, as the weight of the evidence is against the claim for increased rating for GAD with alcohol use disorder during the period on appeal, the claim for an increased rating must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU).

It is the established policy of VA that all Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled.  38?C.F.R. §?4.16.  A finding of total disability is appropriate when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to make it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation.  38?C.F.R. §§?3.340(a)(1), 4.15.

Substantially gainful employment is that employment which is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihood with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the Veteran resides.  Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App.?356 (1991).  Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment.  38?C.F.R. §?4.16(a).

The ability to work sporadically or obtain marginal employment is not substantially gainful employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991).  Marginal employment, where the earned annual income does not exceed the poverty threshold for one person, is not considered substantially gainful employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

TDIU may be assigned, if the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one service-connected disability it is rated 60 percent or more; or if there are two or more service-connected disabilities at least one is rated 40 percent or more and the combined rating is 70 percent or more.  38?C.F.R. §?4.16(a).

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: disabilities of one or both upper extremities; or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; disabilities affecting a single body system (such as orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric); multiple injuries incurred in action; or multiple disabilities incurred as prisoner of war.  38?C.F.R. §?4.16(a).

A claim for a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability, presupposes that the rating for the service-connected disability is less than 100 percent, and only asks for TDIU because of subjective factors that the objective rating does not consider.  Vettese v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?31 (1994).  In evaluating a Veteran's employability, consideration may be given to the level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to age or impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  38?C.F.R. §§?3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

The central inquiry is whether the service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability.  Hatlestad v. Brown,?5?Vet. App. 524 (1993).  Neither nonservice-connected disabilities nor advancing age may be considered in the determination.  38?C.F.R. §§?3.341, 4.19; Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App.?361?(1993).  The fact that a veteran is unemployed or has difficulty finding employment is not enough, as a high rating in itself is recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment.  The question is whether the claimant is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required for employment, not whether the claimant can find employment.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4?Vet. App.?361 (1993).

TDIU is not always a separate claim, but can be a rating option available whenever a claimant attempts to get service connection or a higher rating from VA and the record includes evidence of unemployability.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  TDIU can be raised at various stages of the claims process and arises when VA rates a disability.  Because TDIU can arise any time VA is rating a disability, VA may need to address TDIU as part of separate claim streams when rating different disabilities.  TDIU, when part of a claim for increase, is not a separate claim for benefits that VA can grant or deny unmoored from the underlying service connection or increased rating claim.  Rather, TDIU is part of that underlying claim, as an option for a potential rating, and the eventual effective date depends on the specific claim VA is then adjudicating.  Phillips v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 394 (2024).

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities include generalized anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder rated 50 percent, tinnitus rated 10 percent, and bilateral hearing loss rated 10 percent.  The combined service-connected disability rating has been 60 percent since September 7, 2023.

The Veteran does not meet the percentage criteria for consideration of the assignment of TDIU under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) prior to April 15, 2021.  However, if there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable because of service-connected disabilities, the case should be referred to the Director of the compensation service for extraschedular consideration.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b); Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).  The standard for referral is lower than the standard for granting or denying TDIU.  Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

The service separation form shows that the Veteran worked as a medical specialist, related to or comparable to a civilian medical assistant, while on active duty, and notes that the Veteran had 30 semester hours of college at the time of a January 1974 separation.

In March 2024, a VA examiner found that the Veteran's hearing loss did not impact ordinary conditions of daily life, including the ability to work.  The examiner found, based on the Veteran's reports, that tinnitus affected the ability to work because it was very annoying and interfered with the Veteran's sleep.  The Veteran also reported that tinnitus impacted the ability to hear, sleep, focus, concentrate, and also impacted emotions and caused aggravation.

In June 2024, a VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric disability  manifested with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity and noted difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The examiner did not find difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting among other potential psychiatric symptoms.

After reviewing the entire record, the Board concludes that entitlement to TDIU is not warranted.  The most probative evidence of record shows that, solely considering the service-connected disabilities, the Veteran was more likely than not able to obtain and maintain gainful employment.  The evidence shows primarily interpersonal difficulties establishing and maintaining effective work and personal relationships, some difficulty concentrating or focusing, and some impact on hearing ability due to tinnitus.  During the relevant period, the Veteran did not have any service-connected disabilities impacting the ability to perform physical tasks.  The weight of the evidence shows that service-connected disabilities do not prevent the Veteran from performing physical tasks.  

A June 2024 VA examination showed that the Veteran had difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, but did not have difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting.  The Veteran also did not have an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The weight of the evidence does not show that the Veteran would be unable to work in proximity to coworkers and/or customers or other members of the public.  In fact, the Veteran routinely expressed a desire to work and felt keeping busy would help avoid bad choices.  Additionally, the Veteran testified at the Board hearing that a freshwater aquarium hobby was sustaining, further suggesting that some degree of responsibility and work was beneficial in the Veteran's view.  The Veteran participated in VA compensated work therapy for the majority or entirety of the appeal period, and felt it was beneficial to keep busy.  The Board also notes that the Veteran repeatedly expressed strong confidence in being able to remain sober during the appeal period.

In arriving at this decision, the Board has considered the Veteran's background.  Considering the overall disability picture, and the Veteran's history of employment, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran was not unemployable solely due to service-connected disabilities.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has some nonservice-connected disabilities.  However, the impact of the nonservice-connected disabilities may not be considered under the criteria for TDIU.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence does not show that the service-connected disabilities have prevented the Veteran from obtaining or maintaining employment during the appeal period.  In making that determination, the Board is not refuting the Veteran's contentions that the service-connected disabilities affect the ability to work.  However, the rating schedule adequately contemplates the symptoms at issue.

The Board finds that referral to the Director of the Compensation Service for consideration of the assignment of an extraschedular TDIU is not warranted, as the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran was unemployable due to service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

The Board also notes that the issue of TDIU was raised at the November 2024 Board hearing, and that the weight of the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 rating decision on appeal does not reasonably raise the issue of TDIU.  Therefore, the Board cannot find a pre-decisional duty to assist error was made in not conducting development for that issue and cannot remand for additional development on that basis.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and the evidence is not in approximate balance.  There is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  As the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to service-connected disabilities, and referral for extraschedular consideration pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b) is not warranted, the claim for TDIU must be denied.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Hood, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.