Citation Nr: A25031358
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240223-418047
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability is denied.  

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.  

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for eczema is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT  

1. Even in consideration of his complaints of pain, pain on motion, and functional loss, the Veteran's lumbar spine disability was not manifested by forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 30 degrees or less, favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the spine or the functional equivalent thereof; and, intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week in one year has not been demonstrated.  

2. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis did not manifest nasal polyps, greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side, or equivalent functional impairments during the period on appeal.  

3. The Veteran's eczema did not require systemic therapy, affected less than 5 percent of his entire body, and did not affect exposed areas (i.e., face, neck, or hands).  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW  

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.  

3. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable disability rating for eczema are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS  

The Veteran had active service from October 1989 to October 2010.  

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2023 higher-level review of a January 2022 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  The Veteran appealed that decision by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on February 23, 2024.  He elected appeal by Direct Review.  Therefore, consideration may only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision subsequently subject to the higher-level review on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the January 2022 decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

INCREASED RATINGS

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Board determines the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, and the assigned rating is based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairment of earning capacity in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 ;?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10. Where there is a question as to which of two ratings should be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. ?38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, evaluation of the evidence since the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged rating" (assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found) is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 ?(1999).

1. Entitlement to a Disability Rating in Excess of 10 Percent for a Lumbar Spine Disability  

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is evaluated as 10 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Disease and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula), and he maintains a higher rating is warranted.  

In rating musculoskeletal disabilities, it is necessary to consider functional loss due to flare-ups of pain, fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, and weakness, along with the schedular criteria.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  

The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated innervation, or other pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.  Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  

The factors of joint disability reside in reductions of their normal excursion of movements in different planes of motion.  Less movement than normal (due to ankylosis, limitation or blocking, adhesions, tendon-tie-up, contracted scars, etc.), more movement than normal (from flail joint, resections, nonunion of fracture, relaxation of ligaments, etc.), weakened movement (due to muscle injury, disease or injury of peripheral nerves, divided or lengthened tendons, etc.), excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity, or atrophy of disuse as well as instability of station, disturbance of locomotion, interference with sitting, standing, and weight bearing are relevant considerations for determination of joint disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45.  

Painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, are entitled to at least the minimal compensable rating for the joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 should be addressed to disabilities other than arthritis).  However, painful motion alone is not a functional loss without some restriction of the normal working movements of the body.  Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 43 (2011).  

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held "that the final sentence of § 4.59 creates a requirement that certain range of motion testing be conducted whenever possible." That testing is "for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint."  

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court explained that when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination, VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flare ups from the veterans themselves.  Such information must be considered in rating the Veteran's functional impairment.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is assignable for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or if there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent rating is warranted if there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula.  

Normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are 0 to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are 0 to 30 degrees.  The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation.  The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.  Id. at Note (2).  

Unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Id at Note (5).  

A rating for ankylosis is permitted under 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 and 4.45 if functional loss, to include resulting from pain, restricted motion, strength, fatigability, or incoordination, meets the criteria and is consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis, i.e., the functional equivalent of "a complete limitation of motion." Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 10 (2021).  

Under Diagnostic Code 5243 and 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes (Formula for IVDS), a 10 percent rating is warranted if with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 20 percent rating is assignable for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, per year.  A 40 percent rating is assignable for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, per year.  A 60 percent rating is assignable for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks per year.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  For purposes of evaluations under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is "a period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician." 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for IVDS, Note (1).  

The Board finds that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability does not warrant a disability rating in excess of 10 percent.  This is so for the entirety of the period on appeal.  See Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. 119, at 126.  

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is not shown to have been manifested by forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine limited to 30 degrees or less; or, combined range of motion not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine; unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine; or the functional equivalents thereof, to include after repeated use over time and during flare-ups.  

The pertinent evidence of record includes a January 2022 VA thoracolumbar spine examination.  At that time, the Veteran reported worsening low back pain, which described as constant. He endorsed limitation of flexion.  He stated he treated his back disorder with Ibuprofen, ice, and heat as needed.  He denied flare-ups.

The January 2022 VA examination revealed the Veteran was able to achieve forward flexion to 80 degrees with pain and no additional loss after repetition or repeated use. Limited range of motion also limited forward flexion activities such as putting on shoes and pants.  Pain was evidenced in active motion; passive range of motion testing was medically contraindicated.  Guarding, intermittent muscle spasms, and mild tenderness was noted but did not result in abnormal gait or spinal contour; no use of assistive devices was indicated.  While there was no additional loss after repetition, to include due pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, the examiner indicated the Veteran's statements suggested pain with repeated use would result in functional loss. The examiner found the Veteran's lumbar spine disability would functionally limit his ability to perform activities with forward flexion, such as lifting objects from ground level; he reported functional loss as "difficulty with forward flexion activities such as putting on shoes and pants." No additional factors contributed to disability pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination was not estimated to additionally limit functional ability in terms of degrees of range of motion with repeated use. Ankylosis, favorable or unfavorable, and IVDS, with or without incapacitating episodes, was not found.  Radiculopathy was not identified; straight leg raising tests were negative and there was no decreased strength, reflex, sensation, or any objective neurologic abnormalities such as bowel or bladder problems.  See January 2022 VA Examination.  

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of pain with functional loss due to pain after repeated use. However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by statements concerning the frequency and severity of flare-ups would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees.  The January 2022 VA examination tested for pain, procured information as to functional loss after repeated use from the Veteran, found such would not result in additional loss in terms of degrees of range of motion, and found that while he had tenderness, spasms, and guarding, such was not severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or spinal contour.  

A rating under the Formula for IVDS is not warranted because the Veteran does not have IVDS.  Even if he did, there is no evidence that he was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician, for any duration.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, IVDS Formula.  

Regarding neurological impairment, the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any objective neurologic abnormalities associated with the lumbar spine disability.  The Veteran has erectile dysfunction and has expressed a belief it is due to his lumbar spine disability. However, he does not have the medical experience or training necessary to competently relate those or any other symptoms to disability of the lumbar spine as this is a medically complex determination.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Such a determination must be made by a medical professional with appropriate expertise.  Id.  In that regard, the January 2022 VA examiner found no symptoms attributable to any neurologic abnormality associated with the Veteran's lumbar spine disability-and found so based on the results of examination, and with consideration of the Veteran's reports.  The examination report is adequate and the Veteran's statements that are not competent evidence.  To the extent they could be, his general statements are outweighed by the VA examination report and specific determinations therein.  

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against any rating higher than the 10 percent already assigned, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). The appeal for an increased disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar spine disability is denied.  

2. Entitlement to a Compensable Disability Rating for Allergic Rhinitis

The Veteran maintains a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis, evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522, is warranted.  

Allergic rhinitis warrants a 10 percent rating when there are no nasal polyps but there is greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passages on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A maximum rating of 30 percent is warranted when polyps are present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522.  

The Veteran was afforded a sinus/rhinitis examination in January 2022.  He endorsed frequent headaches, clogged ears, sinus infections requiring antibiotics three times a year, and difficulty sleeping due to post-nasal drip.  Relevant to his rhinitis the VA examiner found no nasal polyps or evidence of greater than 50 percent obstruction, or complete obstruction.  

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against assigning a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis at any time during or proximate to the appeal period.  No symptoms of allergic rhinitis during the period on appeal meet the criteria for a compensable rating. Nasal polyps, or greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side, or equivalent functional impairment during the period on appeal are not shown. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.97, DC 6522.  With respect to the Veteran's sinus and headache complaints, the Board notes that he is already service connected for sinusitis and tension headaches associated with allergic rhinitis. 

The evidence is adequate for rating purposes and provides no basis to grant a compensable rating.  The Veteran has not offered any explanation as to why one could be warranted.  Additionally, no related issues were reasonably raised by the record and the Veteran has not raised any.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017).  

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(a).  The appeal for a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.  

?

3. Entitlement to a Compensable Disability Rating for Eczema  

The Veteran maintains that a compensable disability rating for his service-connected eczema, evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806, is warranted.  

Diagnostic Code 7806 (dermatitis or eczema) directs evaluation under the General Rating Formula for the Skin. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating Formula for the Skin, a 60 percent evaluation is assignable when at least one of the following is present: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected, or; constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA) or other immunosuppressive drugs required per 12-month period. A 30 percent evaluation is assignable when at least one of the following is present: characteristic lesions involving 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected, or; systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of six weeks or more, but not constantly, per 12-month period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating Formula for the Skin.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7806, 7809, 7813 to 7816, and 7820 to 7822, permit evaluation for disfigurement of the head, face, or neck (Diagnostic Code 7800) or scars (Diagnostic Codes 7801, 7802, 7804, or 7805) depending upon the predominant disability, in lieu of the criteria of the General Rating Formula for the Skin.  

The General Rating Formula for the Skin specifies that "topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin," whereas "systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route (orally, injection, suppository, intranasally) other than the skin." Thus, under the General Formula for the Skin applicable to Diagnostic Codes 7806, 7809, 7813 to 7816, 7820 to 7822, and 7824, treatment administered through the skin is ''topical therapy,'' whereas treatment administered through any other route is ''systemic therapy.'' See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118(a).

Here, at a January 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported having eczema that occurred on his elbows and knees and that had remained the same since 2010. The examiner diagnosed eczema and indicated it had been treated with topical Clobetasol for less than 6 weeks in the past 12 months.  The examiner diagnosed eczema and indicated that the Veteran did not have chronic urticaria. Physical examination revealed visible silver, scaly patches of eczema on the knees and elbows affecting less than 5 percent of total body area and no percent of exposed areas.  No systemic corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications, immunosuppressive retinoids, sympathomimetics, PUVA, UVB, electron beam therapy, intensive light therapy, or any other medication or treatment other than Clobetasol for eczema, was noted.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable evaluation because the Veteran's eczema does not more nearly approximate characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent of the entire body or exposed areas; or intermittent systemic therapy required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12- month period.  

The Veteran is not entitled to a compensable rating. He is competent to report issues with his skin.  Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377.  However, the Veteran is not competent to report that those symptoms affect a certain percentage of his entire body; or exposed areas (i.e., face, neck, hands); and he does not maintain topical treatment during the period on appeal consisted of systemic therapy (affecting the body as a whole in operation as treatment for eczema) for at least 6 weeks during any 12-months during the period on appeal.  

No other diagnostic codes are appropriate, including any for scars, and none could provide a higher or separate rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for eczema.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. The appeal for a compensable disability rating for eczema is denied.

 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Dwyer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.