Citation Nr: A25031280
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240728-459398
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability as being secondary to the service-connected bilateral knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force from May 2016 to May 2021.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), wherein the AOJ denied service connection for left and right hip disabilities.

In July 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and requesting a "Direct Review" of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge. In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the January 2024 decision cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Within the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran indicated she wanted to appeal claim for entitlement to service connection for the left hip and service connection for shin splints. The rating decision that denied service connection for shin splints was issued in May 2023. The Board finds that the July 2024 10182 is untimely as to the May 2023 rating decision, as the appeal was not submitted within one year of notification of the rating decision. Thus, the Board will not be addressing the claim within this decision. As the Veteran limited the 10182 to addressing the left the Board considers only the left hip in this appeal. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability as being secondary to the service-connected bilateral knee disability is remanded.

The Board finds that remand is required, as there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error in VA not obtaining an adequate medical opinion in connection with the Veteran's claim as explained below.

In October 2023, the Veteran filed for service connection for a left hip disability. She asserted that her hip disability was due to having knee pain and having to adjust the way she walked to be comfortable, which caused hip pain in both hips and worsened her lower back pain. 

In January 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left hip disability was not related to the lumbosacral strain. However, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention was not that her service-connected low back disability was causing her hip pain, but rather that the service-connected bilateral knee disability caused her to alter the way she walked, which caused the left hip disability and worsened her back pain. The record shows that the AOJ had asked the examiner to opine as to whether the Veteran's left hip disability was caused or aggravated by the service-connected bilateral knee disability; however, the examiner did not answer this particular question. The AOJ did not subsequently seek an addendum medical opinion when the examiner did not, in fact, answer whether the Veteran's left hip disability was caused or aggravated by the bilateral knee disability. This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, a remand is required to obtain an adequate examination and medical opinion. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the left hip disability. The examiner should have access to the claims file.

The agency of original jurisdiction must provide the below facts to the examiner.

To assist in a review of the claims file, the examiner is informed of the following facts with citations in the record, when applicable:

"	The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from May 2016 to May 2021.

"	The Veteran is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); lumbosacral spine strain; left knee strain; right knee strain; tinnitus; polycystic ovarian syndrome; and headaches associated with tinnitus.

"	The Veteran has been diagnosed with a left hip strain and contends that it is caused or aggravated by the service-connected bilateral knee disability. Specifically, she states that due to having knee pain, she has had to adjust the way she walks, which has caused her to develop left hip pain. 

"	A January 2024 VA examination report shows the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral hip strain. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "C&P Exam," Receipt Date 01/05/2024, with "DBQ MUSC Hip and Thigh" in the Subject field.

"	The examiner concluded that the Veteran's left hip disability was not proximately due to or the result of the lumbosacral strain, which she based on medical literature. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "C&P Exam," Receipt Date 01/05/2024, with "DBQ Medical Opinion--Left hip opinion" in the Subject field.

"	The examiner misunderstood the Veteran's contention and did not address whether the Veteran's left hip disability was caused or aggravated by the service-connected bilateral knee disability. Thus, VA is seeking an addendum opinion.

"	Aggravation is different from causation in that it did not cause the disability but rather caused an increase in severity.

"	The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above. This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

The examiner is asked to opine:

(a) Is the Veteran's left hip disability caused by the service-connected bilateral knee disability? Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

(b) If the answer to (a) is negative, is the left hip disability aggravated by the service-connected bilateral knee disability? Aggravation is different from causation in that it did not cause the disability but that it caused an increase in severity. Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

(c) If the examiner finds that any or all of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability caused an increase in severity of the Veteran's left hip disability, the examiner is asked to state whether there is medical evidence created prior to the aggravation or at any time between the time of aggravation and the current level of disability that shows a baseline for the left hip disability prior to aggravation. If the examiner is unable to establish a baseline for the left hip disability prior to the aggravation, he or she should state such and explain why a baseline cannot be determined.

The examiner is asked to provide a rationale for each opinion given, including providing the medical principles and evidence relied upon for each opinion. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered. 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.