Citation Nr: A25031056
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 200616-95474
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for numbness of the fingers of the right hand is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for numbness of the fingers of the left hand is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1989 to September 1992.  Service in Southwest Asia is indicated by the record.

This matter originally came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2020 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for numbness of the left and right hands.  In June 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), on which he identified the June 2020 rating decision, the issues as service connection for numbness in the fingers of the right and left hands, and elected the Evidence Submission docket.

In a February 2024 decision, the Board denied service connection for numbness of the right and left hands.  

The Veteran appealed the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (Court).  While that appeal was pending before the Court, the attorneys who represented the Veteran before the Court, Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kilpatrick, and VA's General Counsel filed a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) on the sole basis that the AOJ had failed to provide notice to the Veteran of the option to request a pre-decisional hearing as required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1).  In November 2024, the Court granted the motion, and vacated the Board's February 2024 decision, and remanded the matter for readjudication.   

The following month, Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kirkpatrick filed an application for attorney's fees and expenses in the amount of $3,887.94, pursuant to the Equal Access to Justice Act (EAJA).  VA's General Counsel indicated that the Secretary did not contest the motion for the sole purpose of avoiding further litigation and the costs related thereto.  In a December 2024 order, the Court granted the EAJA application and awarded fees in the amount sought.  The firm of Chisholm, Chisholm, and Kirkpatrick elected not to continue representing the Veteran before VA.  Thus, he remains represented by the Veterans Service Organization (VSO) listed above.

1. Entitlement to service connection for numbness of the fingers of the right hand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for numbness of the fingers of the left hand.

While the Board sincerely regrets further delay, remand is required to comply with the terms of the JMR.  Specifically, remand is necessary to correct the AOJ's error in failing to satisfy the regulatory duty to provide the Veteran with notice of his right to a pre-decisional hearing.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) and (d)(1).

The parties to the JMR indicated that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1), claimants are "entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim within the purview of part 3 of this chapter before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim."  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) requires notice of decisions made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or granting of relief that includes notice of the right to a hearing.  The parties to the JMR agreed that because the Veteran was not provided notice of this right to a hearing before the AOJ, the Board was required to remand the Veteran's claims to the AOJ pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) with instructions that the AOJ provide the appellant with notice concerning his right to a hearing.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran and his representative with notice of the right to a pre-decisional hearing before the AOJ on the above issues in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103.  The required notice should be documented in the file.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. K. Buckley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.