Citation Nr: A25031309
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-455667
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively favors the finding that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is causally related to his active military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from October 1985 to January 1990, from September 2010 to May 2011, from August to September 2011, from March to October 2014, and from June 2015 to February 2016. In a May 2024 rating decision, the Regional Office denied service connection for OSA. The Veteran appealed, electing the Board's Direct Review.

Service connection is granted for a post-service disability shown by the evidence of record to have been incurred during active military service and/or due to an existing service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(d), 3.310(a). This is at least as likely as not the case before the Board.

An April 2024 VA examination report confirms that the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA based on a March 2019 sleep study report specifically noting his history of asthma and allergies, which at minimum implies the relevance of these medical conditions. The examiner further notes an October 2015 report of the Veteran's trouble sleeping, which falls within the period of his service on active duty from July 2015 to February 2016. 

In May 2016, the Veteran enrolled in the VA healthcare system and immediately reiterated his complaints of fractured sleep during the night and being tired during the day, commonly known as the hallmark symptoms of OSA. His VA medical treatment records are further replete with essentially the same ongoing complaints, which suggests the onset of pertinent symptomatology during the Veteran's active military service.

A further review of the Veteran's VA medical records makes it apparent that his complaints have been overshadowed by and initially attributed to his severe psychiatric symptoms productive of chronic sleep impairment. Nonetheless, upon further workup (which often does take several years), the Veteran eventually was referred to an ENT specialist. To this end, the examiner notes that the Veteran has asthma, chronic rhinitis, deviated septum, and turbinate hypertrophy, each of which (according to a November 2018 otolaryngologist's opinion) contributes to his obstructive symptoms.  Moreover, both the Veteran's asthma and chronic allergic rhinitis are service connected. Upon further investigation of the Veteran's ongoing complaints, his otolaryngologist noted the Veteran's severe snoring along with his continued poor sleep at that point suspected to occur on account of his difficulties breathing due to his chronic upper airway obstruction rather than exclusively due to his psychiatric disorder (which is also service connected), and then requested a sleep study which eventually was done in March 2019 and turned out positive. 

The discussed medical evidence shows that the Veteran's OSA likely had onset during his service and therefore likely is related thereto. Any residual doubt to this end is effectively dissolved by the medical evidence persuasively showing that his OSA is secondary to his substantial upper airway obstruction due his service-connected asthma and chronic allergic rhinitis, each of which has been determined by the otolaryngologist to be an independent contributing factor to his obstructive symptoms. The record is devoid of any evidence that may undermine this medical opinion or affirmatively show that this is not the Veteran's case.

The Board acknowledges that the examiner's conclusion expressed in the April 2024 VA examination report appears to be negative, but the examiner only had answered a very specific question of whether the Veteran's OSA is directly related to his toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). This conclusion does not diminish the probative value of the discussed medical evidence of record persuasively showing that the Veteran's OSA is related to his service, be it on a direct or secondary basis. Absent any affirmative evidence to the contrary in either scenario, the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA is causally related to his active military service, which satisfies all legal criteria for service connection. 

Accordingly, the appeal is granted.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alex Bardin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.