Citation Nr: A25031260
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230925-378979
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for basal cell carcinoma is denied.

Service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Service connection for centrilobular emphysema is denied.

Service connection for right ear hearing loss is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's basal cell carcinoma did not first manifest on active duty and is not otherwise shown to be the result of active service, to include toxic exposure risk activities.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that centrilobular emphysema began during active service or until many years thereafter or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, to include toxic exposure risk activities. 

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that sleep apnea began during active service or until many years thereafter or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, to include toxic exposure risk activities.

4. Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, his right ear hearing loss was incurred during active duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for basal cell carcinoma have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1116, 1154(a), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for centrilobular emphysema have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for right ear hearing loss have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1971 to February 1973 to include service in the Republic of Vietnam and at Camp Lejeune.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an October 2022 rating decision.  

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the December 2022VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, in March 2023 the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error as to the issues of entitlement to service connection for basal cell carcinoma, bilateral hearing loss, centrilobular emphysema and sleep apnea and transferred the claims to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the notice of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300,?20.301, 20.801.

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

As an appeal in which the Veteran requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. 20.301. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection 

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Some chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred in service if they become manifest to a degree of ten percent or more within the applicable presumptive period.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101(3), 1112(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).  For those listed chronic conditions, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Melanomas, as malignant tumors, are a listed chronic disease with a presumptive period of one year following separation from service.

As an initial note, the Board acknowledges that personnel records reflect that the Veteran's service included his service in the Republic of Vietnam and its territorial waters.  He is therefore presumed to be exposed to herbicide agents, such as Agent Orange.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii).

Where, as here, a veteran was stationed at United States Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune between August 1, 1953, and December 31, 1987, the veteran is presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(7).  Under certain circumstances, if an exposed veteran develops one of the following diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (f), VA will presume that the disease is related to the veteran's service: kidney cancer, liver cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, adult leukemia, multiple myeloma, Parkinson's disease, aplastic anemia and other myelodysplastic syndromes, or bladder cancer.

Although entitlement to service connection may not be established on any of the presumptive bases noted above, a veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection on a direct basis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d) (the availability of service connection on a presumptive basis does not preclude consideration of service connection on a direct basis).  

1. Service connection for basal cell carcinoma

The Veteran maintains that he suffers from basal cell carcinoma that is related to his active duty service.  More specifically, the Veteran has maintained that his basal cell carcinoma, first diagnosed more than four decades following his separation from service, is related to toxic exposure, to include Camp Lejeune contaminated water, exposure to herbicide agents, or other exposures in service. 

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma, as noted in both his VA treatment records and a June 2023 VA examination.  Therefore, the Board finds that the first element of service connection, a current diagnosis, has been met.

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), VA must provide a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) when such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

A June 2023 VA Memo confirmed that the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities included being exposed to Camp Lejeune contaminated water, being exposed to herbicide agents in Vietnam, and probable exposure to asbestos.  See June 2023 VA TERA Memo.

Since basal cell carcinoma is not listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f), service connection is also not presumed on the basis of the Veteran's in-service exposure to herbicide agents and to Camp Lejeune contaminated water.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for any skin conditions, to include basal cell carcinoma.  The Veteran's February 1973separation report of medical examination documents a normal clinical evaluation of the skin, without any notation of a skin defect or diagnosis.  See STR Medical.

Thus, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that basal cell carcinoma or chronic symptoms of another skin condition manifested during the Veteran's active-duty service.

Post-service medical evidence is silent for any symptoms, treatment, or diagnosis for a skin condition until July 2009, more than three and a half decades following his separation from service. 

Thus, the Board finds that symptoms of basal cell carcinoma were not continuous since service, including not to a degree of ten percent within one year of service separation.  The Veteran's basal cell carcinoma first manifested in approximately 2009, which is more than 50 years after service separation.  The more than three gap between service and onset persuasively weighs against finding continuous symptoms after service as well as manifestation to a compensable degree within the first post-service year.

The Board next finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence shows that the basal cell carcinoma, which manifested many years after service, was not caused by or otherwise related to the Veteran's service. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in June 2023.  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis with basal cell carcinoma.  However, the examiner declined to provide an etiology opinion finding instead that the diagnosed condition is a known presumptive condition and etiology opinion is no longer provided.  As noted above, the Veteran's diagnosed basal cell carcinoma is not a presumptive condition based on the Veteran's conceded exposure to herbicide agents or water contaminants.  The examiner also appears to base their opinion on the Veteran's purported exposure to burn pits, which is incorrect.  See June 2023 Opinion DBQ. 

The RO obtained another medical opinion in August 2023.  After review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the VA examiner opined that his basal cell carcinoma was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service to include the Veteran's toxic exposures.  The VA examiner considered the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran before offering the opinion that the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma was less likely than not caused by the TERA. 

The examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with both Basal Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma.  Basal cell carcinoma is caused by damage and subsequent DNA changes to the basal cells in the outermost layer of skin.  Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun and indoor tanning is the major cause of BCCs and most skin cancers.  Squamous cell carcinomas can be anywhere on the skin.  In people who sunburn easily, the cancer is usually found on areas of skin that have had a lot of sun.  Currently the examiner noted there was no evidence to suggest that exposure to asbestos, Agent Orange or contaminated water at Camp Lejeune would be the cause of the Veteran's skin cancers.  As such, the examiner was unable to establish a nexus.  See Skin Diseases and Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaires, August 2023.

The VA examiner has medical expertise and training, had sufficient facts and data on which to base the medical opinion, and supported the medical opinion with sufficient rationale.  As such, the Board finds the examiner's medical opinion to be competent, credible, and entitled to probative value.  There is no medical opinion to the contrary of record.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that his skin cancer was the result of conceded TERAs.  Although the Veteran is competent to report that he observed symptoms of skin problems, he is not competent to diagnose his skin cancer as related to service, to include as due to exposure to Agent Orange, water contaminants or asbestos.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, or reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or the lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d. 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (lay evidence is one type of evidence that must be considered and competent lay evidence can be sufficient 

Accordingly, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim for service connection, the benefit-of-the doubt rule is not for application, and the claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied

The Veteran contends that he suffers from obstructive sleep apnea is related to his active duty service. 

The rating decision on appeal made favorable findings that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea and that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded based on the Veteran's conceded exposure to herbicide agents, service in Camp Lejeune and asbestos exposure.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 5104(b)(4), 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a) (all favorable findings towards claimants are binding upon all subsequent adjudicators, unless clear and unmistakable evidence is shown to the contrary to rebut such favorable findings).

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnosis of breathing or sleep irregularities.  Records show he was not diagnosed with the condition until approximately 2009.  The record contains a September 2020 lay statement from the Veteran's spouse indicating that she witnessed the Veteran snoring once they rekindled their relationship in the early 1990s.  Even assuming that the reports of snoring in the early 1990s were a manifestation of undiagnosed obstructive sleep apnea, this occurred years after the Veteran's separation from service. 

The thrust of the Veteran's argument has been that the condition is secondary to the conceded toxic exposures he experienced during service. As noted earlier herein, his exposure to herbicide agents, contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and asbestos is conceded.  However, his claimed conditions are not among the diseases identified in 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.309(e), (f) as being associated with exposure to herbicide agents or CLCW.  Therefore, the presumptions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) and (f) are not for application.  

Nevertheless, the Board must also consider whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is directly caused by herbicide exposure.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  Again, a presumption of service connection provided by law is not the sole method for showing causation in establishing a claim for service connection for disability due to herbicide exposure.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).

The Veteran was provided with a VA sleep apnea examination in June 2023.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure activities of the Veteran.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's conceded exposure to herbicide agents and Camp Lejeune water contaminants.  The examiner also noted the Veteran's 22-year smoking history noting that he quit smoking in approximately 1992.  The examiner found no complaints or documented symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea in service treatment records and the Veteran was diagnosed approximately 35 years after separation.  The examiner noted the Veteran's extensive history of smoking and obesity which are contributors to the diagnosis of sleep apnea. 

The Veteran's records were again reviewed in August 2023.  The examiner also opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure activities of the Veteran.  The examiner noted that while the Veteran reported that he began snoring at the end of his enlistment, their review of the claims file did not find any complaints, diagnosis, or treatment of a sleeping disorder during active duty service.  The Veteran also reported that his wife told him he had excessive snoring and would choke while sleeping.  However, the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep area in approximately 2009, which is nearly four decades after separation from service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran also had a long history of obesity and tobacco use, reporting he started smoking during boot camp and was smoking approximately 2 packs of cigarettes per day he had until quit approximately ten years prior.

The examiner explained the pathophysiology of Obstructive Sleep Apnea, noting it is caused by a blockage of the upper airways, usually by soft tissues in the back of the throat when a person falls asleep.  This blockage impedes the flow of air into the trachea with air obstructed before it even enters the lungs leading to the commonly associated symptoms of Obstructive Sleep Apnea.  During his sleep study, the Veteran had a BMI of 36.3 with a neck size of 18 inches.  Snoring can be a symptom of OSA but as a standalone symptom, does not indicate a dx of OSA, as snoring may be present without a history of OSA.  The Veteran's high body mass index and smoking history were more likely than not the causative factor for the Veteran's development of OSA.  A nexus was therefore not established secondary to a TERA.

The Board finds the examiners' opinion to be highly probative.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

Further, the competent lay evidence does not show that the Veteran's sleep apnea began during service and has been recurrent since that time.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the preponderance of the lay and medical evidence is against the Veteran's claim.  As such, the benefit of the doubt provision does not apply.

3. Entitlement to service connection for centrilobular emphysema

The Veteran maintains that he suffers from emphysema that is related to his active duty service.  The Veteran's primary theory of entitlement to service connection is that he developed emphysema post-service because of his service in the Republic of Vietnam and being stationed at Camp Lejeune.  See April 2022 VA 21-526 EZ Fully Developed Claim. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

Records show that the Veteran was diagnosed with emphysema in approximately 2021.  See June 2023 VA Respiratory Conditions examination.  His exposure to herbicide agents and to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune is conceded.  See May 2023 VA TERA Memo.  However, his claimed condition is not among the diseases identified in 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.309(e), (f) as being associated with exposure to herbicide agents or CLCW.  Therefore, the presumptions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) and (f) are not for application.  

However, the Board must also consider whether the Veteran's centrilobular emphysema is directly caused by herbicide exposure.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

The Veteran was provided with a VA respiratory conditions examination in June 2023.  The examiner acknowledged reviewing the May 2023 VA TERA memo confirming toxic exposure activities for the Veteran.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's centrilobular emphysema was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner explained that while the Veteran has documented exposure to herbicide agents and Camp Lejeune, he was not diagnosed with centrilobular emphysema until approximately 2022, more than 5 decades after his active duty service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has an extensive history of smoking, which is reported to be approximately 22 years.  The examiner explained that given the heavy implications of smoking, it was more likely than not that the Veteran's centrilobular emphysema was secondary to his extensive history of smoking.

The Veteran was provided with another VA respiratory conditions examination in August 2023. The examiner acknowledged reviewing the May 2023 VA TERA memo confirming toxic exposure activities for the Veteran.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's centrilobular emphysema was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner noted that the Veteran reported starting smoking in boot camp and smoking until approximately 10 years prior.  The Veteran was diagnosed with emphysema in May 2022 and had a previous negative chest x-ray in 2012. The examiner highlighted that emphysema is one of the most preventable respiratory illnesses because it is so strongly linked to smoking.  Air pollutants, an alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, and respiratory infections can also play a role, but smoking is considered the number one cause.  The examiner found that while the Veteran does have exposure to air pollutants, his long history of cigarette smoking was more likely than not the biggest contributing factor to his development of emphysema. 

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of centrilobular emphysema, the evidence is persuasively against finding that it began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board finds the June 2023 and August 2023 VA medical opinions to be highly probative.  The VA examiners' opinions adequately addressed the Veteran's contentions, his military service and TERA, and medical history.  The VA examiners provided a detailed rationale for their opinion, which was clear and based upon the relevant evidence.  As such, the Board finds the June 2023 and August 2023 VA medical opinions to be highly persuasive and entitled to great weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  The Board also notes that there is no medical opinion in the record that supports a finding that the Veteran's emphysema is related to his military service.

The Board acknowledges that Veteran's belief that his emphysema is related to service.  The Veteran, however, is not qualified to render such a medical opinion.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  A lay person is competent to report observable symptomatology of an injury or illness, but they are not competent to render expert opinions or diagnoses of complex medical conditions.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307-08 (2007).  Thus, this nexus question requires expert consideration and cannot be considered within the competence of a non-expert lay witness.  The Veteran, as a lay person, has not established the competence needed to rebut expert medical opinion.  See Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 274-75 (2015).

As the weight of the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for centrilobular emphysema is not warranted.

4. Service connection for right ear hearing loss 

The Veteran has a diagnosis of right ear hearing loss pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 and suffered acoustic trauma when exposed to extreme loud noise in service.  See April 2021, June 2023, and July 2023 VA audiological examination.  

The RO has already conceded military noise exposure based on the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as a tank crewman with a high probability for hazardous noise exposure. See July 2023 rating decision.  Further, the Veteran is service connected for tinnitus and left ear hearing loss.  Thus, the first two criteria have been met.

Further, the competent and credible evidence of record shows that the Veteran's current right ear hearing loss began during service and has been recurrent since that time.  Throughout the appeal, the Veteran has asserted that he was exposed to firearms in service and his hearing loss is chronic and disabling since service.

The Veteran is competent to report the onset and continuation of his hearing loss symptoms and the Board finds his testimony credible.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board acknowledges the negative VA opinion evidence.  However, the competent and credible evidence shows that the Veteran's right ear hearing loss had its onset in service.  Thus, service connection is warranted.  See Flynn v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 500, 503 (1994).

 

 

STEVEN D. REISS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Woehlke, V.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.