Citation Nr: A25031910
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240201-413424
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have not rendered him so helpless as to require the need for regular aid and attendance, nor was he actually bedridden, as required for entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on aid and attendance have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service with the Army from June 1977 to February 1980.  

In February 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a rating decision denying entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance.  This constituted an initial decision, therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeal Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing Direct Review of the February 2023 rating decision denying entitlement SMC aid and attendance.  

Applicable Law and Regulations

SMC is available when, as the result of service-connected disability, a veteran suffers additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by the VA's schedule for rating disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352; see also VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 5-89 (Mar. 23, 1989) (explaining that SMC is a supplementary statutory benefit based on noneconomic factors such as personal inconvenience, social inadaptability, or the profound nature of a disability).  The rate of SMC varies according to the nature of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  Basic levels of SMC are listed at 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).  Higher levels of SMC are provided at 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), (m), (n), and (o).

SMC is warranted if, because of a service-connected disability, a veteran is permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  SMC is warranted if a veteran has a service-connected disability rated as total and has additional service-connected disabilities independently rated as 60 percent or more, or by reason of such service-connected disabilities is permanently housebound.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

The need for aid and attendance means helplessness or being so nearly helpless as to require the regular assistance of another person.  In order to establish entitlement to an increased compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance, a veteran must have an anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, one hand and one foot, blindness in both eyes of 5/200 or less, or have a factual need for regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.351(b), (c).

Determinations as to need for aid and assistance must be based on actual requirements of personal assistance from others.  In making such determinations, consideration is given to such conditions as: inability of the appellant to dress or undress himself or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid; inability of the appellant to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

Performance of the necessary aid and attendance service by a relative of the beneficiary or other member of his household will not prevent the granting of the additional allowance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(c).

The VA must consider the enumerated factors under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a); that eligibility requires at least one of the enumerated factors to be present; and that, because the regulation provides that the "particular personal function" which a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole, the "particular personal function" must be one of the enumerated factors.  Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated above (in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a)) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) provides that "[i]t is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need."

When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (reasonable doubt to be resolved in the Veteran's favor); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is in approximate balance).

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran contends entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance of his wife because without her care he would be a danger to himself and others.

The Veteran is currently service connected for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) at 70 percent disabling effective June 28, 2013; loss of use of the left upper extremity at the left elbow at a noncompensable rate effective February 9, 1980, 40 percent disabling effective August 30, 2017, and 60 percent disabling effective September 1, 2020; ulnar neuroma, left P/O at a noncompensable rate effective February 9, 1980, and 20 percent disabling effective June 28, 2013; healed fracture of the left ulnar with limitation of flexion at 20 percent disabling effective August 30, 2017 to September 1, 2020; healed fracture left ulnar with limitation of supination and pronation at 20 percent disabling effective August 30, 2017 to September 1, 2020; tinnitus at 10 percent disabling effective June 28, 2013; S-shaped scar of the left ulnar/posterior forearm at 10 percent disabling effective October 15, 2013; and a linear scar status post left ulnar elbow surgery associated with loss of use of the left upper extremity at the left elbow at a noncompensable rate effective August 30, 2017.  

The Veteran was awarded entitlement to a total disability rating on the basis of individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities effective June 28, 2013.  Additionally, the Veteran was awarded SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, subsection (s) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i) on account of TDIU due solely to service-connected PTSD rated at 100 percent and additional service-connected disabilities of loss of use of the left upper extremity at the left elbow, ulnar neuroma, left P/O, healed fracture of the left ulnar with limitation of flexion, healed fracture left ulnar with limitation of supination and pronation, tinnitus, S-shaped scar of the left ulnar/posterior forearm, a linear scar status post left ulnar elbow surgery associated with loss of use of the left upper extremity at the left elbow, independently ratable at 60 percent or more from August 30, 2017; and SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114, subsection (k) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a) on account of loss of use of one hand from September 1, 2020.    

A November 2013 VA treatment record noted the Veteran was participating in local weekly MOVE group and found it beneficial.  In March 2014, he reported to VA treating providers that he was walking outside three miles or going to the gym five to six days a week.  

In May 2014, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's tinnitus impacted the ordinary conditions of daily life including his ability to work.  He reported difficulty concentrating unless he had noise.  The examiner indicated that tinnitus was rarely disabling to the point of being unable to work in any capacity.  Considering only the tinnitus, this condition should not impact his ability to perform all types of physical or sedentary jobs to the degree as to render him unemployable.  The May 2014 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In May 2014, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational task, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  His symptoms included a depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often.  During his mental status examination, he was observed to be neatly groomed, appropriately dressed, have unremarkable psychomotor activity, clear speech, a cooperative attitude, constricted affect, anxious and dysphoric mood, be easily distracted, have difficulty concentrating when reading and by noise, unremarkable thought process/content, no delusions, understood the outcome of his behavior, had above average intelligence, and insight into his problem.  The VA examiner further noted that the Veteran could manage his financial affairs as well as maintain minimum personal hygiene.  The May 2014 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).       

In May 2014, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a left shoulder labrum injury and left tricep tear secondary to a motorcycle accident status post repair.  He reported a loss of muscle mass in the left arm as well as reduced left hand and arm strength with pain/numbness in the hand and fingers.  He wore a rubber/padded brace sleeve almost every day.  He reported flare ups in the left upper extremity causing increased pain but no further limitation on his range of motion.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's left shoulder condition impacted his ability to work.  The left shoulder disability limited his range of motion impacting physical labor that required lifting, working overhead, and pushing/pulling.  The May 2014 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In May 2014, the VA examiner diagnosed a fractured left ulna PO healed (per records, this was comminuted fracture left ulnar status post open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), with hardware later removed); ulnar neuroma, left PO (per records, Veteran had exploration of entrapped ulnar nerve).  The Veteran reported loss of muscle mass in the left arm, reduced left hand and arm strength with pain/numbness in the hand and fingers.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's elbow/forearm condition as well as his peripheral nerve condition impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran last worked in 2011.  While working his left forearm bothered him when completing tasks, such as helping to unload trucks or occasionally scraping grills.  The forearm would always ache/hurt and the more physical tasks bothered his arm.  The May 2014 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In May 2014, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's S-shaped scar left ulnar/posterior forearm did not impact his ability to work.  The May 2014 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In a December 2014 disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), E.K. (MD), a treating provider, diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD, panic disorder, major depressive disorder, hypersomnia, and a problem with enclosed spaces.  The Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  The Veteran had the following symptoms: a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, difficulty understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  Doctor E.K. opined the Veteran was not capable of managing his financial affairs.  His wife paid all bills and managed their financial affairs.  The Veteran often became very upset and agitated with minor problems of medical care.  This was indicative of how hard it was for him to deal with any stress /adversity.  Doctor E.K.'s opinion was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

January 2015 and February 2015 VA treatment notes indicated the Veteran was fully independent in his instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) and ADLs.  His wife paid the bills, but it was unclear if this was due to concern at him being inefficient or just the way they did things.  

In April 2015, the VA examiner opined the Veteran continued to exhibit diagnosable signs and symptoms of PTSD as well as symptoms of depression and panic attacks, which were subsumed under the PTSD diagnosis.  His phobia of enclosed spaces appeared to be an aspect of his PTSD.  The Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran reported waking up around 4:30 to 5AM because he could not sleep anymore.  He then ate whatever his wife had previously prepared, watched the news or listened to music, and waited for his wife to return home around 5PM.  He reported going to his father's house twice a week.  He also described performing yard chores but would rarely run an errand for a family member.  He attended VA appointments and went out to eat with his wife about once a week.   

His symptoms included a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting.  His mental status examination found his appearance appropriate, he was well groomed, showed signs of agitation and anxiety, had a tendency to ramble, a coherent thought process but mildly fixated on a set of complaints about perceived mistreatment by authority figures in the past, intact insight, normal speech, a logical thought process but overly inclusive, intact judgment, a dysphoric/anxious/depressed mood, constricted affect, and an adequate concentration and memory.  There were no signs of psychosis or suicidal or homicidal ideation.  The VA examiner assessed the Veteran could manage his financial affairs.  

The VA examiner opined the Veteran's PTSD would impact his ability to work.  His PTSD, including depressive symptoms and panic attacks, would make work stressful for him in that he would have difficulty interacting with others under more conflictual or otherwise negative circumstances.  However, most of his PTSD symptoms were longstanding and present during many years of productive employment.  The April 2015 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

Correspondence submitted by the Veteran in July 2015 indicated that his wife planned his day and handled all financial decisions because he could not focus and would forget.  She prepared all his meals and attended to the laundry; without her he could not go on. 

A January 2016 VA treatment note indicated he could maintain his IADLs.  In April 2016, he reported anxiety and depression were not interfering with his daily activities.  However, he occasionally struggled with claustrophobia and nightmares.  In October 2016, VA treating providers continued to find he could maintain his IADLs.  They also noted that his wife had started working part-time and was home more, this was working out well.  She continued to manage their money because the Veteran had filed for bankruptcy three times before.  He continued to go visit his elderly father three days a week.  A June 2017 VA treatment note continued to indicate he could maintain his IADLs.    

A September 2017 VA examiner noted the Veteran's report of constant seven out of 10 left elbow pain.  He described his left forearm pain as both throbbing and hard to explain.  He had numbness and weakness in the fourth and fifth fingers when trying to use them over time.  The Veteran's left ulnar neuroma impacted his ability to work due to no endurance in the fourth and fifth fingers over time.  The September 2017 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).         

In September 2017, the VA examiner diagnosed a scar of the left ulnar/posterior forearm.  The Veteran reported the scar was numb unless he accidentally hit the area or pressed hard on it and then he would have pain throughout.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's scar impacted his ability to work.  The Veteran was concerned about the scar causing him pain if it was not protected or if he hit it accidentally.  The September 2017 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In September 2017, the VA examiner diagnosed a healed fracture of the left ulna status post ORIF.  The examiner opined the Veteran's condition impacted his ability to perform any type of occupational task.  The Veteran said he would not be able to work jobs involving lifting heavy objects, or lifting any objects repeatedly, as in assembly line work.  The September 2017 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

January 2018 VA treatment records noted the Veteran could maintain his ADLs and IADLs.  In September 2019, his VA treating providers continued to note he could maintain his ADLs.  He was generally high functioning but had difficulty with anxiety, obsessional thinking, and a depressed mood.  

During the April 2019 Board hearing, the Veteran testified he did not sleep well due to nightmares and night sweats.  He got about two to three hours sleep and then got up.  He reported going to another room because he felt suffocated in the bedroom with the door shut.  He described feeling that he did not know what was going to happen when the door was shut, and this caused him an outrageous level of stress.  He sometimes had to take off his clothes because he felt like he was being smothered.  He testified to daily panic attacks.  This impacted his routine activities.  He had difficulty managing stressful situations and impulse control problems.  The Veteran reported being medically retired due to his cardiovascular disease but had to leave work early many times to go to the hospital for anxiety and chest pains due to his PTSD.  During a typical day he would go for a walk or to the local gym when there were few people around and visited his elderly father for a couple of hours to ensure he had what he needed for lunch.  He did not finish describing a typically day because he discussed a tangential thought about worrying about his health and getting life insurance to care for his wife.  

The Veteran is competent to provide testimony concerning factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge and experience through his senses.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2007); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005).     

In August 2019 and April 2020, VA treating providers found the Veteran was able to maintain his ADLs.  He was generally high functioning but had difficulty with anxiety, obsessional thinking, and a depressed mood.  

In September 2020, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with ankylosis of left elbow joint and a fractured left elbow.  The Veteran reported when trying to fully extend his arm he experienced extreme pain, loss of strength, and a very weak grip strength; using his hand caused extreme pain; he dropped a lot of items because of pain with gripping; had extreme fatigue when trying to put on shirt; and drove a car mostly with one grip.  He wore an arm pad for protection because any contact to the arm was extremely painful.  The pain he experienced was constant and always on his mind.  The VA examiner opined his left elbow disability impacted his ability to perform any type of occupational task due to difficulty lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling, gripping, dressing, and driving as well as a decline in his fine motor skills.  The September 2020 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).     

In February 2021, the Veteran reported feeling frustrated by what he could not do all day long.  It was difficult for him to drive because of his left arm.  The ulnar nerve pain when he bumped it on something was nauseatingly intense.  He wore a soft brace to protect the left arm and only used the right arm to drive.  His wife drove most of the time because he became too distracted by pain and intrusive thoughts.  The act of putting on a shirt was one of the most painful and exhausting parts of his day because he could not extend the left arm all the way to get the shirt on and even brushing the arm against the shirt was awful even wearing the brace.  He tried to put his pants on with the right hand, but it was awkward and painful.  He could barely tie his shoes and then only if he put his feet up on something.  His wife helped him when he really struggled getting dress and undressed.  She took care of things that could not be done with one hand like dishes and sweeping.

In March 2021, E.S. (Ph.D.), provided an independent medical evaluation.  The Veteran's mental status examination noted he was appropriately dressed, groomed, and cooperative during the interview.  He made adequate eye contact, and no abnormalities of psychomotor behavior were noted.  He was mildly anxious but maintained adequate attention, concentration, and memory.  His insight and judgment were also found adequate.  The Veteran reported the following symptoms: hypervigilance, nightmares, physiological reactivity, restricted affect, avoidance and social withdrawal, irritability, low mood, intermittent paranoia, chronic sleep impairment, and ongoing negative beliefs and emotions about traumatic experiences while in the Army.  

Doctor E.S. found the Veteran would have difficulty completing his activities of daily living due to psychiatric symptoms.  He reported sometimes needing reminders.  He did not engage in household activities or yard work.  His wife ran the errands, and he only joined her if necessary.  However, he noted feeling confined to his home because of his psychiatric symptoms.  Doctor E.S.'s opinion was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

In September 2022, the Veteran reported being married to his wife since 1997 and that she cared for him the entire time.  Because of his arm condition, he had a lot of difficulty gripping and carrying things.  He needed his wife's help buttoning his shirts.  If his wife was not home, he had to find someone else to help him.  One time had to ask the older woman who lived down the street to help him.  He avoided wearing shoes with laces.  He prefers to wear slip-ons because of difficulty tying the laces.  If he wore shoes with laces, his wife would tie them for him.  The Veteran described that his left arm condition/disability had rendered it essentially useless.  He dropped and broke things all the time, eating took longer than it used to due to difficulty gripping utensils, and he always made a mess spilling things on himself, which his wife cleaned up for him because he could not do it himself.  His wife helped him put on his left arm brace.  Additionally, his PTSD impacted his memory and concentration.  It took him less than 10 minutes to forget something once it was said.  His wife wrote everything down for him and left him written reminders so he could not forget things.  His memory issues kept him from cooking because he could not be trusted to use the stove or oven.  His wife also reminded him to take his medications.   

In September 2022, F.C. (the Veteran's wife) provided a lay statement.  F.C. reported marrying the Veteran in 1997.  She was his caretaker from the beginning of their marriage.  He had difficulty doing tasks with his hands because of his left arm condition.  She helped him with basic tasks he could not do on his own.  For example, she helped him dress by buttoning his shirts and fixing the collar and cut his hair for him so that it is easier to manage even with limited motion in his arm.  The Veteran had difficulty gripping things because of his arm condition.  He dropped things constantly breaking many dishes over the years, which made a mess.  He tried to clean these messes up but was not able to clean up after himself.  She wiped down the surfaces when he spilled and did all the laundry.  

F.C. reported that the Veteran's PTSD impacted his mood and memory.  He had difficulty remembering things he just did or was supposed to do.  She reminded him to run errands, eat, and take his medication.  Their schedules were linked so she knew what he was doing in a day and could remind him.  His poor memory meant he could not cook.  He would forget he turned on the stove.  She did all the cooking and put the food away in the fridge labeled with the contents and how to reheat it in the microwave because he could not use the stove or oven.  She helped him with things he physically was unable to do because of his left arm and managed his schedule and daily life when his PTSD caused him to forget.  F.C. reported providing care for her husband every day.  F.C.'s statement is probative.  She is competent to report her observations and conversations with the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2007).

In a February 2023 VA examination regarding the Veteran's request for aid and attendance, the examiner diagnosed the following conditions: PTSD; loss of use of left upper extremity at the left elbow; a healed left ulnar fracture with limitation of extension, flexion, supination, and pronation; and anxiety.  The examiner opined the ankylosis of the left elbow joint affected his ability to use buttons, zippers, cook meals, and shower.  He did not prepare his own meals; however, he could feed himself.  He needed mild to moderate assistance with the following activities: dressing and undressing, bathing, grooming, keeping himself ordinarily clean and presentable, and toileting.  His wife helped him with buttons and zippers.  He wore slip-on shoes because he could not tie his shoes.  He reported numbness to all fingertips on the left hand and an inability to straighten his left elbow out.  He wore a brace at night.  When his wife went to work two days a week, she called frequently to check on him.  The Veteran was not legally blind but used reading glasses.  

His wife prepared his medications for him in a medicine planner.  She will hand him medications when it is time to take them because he forgets.  He does not have an ability to manage his own financial affairs due to memory loss.  Due to numbness in his fingertips, he had a restricted grip in the left upper extremity and fine movements.  He was restricted in his ability to feed himself, button clothing, shave, and attend to the needs of nature.  He dropped things unless he was looking directly at the object.  However, the examiner opined the Veteran could perform his self-care and ambulate or travel beyond the premises of the house (or if hospitalized beyond the ward of the clinic area).  He ran errands with his wife if they were short visits where he could sit in the car.  He was unable to help with grabbing items off the shelves.  He went to weekly doctor appointments.  He used an assistive aid for locomotion of one block.    

The February 2023 VA examination was probative evidence, as it relied on sufficient facts and data, and provided a rationale for the opinion.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).   

As noted above, the Veteran is already in receipt of SMC (k) for loss of use of one hand and housebound status under SMC (s) based on his PTSD rated at 100 percent and additional service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more.  Because of this, he is not entitled to separate payments at the (s) and (l) rates unless the disability or disabilities which render the Veteran eligible for aid and attendance are separate and distinct from that or those which entitle him to SMC (s).  38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) and (s).  

In this case, there is no indication that the Veteran's other disabilities would render him eligible for aid and attendance.  The February 2023 VA examiner opined the Veteran was unable to manage his own financial affairs and his wife prepared his medications for him due to memory loss.  The Board notes that concentration and memory loss are associated with his PTSD.  The Board also notes that the evidence of record indicated his history of bankruptcy was the reason his wife managed their finances.  The February 2023 VA examiner noted the Veteran needed only mild to moderate assistance with dressing and undressing, bathing, grooming, keeping himself ordinarily clean and presentable, and toileting.  The examiner opined the Veteran could perform his self-care, ambulate or travel beyond the premises of the house, and attend weekly doctor appointments.  He was not legally blind and did not require nursing home care.  In fact, the Veteran reported going to his father's house several times a week to check in on him and spending several days a week at home alone while his wife worked part-time.  Therefore, the Board finds that the need for regular aid and attendance of another person under SMC (l) was not met.

Additionally, an SMC (p) rating will be awarded when the Veteran is in receipt of an SMC rate between (l) and (o) and also has additional service-connected disabilities that combine independently to 50 or 100 percent.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(f).  Such an award creates "entitlement to the next higher intermediate rate or if already entitled to an intermediate rate to the next higher statutory rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114."  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(f)(3).  Put another way, SMC (p) affords "a half-step" or "full step" increase in the level of compensation. The disability or disabilities independently ratable at 50 percent or more must be separate and distinct and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems from the conditions establishing entitlement under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l) through (n).

Here, the evidence does not establish that the Veteran meets the criteria for an award of SMC under §§ 1114(l) through (n), as discussed above.  Accordingly, a higher rate of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(p) is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(o), (p); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(e), (f).

Finally, SMC at the (r) rate concerns special aid and attendance and is divided between (R)(1) and (R)(2), each with separate criteria.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(r); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(h).  To qualify under the (r)(1) or the (r)(2) rate, receipt of the (o) rate, the maximum rate under (p), or an intermediate rate between the (n) and (o) rates plus a (k) rate is required.  Id.

In this case, as detailed above, the evidence does not establish entitlement to SMC at the (l) rate based on aid and attendance or under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(k), (n), (o), or (p).  As such, the threshold requirements for SMC at the (r) rate are not met.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not establish that the Veteran meets the criteria for an award of additional SMC in excess of the amount paid pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114.  In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim, the doctrine is not applicable, and his claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.L. Byers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.