Citation Nr: A25031120
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-472489
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches condition (claimed as secondary to service-connected tinnitus) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1989 to December 1996.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) August 2024 rating decision.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches condition (claimed as secondary to service-connected tinnitus), any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363 (U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. Although the Veteran's period of time to request a docket switch has not expired, the instant decision is a remand and thus there is no due process concern or prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the appeal. See August 23, 2024, VA 20-8993 notification letter and September 5, 2024, VA 10182 notice of disagreement.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches condition (claimed as secondary to service-connected tinnitus) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a migraine headache condition that is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus disability.  Additionally, the Veteran indicated that due to the constant ringing in his ears he suffers from migraine headaches.  The Veteran reported the onset of his migraine headache condition during service and that the condition has remained the same with symptoms of nausea and pain in his right forehead lasting 2-3 hours at a time a few times every week.  The pain causes the Veteran to have sit down and prevents him from concentrating and the Veteran reported being treated in service for migraine headache condition.  See July 2024 VA 21-526 claim, August 2024 C&P examination, and January 1993 and November 1996 service treatment records (STRs).

The Veteran is service connected for a tinnitus disability. See August 2024 rating decision.

Service connection requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In determining whether a disability is to be granted secondary service connection the VA must find (1) that there is a current disability that is not service connected; (2) that there is at least one service-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the non-service-connected disability is either, (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a).

The Board notes that the RO made favorable findings that the Veteran's STRs reflect a January 1993 and November 1996 treatment for headaches, and that the Veteran has been service connected for a tinnitus disability. See August 2024 rating decision. The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent a finding of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran's STRs reflect a medical treatment entry for headaches in January 1993 and the Veteran's November 1996 report of medical history reflects a compliant of frequent or severe headaches. See January 1993 service treatment record and November 1996 report of medical history.

In August 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. During the examination the Veteran stated that he suffers from a migraine headache condition that had its onset during service and has stayed the same since.  The Veteran reported pain on the right side of the forehead, nausea and sharp pulsating headaches. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, service records, along with interviewing the Veteran (without an examination) and concluded that the Veteran's migraine headaches condition were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The examiner stated as rationale for the negative nexus opinion that the record is absent of any headache complaints since the Veteran separated from service and that the Veteran's complaints of migraines are subjective with no objective evidence in the Veteran's medical records.  The Board finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

Additionally, the Board finds that the August 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate because the opinion lacked a rationale on why the Veteran's migraine headache condition was less likely than not caused by an in-service injury event or illness. The examiner did not consider and address the Veteran's specific lay statements in the record regarding being treated during service for a headache condition, did not specifically address the medical treatment reports for headaches during service, and did not opine whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus disability caused or aggravated his migraine headache condition.  

The Board notes that the Veteran asserted a relationship between his migraine headaches condition and his tinnitus disability in his July 2024 claim. As the contention of secondary service connection was first raised in July 2024 and since the Veteran was service connected for tinnitus, at the time of the rating decision on appeal, this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine whether the Veteran's migraine headaches condition is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset in, is caused by, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's military service?

2. Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the migraine headaches condition was caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's STR's to include the January 1993 and November 1996 reports of headache pain, and any related lay-observable symptoms to include the additional symptom of pain. The examiner should consider the Veteran's lay statements. For the purpose of this examination and opinion only, the examiner must assume that the Veteran's statements are credible and accurate unless there is a medical reason to conclude otherwise. If this is the case, the examiner must provide a thorough explanation.

A full rationale must be provided for all medical opinions provided.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Feldmann, Charles E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.