Citation Nr: A25031381
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 250129-508410
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral spine degenerative disc disease and scoliosis is remanded.

Entitlement to lower extremity radiculopathy secondary to lumbosacral spine degenerative disc disease and scoliosis is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1972 to November 1972. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2025 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral spine degenerative disc disease and scoliosis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Lastly, in September 2024, the Veteran filed a motion to advance this appeal on the Board's docket (AOD) due to serious illness.  In the October 24, 2024, Board remand, the Board found that the Veteran demonstrated good cause to advance the appeal and granted the Veteran's AOD motion.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).  The Veteran, through his representative, submitted an additional AOD motion on January 29, 2025, which was also subsequently granted on February 25, 2025. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral spine degenerative disc disease and scoliosis

The Veteran seeks service connection for degenerative disc disease with scoliosis.  See March 2024 Claim.  Specifically, the Veteran reported that he was drafted into the Army with a pre-existing condition and despite being placed on medical hold, and given the directive of no marching, exercising, running, and jumping, he was assigned as a "CQ runner and "Night Repro." See March 2024 Veteran Statement; see also August 2024 Veteran Statement.  The Veteran contends that as a "CQ runner" and "Night Repro" he was required to walk and run across the base delivering messages and packages for up to 12 hours a day.  See August 2024 Veteran Statement.  As a result, the Veteran asserts that he was in pain during service and "completely exasperated (sic) his condition."  See March 2024 Veteran Statement. 

The Veteran is currently diagnosed with degenerative disc disease and scoliosis.  See May 2024 Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  

The June 13, 1972, Report of Examination at enlistment documented no abnormalities of the spine and other musculoskeletal, however a "low back strain" diagnosis was provided in a separate section of the examination.   

The Veteran's military personnel records include two letters documenting diagnoses of right rotatory scoliosis of the upper dorsal vertebra with symptoms of headaches, hypertension, low back pain (intermittent), and degenerative disc disease with nerve root manifestations, right fifth lumbar, right dorsal scoliosis, and left lumbar scoliosis.  See June 15, 1972 letter authored by Dr. G.B.; see also June 16, 1972 letter authored by Dr. J.K.C.  Additionally, the Veteran underwent an orthopedic consultation related to his back which documented a diagnosis of chronic low back strain, moderately symptomatic with few objective findings and no significant objective evidence of organic orthopedic pathology found as regards to the cervical spine.  See July 17, 1972 Orthopedic Consult Note.  An undated record in the Veteran's personnel records documents a diagnosis of "lumbar scoliosis lower L, otherwise negative chronic back ache with definite pathology." 

In a prior decision, the Board determined that the presumption of aggravation is applicable in this matter and made a finding that "the Veteran satisfied the first prong of this test by showing that a worsening occurred during service beyond a normal progression."  However, clear and unmistakable evidence is required to establish that an increase in severity is due to the natural progression, which is not the evidentiary burden required of the Veteran.  See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (holding that if a preexisting disorder is noted upon entry into service, and the Veteran brings a claim for service connection on the basis of aggravation under § 1153, the burden falls on the Veteran to establish aggravation of the preexisting disorder).   Nevertheless, the Board interprets the findings to include that: there was a pre-existing back disorder noted upon entry into service, the Veteran satisfied his burden establishing the pre-existing disorder increased in severity during service, and thus, the presumption of aggravation is triggered.  

Once a veteran establishes worsening, "the burden shifts to the [VA] Secretary to show by clear and unmistakable evidence that the worsening of the condition was due to the natural progress of the disease."  See Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 235 n.6 (2012).

Therefore, the primary inquiry in this matter is whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the "increase in disability [was] due to the natural progress of the preexisting condition.  See Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096 (quoting 38 U.S.C. § 1153); Jensen v. Brown, 19 F.3d 1413, 1417 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

In this regard, in a May 2024 VA opinion, the examiner rendered a negative opinion regarding service connection based on aggravation.  Although the VA examiner checked the box indicating that the disability was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness, the examiner used a preponderance of the evidence standard "less likely than not" in the rationale rather than the correct legal standard "clearly and unmistakable" aggravated beyond its natural progression.  Thus, making the negative opinion insufficient to support a conclusion that the in-service worsening of the back disability was clearly and unmistakably due to the natural progress of the disease. 

In October 2024, the Board remanded the issue for an addendum opinion to correct the improper evidentiary standard used by the May 2024 VA examiner.  The Board directed the VA examiner to opine as to whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence (medically undebatable) that the Veteran's back disorder was not aggravated to a permanent degree in service beyond that which would be due to the natural progression of the disease.  

In a December 2024 medical opinion, the VA examiner again checked the box indicating that the disability was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness but concluded that the Veteran's x-rays from 2022 and evaluation by his private doctor in 1969 were unchanged "making annexes of injury for aggravation beyond its natural progression most unlikely."  The examiner opined further that an MRI was considered the "gold standard" for back imaging and the Veteran had not undergone this level of diagnostic testing.  Although the medical opinion was thorough in the review of records, the VA examiner failed to use the correct evidentiary standard, rendering the opinion inadequate for adjudication. 

Furthermore, no VA examiner has opined as to whether the Veteran's scoliosis is a congenital or development defect or a congenital disease.  VA laws and regulations provide that congenital and developmental defects are not disabilities within the meaning of applicable regulations providing for payment of VA disability compensation benefits.   See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 4.9.  The VA General Counsel explained there is a distinction under the law between a congenital or developmental "disease" and a congenital "defect" for service connection purposes: congenital diseases may be recognized as service-connected if the evidence shows aggravation in service within the meaning of VA regulations.   A congenital or developmental defect, on the other hand, is not service connectable because of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (c); however, service connection may be granted for additional disability due to a disease or injury superimposed upon the defect during service. VAOPGCPREC 82-90.

The January 2025 rating decision denied the claim without obtaining an addendum to address the above-noted deficiencies.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  A remand is necessary to correct it. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for lower extremity radiculopathy secondary to lumbosacral spine degenerative disease with scoliosis.

When a Veteran files a claim for compensation, VA has a duty to fully and sympathetically develop the Veteran's claim to its optimum.  See Hodge v. West, 155 F.3d 1356, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 1998).  As part of VA's duty to fully and sympathetically develop the Veteran's claim, VA must consider all theories of entitlement that are raised by the Veteran, or reasonably raised by the record. See 38 U.S.C. § 1151; Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Regarding the lower extremity radiculopathy, a May 2024 Back Conditions DBQ for the low back includes questions about related radiculopathy, which affirmatively documents lower extremity radicular pain and numbness, and the Veteran relates this condition as symptoms of his back disability.  The Veteran has not initiated sperate claims for lower extremity radicular pain and the issues have not been previously adjudicated. 

A remand is warranted for the Veteran's lower extremity radiculopathy because it is inextricably intertwined with the low back disability as the May 2024 Back Conditions DBQ for the low back includes questions about related radiculopathy, which affirmatively document lower extremity radicular pain and numbness.  See Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 177 (2009) (en banc) (explaining that claims are inextricably intertwined where the adjudication of one claim could have a significant impact on the adjudication of another claim); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).  Here, a grant of service connection for low back disability would significantly impact his claim for lower extremity radiculopathy claim.   

Because the Veteran's low back claim has been remanded for a VA examination, the Board finds that a remand of his claim for radiculopathy, as inextricably intertwined, is also necessary.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to address the Veteran's degenerative disc disorder and scoliosis.  Any testing deemed necessary should be conducted, and the results should be noted in the examination report. 

(A) Then, the examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed scoliosis, noted at entry and in the private treatment records (See June 15, 1972 Military Personnel Record; see also June 16, 1972 Military Personnel Record), is (1) a congenital "disease," (2) a congenital or developmental "defect," or (3) an acquired disability?

The examiner is reminded that, for VA purposes, a "disease" generally refers to a condition that is considered capable of improving or deteriorating, while a "defect" is generally not considered capable of improving or deteriorating.  VAOPGCREC 82-90 (1990) (citing Durham v. United States, 214 F.2d 862, 875 (D.C. Circuit 1954) 

i. If the Veteran's scoliosis is a congenital defect, was it subject to a superimposed disease or injury during his period of active service that resulted in additional disability?

ii. If the Veteran's scoliosis is a congenital disease, was the increase in severity during service?

iii. If the Veteran's scoliosis increased in severity during service, is there clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease?

(B) If it is a disease, the clinician must opine as to whether it is clear and unmistakable (medically undebatable) that the pre-existing scoliosis was NOT aggravated (i.e. permanently worsening which is not a temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service.  See Wagner v. Principi, 370, F.3d 1089, 1096 9Fed. Cir. 2004)) during service; or whether it is clear and unmistakable (medically undebatable) the increase in service was due to the natural progress of the preexisting condition. 

In answering this question, the clinician should address the Veteran's lay statements, that despite having a physical profile that included no marching, his duties as a "CQ runner" and "Night Repro" required him to walk across the base delivering messages and packages for up to 12 hours a day and as a result, he was in pain during service and "completely exasperated his condition.  See August 2024 Veteran Statement; see also March 2024 Veteran Statement.  

2. Obtain an addendum from an appropriate clinician to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right and left lower extremity radiculopathy.  

The examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's lower right and left lower extremity radiculopathy is due to or aggravated by his lumbosacral degenerative disc disease with scoliosis. 

The clinician is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, S. L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.