Citation Nr: A25031735
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231228-403549
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease is denied.

An initial compensable disability rating for chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease is manifested by urolithiasis in the kidney, requiring treatment 0 to 1 time per year, with occasional attacks of colic.

2. The Veteran's chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis has been manifested by symptoms including decreased appetite, nausea, and gas.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7508.

2.  The criteria for an initial compensable disability rating for chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.114, DCs 7314, 7315. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1976 to June 2000.

By way of background, the Veteran's claims for service connection for a kidney disability and a gallbladder disability were previously before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) when they were remanded in August 2018 and April 2023 for additional development.  

In an October 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease, rated 10 percent, and chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis, rated 0 percent, both effective April 8, 2014. 

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and requested review of the initial ratings assigned for his service-connected disabilities in the October 2023 rating decision.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Lastly, the Board notes that in the Appellant's Brief submitted in February 2024 by the Veteran's representative, it was highlighted how the Veteran's service-connected nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease and chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis impacted the Veteran functionally, including on his ability to work.  Ordinarily, when a Veteran files a claim for an increased rating, he is presumed to be seeking the maximum benefit under any applicable theory, including a total disability evaluation based on individual unemployability (TDIU). See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 45354 (2009).  Here, however, the Veteran is already assigned a TDIU rating, effective August 16, 2009 (and prior to the effective dates assigned for the disabilities addressed herein).  Accordingly, this matter need not be addressed further.  

Increased Rating 

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted considering the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (citing Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999)).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g). If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110.

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease

The Veteran is assigned a 10 percent disability rating for nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease, under DC 7508.  See October 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran has generally asserted that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent. 

At the outset, the Board notes, effective November 14, 2021, and during the pendency of this appeal, VA amended 38 C.F.R. § 4.115(a) and 4.115(b) in part, to include amending 4.115(a) by revising the introductory text and the table entries for "renal dysfunction" and "urinary tract infection," revising the entry for DC 7508, removing the entry for DC 7510, revising the entry for DC 7541, as well as other changes not pertinent to the Veteran's instant appeal. See Schedule for Rating Disabilities; The Genitourinary Diseases and Conditions, 86 Fed. Reg. 54081 (Sep. 30, 2021).

Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to November 14, 2021, and both the old and new rating criteria from November 14, 2021. The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.

Prior to November 14, 2021, under DC 7508, nephrolithiasis was rated as hydronephrosis except when there were recurring stone formations that required one or more of the following: (1) diet therapy, (2) drug therapy, and/or (3) invasive or non-invasive procedures more than two times a year; in which case a 30 percent evaluation would be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b DC 7508.

Effective November 14, 2021, DC 7508 now states that nephrolithiasis is to be rated as hydronephrosis, except for recurrent stone formation requiring invasive or non-invasive procedures more than two times per year; in which case a 30 percent evaluation is assigned.  This change eliminated the exceptions for recurrent stone formation requiring diet or drug therapy.

DC 7509, which rates hydronephrosis, was unchanged by the revisions. Under DC 7509, a 10 percent rating is warranted for only an occasional attack of colic, not infected and not requiring catheter drainage; a 20 percent rating is warranted for frequent attacks of colic, requiring catheter drainage; and a 30 percent rating is warranted for frequent attacks of colic with infection (pyonephrosis) with impaired kidney function.  If hydronephrosis is severe, it is rated as renal dysfunction. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, DC 7509.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, April 2014 private treatment records show the Veteran was treated with a stent insertion for a kidney stone in his distal common bile duct.  

In August 2020, the Veteran underwent a VA Kidney Conditions examination.  The examiner diagnosed with nephrolithiasis (kidney stone) as well as cystic kidney disease.  The Veteran reported that in 2007, he sought treatment for right flower flank pain and after testing, a kidney stone was confirmed.  He was treated with forced fluids that passed the stone.  The Veteran also reported that since 2011, he had passed another stone 3 times.  The Veteran indicated to the examiner that his condition had improved since onset; his current symptoms consisted of continued lower back pain, although he had been told the pain was from his lower back condition.  It was noted that in August 2011, the Veteran underwent a right uretero pyeloscopy with lithotripsy/stent placement; however, he had not received any other treatment/surgery, to include taking any continuous medication for the diagnosed condition.  On examination of the Veteran, the examiner indicated he did not suffer from renal dysfunction, urinary tract or kidney infection, kidney transplant or removal, or tumors and neoplasms.  The Veteran did have urolithiasis in the kidney, but he did not require treatment (such as diet therapy, drug therapy, or invasive or non-invasive procedures) for recurrent stone formation or suffer from symptoms due to urolithiasis.  The examiner did not find any additional pertinent physical findings or complications related to his diagnosis.  Diagnostic testing was reviewed; the examiner noted that RBC's/HPF and proteinuria (albumin) testing had been performed in October 2020 with normal results.  A CT Intravenous Pyelogram was also performed in October 2016.  At the time, the Veteran's kidneys showed no hydronephrosis bilaterally, but multiple bilateral simple renal cysts were present with some distortion of the renal collecting system bilaterally.  There were no filling defects seen in the renal collecting system or opacified ureters.  A simple cyst distorting the right renal collecting system was noted in the right kidney.  A large cyst was also found on the left side.  Finally, the examiner indicated the Veteran had no functional impact from his kidney condition on his ability to work.

VA treatment records include a CT performed in July 2022; it revealed renal and bladder stones.

Another VA Kidney Conditions examination was performed in September 2023.  The examiner diagnosed nephrolithiasis and cystic kidney disease.  During this examination, the Veteran reported a history of onset in 1989 stating that he had a hematuria at that time and was diagnosed with nephrolithiasis, which was managed conservatively.  He also reported that he continued to have chronic nephrolithiasis and hematuria and had removal of stones from the kidney in that present year.  He also reported having multiple procedures for stone removal since 1989, likely over ten, and indicated that his condition had progressed/worsened since onset.  For current symptoms, the Veteran reported hematuria and pain in the back and groin.  It was noted that the Veteran's condition had been treated with cystoscopy for removal of bilateral stones; he did not take continuous medication for the condition.  He also did not have hypertension or heart disease due to renal dysfunction or another cause from a kidney condition.  In fact, the examiner indicated the Veteran did not have renal dysfunction.  He did, on the other hand, have urolithiasis in the kidney and ureter.  The stone formation did not cause stricture of the ureter, but the Veteran did require treatment for his kidney stone 0 to 1 times per year.  He also suffered from pyelonephritis and hydronephrosis.  Additionally, he had occasional attacks of colic due to the urolithiasis.  The Veteran did not have a history of urinary tract or kidney infection, kidney removal or transplant, tumors and neoplasms, or any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms.  Diagnostic testing results in the medical records were reviewed along with the results from those conducted in conjunction with the examination; these showed CRE of 1.2, BUN of 11, and EGFR of 60.  Functionally, it was indicated that when the Veteran had pain from kidney stones, he could function at work and must rest at home.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence does not support a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's service-connected nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease.  The record shows the Veteran suffers from urolithiasis in the kidney; however, during the August 2020 VA examination it was indicated it did not require treatment and in the September 2023 VA examination, it was indicated it required invasive or non-invasive procedures for treatment, but only 0 to 1 time per year.  A higher (30 percent) rating under DC 7508 (both prior to and after November 14, 2021) requires treatment more than two times a year, which has not been shown.  

When rating under DC 7509, for hydronephrosis, the August 2020 VA examiner indicated the Veteran's urolithiasis did not cause hydronephrosis.  During the September 2023 VA examination, it was indicated that the Veteran's upper urinary tract urolithiasis required infectious (pyonephrosis) and caused hydronephrosis.  However, the attacks of colic were characterized as occasional; frequent attacks of colic were not found.  Based on this, the Veteran is appropriately assigned a 10 percent rating based on a finding of occasional attack of colic, not infected and not requiring catheter drainage.  A higher 20 percent requires frequent attacks of colic, requiring catheter drainage.  And although a 30 percent rating includes a finding of pyonephrosis, which the Veteran was indicated to have during the September 2023 VA examination, it also noted that a 30 percent rating is warranted for frequent attacks of colic with infection (pyonephrosis) with impaired kidney function.  It is not shown that the Veteran has frequent attacks of colic or impaired kidney function.  Accordingly, a higher rating on this basis is not warranted either.

In conclusion, the record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for his nephrolithiasis with cystic kidney disease, and the claim must be denied.  As the weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis

The Veteran is assigned a noncompensable disability rating for chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis under DCs 7315-7314.  See October 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran generally asserts that his disability warrants a compensable rating.

VA recently amended the Rating Schedule for evaluating digestive system disabilities, effective May 19, 2024.  See 89 Fed. Reg. 19375 (Mar. 20, 2024).  As addressed above, revised rating criteria typically apply to all claims received by VA or that are pending before the AOJ on or after May 19, 2024.  In this case, however, the rating decision on appeal was issued prior to the implementation of the revised rating criteria.  As this decision reviews the October 2023 rating decision to determine whether the correct decision was made at that time, the Board will only review the criteria in effect at the time of that decision.

Under DC 7315, chronic cholelithiasis is evaluated as for chronic cholecystitis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  Under DC 7314, for chronic cholecystitis, a noncompensable (0 percent) rating is warranted for mild chronic cholecystitis.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate chronic cholecystitis, described as gall bladder dyspepsia, confirmed by X-ray technique, and with infrequent attacks (not over two or three a year) of gall bladder colic, with or without jaundice.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for severe chronic cholecystitis, described as frequent attacks of gall bladder colic.  Id.  

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, a January 2014 MRI shows the Veteran's gallbladder was filled with multiple stones.  He underwent an operation for removal that same month.  The postoperative diagnosis was chronic cholecystitis.  

An April 2014 private record shows a diagnosis of biliary colic secondary to probable retained common bile duct stone.

In November 2017, the Veteran presented to a VA treatment facility positive for choledocholithiasis and biliary colic pain.

In August 2020, the Veteran underwent a VA Gallbladder and Pancreas Conditions examination.  The examiner diagnosed cholecystectomy, choledocholithiasis, and cholecystitis.  It was reported for medical history that in 2014, the Veteran had a cholecystectomy (gall bladder removal) that was followed by some infections caused by bile duct infections. The condition was now resolved; however, the Veteran reported current symptoms of feeling that he had a decreased appetite, decreased thirst, and was often "gassy."  The Veteran did not require continuous medication for the control of his gallbladder condition.  On physical examination, no signs or symptoms attributable to a gallbladder condition, such as gallbladder dyspepsia, attacks of gallbladder colic, jaundice, or post-operative residuals from a cholecystectomy, were noted.  The Veteran also did not have any other additional signs or symptoms attributable to his gallbladder condition that were not directly asked about on the examination report.  Additionally, the examiner indicated the Veteran did not have any signs or symptoms attributable to a pancreas condition, or other pertinent physical findings aside from a scar that was located on his abdomen just below his chest.  The scar measured 25.4 centimeters by .8 centimeters, and was not painful or unstable.  Diagnostic imaging from January 2014 was reviewed; it showed the gallbladder was filled with multiple stones.  The results of the imaging were choledocholithiasis and cholecystitis, irregular, beaded appearance of the cystic duct, which may be due to obstruction and multiple bilateral renal cysts.  The examiner indicated there were no significant diagnostic test findings and/or results and that functionally, the Veteran's gallbladder condition had no impact on his ability to work.

A July 2022 VA treatment record show a CT scan of the abdomen was performed.  The findings showed a normal liver and gallbladder.

Another VA Gallbladder and Pancreas Conditions examination was performed in September 2023.  The examiner diagnosed chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis.  During this examination, the Veteran indicated that his condition had improved since its onset.  He described his current symptoms as persistent occasional nausea with near vomiting and abdominal pain.  It was noted that the Veteran had undergone biliary stenting and that he treated his gallbladder condition with Omeprazole daily.  On physical examination, the examiner indicated the Veteran suffered from infrequent nausea and bloating as a result of his gallbladder condition.  He did not have any pancreas conditions, tumors and neoplasms, or other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms attributable to his gallbladder condition.  Diagnostic testing was reviewed; a 2011 ultrasound noted multiple gallbladder stones, and a 2017 endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed stones were located and removed with stricture noted and the stent that had been previously placed removed.  The laboratory testing performed in conjunction with the September 2023 VA examination showed alkaline phosphatase of 107 and bilirubin of .84.  The examiner indicated there were no significant diagnostic test findings and/or results and that functionally, the nausea from the Veteran's gallbladder condition disrupted his ability to work. 

Based on the foregoing evidence, it is not shown that the Veteran's chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis has been manifested by any compensable residual symptoms.  Although the Veteran reported symptoms of decreased appetite, decreased thirst, feeling gassy, and persistent occasional nausea with near vomiting and abdominal pain, the Board finds that these symptoms amount to mild chronic cholecystitis, which warrants a 0 percent under DCs 7315-7314.  Importantly, a compensable (10 percent) rating requires a showing of moderate chronic cholecystitis; this is described as gall bladder dyspepsia, confirmed by X-ray technique, and with infrequent attacks (not over two or three a year) of gall bladder colic, with or without jaundice.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7314.  Such symptoms have not been shown in the Veteran's treatment records or in the August 2020 and September 2023 VA examination reports.  In fact, during both VA examinations, it was specifically indicated that the Veteran did not have gallbladder dyspepsia, any attacks of gallbladder colic (infrequent or frequent), or jaundice.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the Veteran's chronic cholelithiasis and chronic cholangitis does not more nearly approximate the criteria corresponding to a compensable disability rating under either DCs 7314 or 7315.  As the record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's increased rating claim, it must be denied.  The weight of the evidence is against the claim, and therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Churchwell, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.