Citation Nr: A25031343
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-452186
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating, effective December 1, 2023, for service-connected prostate cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1990 to June 1996.

This matter is on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision.  In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, notice of disagreement, requesting direct review by a Veterans Law Judge.  The Board will consider evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision notification letter.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.  

By way of procedural history, the Veteran filed a new claim for increased rating in May 2024.  Here, the rating decision was issued in June 2024 which granted a 20 percent rating for prostate cancer residuals.  This rating decision is not on appeal.

While the Board notes that this appeal arises from a rating decision issued in the past year, the Veteran's representative, in an August 2024 brief presentation, clearly indicated that the representative advanced the Veteran's claim as to whether a compensable evaluation is warranted.  The Board views this brief as a waiver of the Veteran's right to switch dockets in the remainder of the one-year period and will proceed with a decision in this case.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

Regrettably, the Board finds a remand is necessary.  Specifically, the Board finds that further development is necessary prior to adjudicating the matter.

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023.  Here, the examiner noted a diagnosis of neoplasms of the male reproductive systems, including prostate cancer.  The Veteran reported he was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2022 and opted for radical prostatectomy with lymph node removal.  The examiner noted the Veteran's prostatectomy surgery was in August 2022.  The examiner notes there are no scars or other disfigurement related to his condition.  Furthermore, the examiner noted a biopsy has been performed, but the results are unknown as he was unable to locate the biopsy report within the claims file.  Lastly, the examiner noted the Veteran was instructed to send all personal medical records to the VA evidence intake center for proper submission.  See November 2023 VA Male Reproductive Organ Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).

A few days after the examination, the RO issued the rating decision on appeal.

Here, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred when the RO did not request private medical records from the Veteran.  The VA examination made it evident that further medical records were available.  Additionally, the medical records were not made available to the examiner, as the biopsy and report was unavailable during the examination as noted by the examiner.

Lastly, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred when records were not received regarding the Veteran's biopsy.  The examiner noted a biopsy without actual medical evidence of the biopsy.

As such, the Board finds the November 2023 VA examination is inadequate, and a remand is warranted based on a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Inform the Veteran of VA's duty to assist in obtaining private medical treatment records (including prostate biopsy results), and, if authorization is granted, attempt to obtain any relevant medical treatment records.  The Veteran should be specifically requested to complete a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information.  All efforts must be documented in the claims file.

2. After the above is completed, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for prostate cancer, to include residuals, to assess the severity of his condition for the period beginning December 1, 2023.  The examiner must indicate that they reviewed the entirety of the claims file prior to setting forth his or her opinion, including any available biopsy reports. The examiner should describe the frequency and severity of all present symptoms and manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected prostate cancer with residual, if found.  The Veteran's lay assertions in this regard should be recorded and considered.  

All opinions must be supported by a detailed rationale.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Glaeser

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.