Citation Nr: A25031098
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240614-447443
DATE:       April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1987 to April 1990 and from November 2004 to November 2005. 

This issue comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 Rating Decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the June 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss.

The Veteran contends that his bilateral hearing loss is related to his active service, specifically his exposure to guns and cannons. See October 2021 Fully Developed Claim. 

The Veteran was afforded four VA examinations in connection with his hearing loss claim. At the first VA examination in December 2021, the examiner found the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral hearing loss. The Veteran reported being exposed to gunfire and cannons while on the range as a cannon crewmember. He denied occupational and recreational noise exposure after service. The examiner did not find a nexus between the Veteran's diagnosed hearing loss and his military service. The rationale provided by the examiner was that there were no significant threshold shifts from entrance to separation for both active-duty periods which is objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage. Furthermore, the examiner noted the service treatment records were silent for hearing loss complaints and that although noise exposure is conceded and the relationship of noise, auditory damage and hearing loss is well-established, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone. Finally, the examiner found that there must be a nexus of auditory damage to relate current hearing loss to military noise and not another etiology. See December 2021 C&P Exam. 

The other three VA examinations provide the same rationale for not finding a nexus between the Veteran's hearing loss and his military service. See July 2022 C&P Exam; September 2023 C&P Exam; November 2023 C&P exam. 

The Board finds the medical opinions obtained by the AOJ to be inadequate for rating purposes. A lack of documented hearing loss in service, or normal hearing at separation from service, is not, without more, a sufficient basis for an unfavorable nexus opinion. Hensely v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159-60 (1993). Accordingly, the Board finds a remand is necessary so that a new VA opinion regarding the Veteran's hearing loss may be obtained. 

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed, or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to offer an opinion as to the Veteran's bilateral ear hearing loss.

The examiner should explain why the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is or is not a delayed response to in-service noise exposure. The examiner should explain the reasoning for any opinion provided, to include the medical significance of any findings, as adjudicators are precluded from making medical findings.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to observable symptomatology. The examiner's attention is thus directed to the Veteran's statements concerning the in-service experiences, the onset of the claimed condition, and the persistent symptoms he has experienced since service.

The examiner is reminded that a medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the record or that does not address the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history is inadequate. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

(Continued on the next page)

?

As indicated, a rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided as the Board is precluded from making medical findings. A discussion of the facts and the medical principles involved will be of considerable assistance to the Board, including citation to any supporting medical treatises.

 

 

J. B. FREEMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pulaski, Michael F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.