Citation Nr: A25031471
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-463334
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1988 to June 1992 and in the United States Army from October 1993 to November 1995.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which, in pertinent part, denied service connection for GERD and a back disability.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on which he identified the January 2024 rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.  

By way of history, in February 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of a previous denial of service connection for a back disability.  In February 2023, the Veteran also submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ, seeking service connection for GERD.  

In a March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for a back disability.  In a May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for GERD.  

In August 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of the March 2023 and May 2023 rating decisions.  In a January 2024 rating decision referenced above, the AOJ readjudicated and denied service connection for GERD and denied service connection for a back disability.  In August 2024, VA received the Veteran's timely Board appeal, on which he identified the January 2024 rating decision.

Given this procedural history, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the January 2024 AOJ decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  Because the Board is remanding the claims, however, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of the claim.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.  

The Veteran asserts two theories of entitlement with respect to his claim of service connection for GERD.  At the time of his original application for compensation, the Veteran claimed that he developed GERD as a result of taking NSAID medications to treat his service-connected right knee disability.  See February 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.  More recently, the Veteran has claimed that his GERD began in service as a result of alternating day and night shifts, which resulted in abnormal eating patterns, which in turn, caused heartburn and an acid taste in his throat.  See September 2023 VA examination report.  

The Veteran's service treatment records (STR's) are silent for any complaints or findings related to GERD.  Rather, these records include multiple examination reports determining that the Veteran's mouth, throat, and abdomen were normal, and reports of medical history on which the Veteran denied having, or ever having had, frequent indigestion and stomach trouble.  

In a June 1997 rating decision, the RO awarded service connection for chondromalacia, right knee, and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective December 1, 1995.

The Veteran established care with VA in March 2008, at which time he reported worsening right knee pain and was told by his clinician to take NSAIDs as needed.  An August 2013 VA orthopedic note reflects the clinicians report that the Veteran had been previously instructed to take NSAIDs to treat his right knee pain and that he was currently taking Advil.  A March 2014 primary care note reflects that the Veteran had an active prescription for Naproxen.  A September 2014 VA otolaryngology note reflects that the Veteran had been diagnosed as having laryngopharyngeal reflux.  A scope examination revealed continued reflux findings.  The Veteran was instructed to continue taking a proton pump inhibitor 30 minutes prior to meals.  A June 2015 follow-up otolaryngology note reflects the clinician's instructions to "continue conservative GERD therapy."  

In an October 2015 rating decision, the RO awarded service connection for degenerative arthritis, right knee and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective March 24, 2008.

In February 2023, the Veteran applied for VA compensation, seeking service connection for GERD.  In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a written statement that he has taken Ibuprofen and Advil for his service-connected disabilities and began to have symptoms of GERD after taking these medications on a routine basis.  The Veteran also submitted an abstract of a study aimed to assess the prevalence of GERD and its associated risk factors among the Al-Qunfudah population, and an article discussing the etiology, epidemiology, and pathophysiology of GERD.  

In March 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  The examiner reported the Veteran's history as "Veteran states his reflux started about 5 years ago due to his right knee pain...."  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had pyrosis, reflux, and sleep disturbance caused by esophageal reflux, and that he took Tums, Pepto-Bismol, and OTC HEB brand as treatment.  The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a current or previous diagnosis of an esophageal condition.  In the remarks section of the report, the examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms were subjective only and that the Veteran's records were silent for any complaint of GERD or evidence of chronic symptoms of GERD.  In an accompanying opinion, the examiner again stated that the Veteran did not have a GERD diagnosis and noted that "no research studies have shown 'chondromalacia, right knee to include arthritis' as a risk factor for GERD."  

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a private opinion authored by David Palmer, RN, FNP-C.  Mr. Palmer opined that "it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% probability) that the Veteran's current GERD is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-related condition to include right knee degenerative arthritis and chondromalacia right knee to include arthritis with subsequent weight gain and chronic NSAID usage."  He stated that the Veteran has chronically used NSAIDs, to include Advil and Ibuprofen, to medicate his pain and that he began to develop upper gastrointestinal disturbances with severe GERD symptomatology, after beginning chronic NSAID use.  Mr. Palmer cited to several studies regarding GERD pathophysiology in relation to NSAID use.  

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  At this examination, he claimed that his GERD began in service due to alternating between day and night shifts with abnormal eating patterns that caused heartburn and an acid taste in his throat.  The examiner noted that the Veteran currently reports symptoms of pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and sleep disturbance, and that he takes Omeprazole.  The examiner reported a diagnosis of GERD.  In an accompanying opinion, the examiner determined that "it is less likely than not that the Veteran's GERD is related to service."  He reasoned that there was no evidence in the STR's that the Veteran had GERD, and he did not report symptoms of GERD on his separation examination.  

As an initial matter, the Board finds the August 2023 private medical opinion offered by Mr. Palmer fails to provide a basis upon which to grant the claim.  To begin, Mr. Palmer did not indicate that he had reviewed the Veteran's claim file or any of his medical history.  He also did not indicate that he had personally interviewed and/or examined the Veteran. He provided no analysis of the Veteran's specific medical history nor the timing of the Veteran's NSAID use in relation to the onset of his GERD diagnosis.  Additionally, the medical literature cited by Mr. Palmer does not support a causal relationship between NSAID use and GERD.  At best, the literature shows an association between NSAIDs and GERD, whereas the applicable legal criteria require a causal relationship.  Finally, it is unclear whether it is Mr. Palmer's opinion that the Veteran's GERD is secondary to, related to, or aggravated by his service-connected knee disability, as he appeared to opine all three.  To the extent Mr. Palmer opined that NSAID use aggravates the Veteran's GERD, he did not provide a baseline or, indeed, any analysis of the Veteran's medical history to explain and support an aggravation finding.  

After reviewing the remaining evidence, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the AOJ failed to obtain an adequate opinion.  In this regard, the March 2023 VA opinion is inadequate as it is based on an inaccurate factual premise.  The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a current or previous diagnosis of an esophageal condition.  The Veteran's VA treatment records reflect, however, that he had been diagnosed and treated for GERD. See August 2014, June 2015, and October 2015 VA treatment notes.  As such, the opinion is of little probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is not probative); Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion). 

The Board also finds the September 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate to the extent it did not offer a secondary service connection opinion despite the Veteran's contention that he developed GERD as a result of taking NSAIDs for his service-connected right knee disability.   The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that once VA provides a medical examination, even where such an examination is not required by law, VA must ensure that the examination is adequate).  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability.  

The Veteran asserts two theories of entitlement with respect to his back disability.  At the time of his original application for compensation, the Veteran claimed that he developed a back disability as a result of an altered gait caused by his service-connected right knee disability.  See January 2010 VA Form 9; February 2023 VA Form 21-4138.  More recently, the Veteran has claimed that his back disability was incurred in service as a result of an injury he sustained when he slipped down a set of stairs in the barracks and/or while running around the airfield.  See September 2023 VA examination report.  

A May 1992 STR reflects the Veteran's report of back pain, pressure in the head, and feeling cold.  The clinician, however, attributed the Veteran's symptoms to a viral syndrome, rather than a musculoskeletal etiology.  A February 1993 entrance Report of Medical Examination reflects that the Veteran's spine was examined and determined to be abnormal.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had mild dorsal kyphosis.  Otherwise, the service treatment records are silent for complaints or abnormalities pertaining to the back.  These records include examination reports determining that the Veteran's spine was normal, and reports of medical history on which the Veteran consistently denied having, or ever having had, recurrent back pain.  

In connection with his claim of service connection for a right knee disability, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2004.  Upon physical examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not have an abnormal gait.  In connection with his claim for an increased rating for his right knee disability, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2008.  Upon physical examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's gait was within normal limits.  He also noted that the Veteran's feet did not reveal any signs of abnormal weight bearing or breakdown, callosities or any unusual shoe wear pattern.  

A January 2010 VA primary care note reflects the Veteran's report of low back pain.  X-rays demonstrated no subluxation, minimal lumbar spine osteophytes, mild right upper pelvic tilt, minimal anterior wedging of T11, and very mild narrowing of the L3/L4 disc space.  

In January 2010, the Veteran applied for VA compensation, seeking service connection for a back disability secondary to his service-connected right knee disability.  See VA January 2010 Form 9.  

In connection with his claim for an increased rating for his right knee disability, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2010.  Upon physical examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's gait was normal.  He also noted that there was other evidence of abnormal weight bearing reflected in increased wear on the outside edge of the heels of both shoes.  

An August 2013 VA orthopedic note reflects that, upon physical examination, the Veteran was noted to ambulate with a normal gait, and that his quad girth was 14.75 cm on the right and 15 cm on the left.  

In December 2015, the Veteran submitted a statement that he had been treated by a chiropractor since 2013 for severe mid/lower back pain.  With this statement, he also submitted records from the chiropractor that reflected the Veteran's report of radiating pain down his right arm and findings related only to the Veteran's cervical spine.  

In January 2016, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  The examiner indicated that "the Veteran was not interviewed and examined as this was not required."  After review of the records, the examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability "is less likely as not (less than 50 percent or greater probability) proximately due to or the result [of] his service-connected right knee condition."  He reasoned as follows:

The contention that one joint of the body having pain causes a person to favor or "unload" on another joint and therefore cause arthritis in that joint is often cited.  It is biomechanically incorrect and has been disproven in the orthopedic and occupational medicine literature.  Arthritis formation would require increase speed and increase sheer forces across the joint, a situation only seen in the paralytic or waddling gait abnormality.  The veteran does not have this.  	

An October 2019 VA treatment note reflects that the Veteran had normal posture and gait and was able to ambulate easily without assistance.  A February 2020 primary care note reflects that the Veteran's gait was steady, and he had no significant limp.  A September 2022 primary care note reflects that the Veteran had no gait abnormalities. A September 2022 x-ray report reflects moderate degenerative disc disease at L3-4 and L4-5 and mild degenerative disc disease at L5/S1.  An October 2022 physical therapy progress note reflects that the Veteran had a normal gait and used no assistive devices.  

In February 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement claiming that the pain and discomfort in his right knee causes him to walk unevenly and increases the pain and discomfort in his lower back.  He also stated that his doctor advised him that he has an abnormal curvature in his back.  The Veteran also submitted abstracts of two articles entitled "The Influence of Pain Distribution of Walking Velocity and Horizontal Ground Reaction Forces in Patients with Low Back Pain" and "Chronic Joint Pain in the Lower Body is Associated with Gait Differences Independent From Radiographic Osteoarthritis."  

In August 2023 the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion authored by David Palmer, RN, FNP-C.  Mr. Palmer opined that "it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the Veteran's current moderate degenerative disc disease at L3-4 and L4-5 and mild degenerative disc disease at L5/S1 condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-related chondromalacia, right knee, to include arthritis associated with compensatory walking strategies with biomechanical and kinematic changes."  He stated that due to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability, he developed an antalgic gait pattern with limping and/or a transfer in his center of gravity due to unequal weight distribution in the lower extremities.  He further stated that the medical literature associates this unequal weight distribution with secondary biomechanical changes that cause abnormal kinematics within both of the lower extremity joints and that this hastened the development and progression of the Veteran's back disability.  Mr. Palmer cited to several studies regarding the pathophysiology of lower extremity conditions in relation to abnormal gait, pathophysiology of abnormal gait in relation to knee arthritis conditions, and pathophysiology of lumbar spine in relation to abnormal gait.  

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  At this examination, the Veteran claimed that his back pain began in service after he slipped down a set of stairs in the barracks and landed in a wall.  He reported that he was seen at Pensacola hospital.  The Veteran also attributed his in-service back pain to "running around [the] airfield."  He reported that he was placed on light duty at different times and that his back pain has continued since that time.  He also reported that he has been seeing a chiropractor for 15 years.  The examiner noted diagnoses of degenerative arthritis and degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS).  In an accompanying opinion, the examiner determined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability is a result of his service.  He reasoned that the Veteran STR's did not reflect any reports of a back condition in service and the post-service medical records did not show development of a back condition within one year of separation.  

As an initial matter, the Board finds the August 2023 private medical opinion offered by Mr. Palmer fails to provide a basis upon which to grant the claim.  In support of his positive opinion, Mr. Palmer explained that due to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability, he developed an antalgic gait pattern with limping and/or a transfer in his center of gravity due to unequal weight distribution in the lower extremities.  There is no indication in Mr. Palmer's report, however, that he examined and/or interviewed the Veteran.  Additionally, while Mr. Palmer included copies of select pages of the Veteran's medical records, there is no indication in the report that he reviewed the Veteran's entire medical history or claims file.  Mr. Palmer's opinion is based almost entirely on the Veteran's August 2023 written statement describing his claimed gait problems related to his service-connected right knee.  Mr. Palmer apparently failed to consider the many VA treatment notes and VA examination reports that reflect findings that the Veteran did not walk with a limp or have an abnormal gait.  See April 2004, May 2008, and March 2010 VA examination reports; August 2013, October 2019, February 2020, September 2022, and October 2022 VA treatment notes.  Finally, it is unclear whether it is Mr. Palmer's opinion that the Veteran's back disability is secondary to, related to, or aggravated by his service-connected knee disability, as he appeared to opine all three.  To the extent Mr. Palmer opined that the service-connected knee disability aggravates the Veteran's back disability, he did not provide a baseline or, indeed, any analysis of the Veteran's medical history to explain and support an aggravation finding.  His opinion, therefore, is of little probative value.  

After reviewing the remaining evidence, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the AOJ failed to obtain an adequate opinion.  In this regard, although the January 2016 VA examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's service-connected knee disability caused his back disability, he did not address the question of aggravation.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (holding that a secondary service connection opinion that addresses a causal relationship, but does not address the question of aggravation, is inadequate). In addition, the examiner did not specify the nature of the Veteran's back disability, other than to state generally that favoring one joint because of pain does not cause arthritis.  The examiner did not interview and/or examine the Veteran, nor did he render a diagnosis related to his back or reference a specific diagnosis from the Veteran's medical records.  

The Board also finds the September 2023 VA examination inadequate.  To begin, the examiner did not offer a secondary service connection opinion despite the Veteran's contention that his back disability is secondary to his service-connected right knee disability.  With respect to direct service connection, the examiner rendered a negative opinion based on the lack of documentation in the Veteran's STR's regarding a back condition.  As discussed above, however, the service treatment records include a 1993 notation of mild dorsal kyphosis.  As such, the examiner's statement that the Veteran's STR's are silent as to a back condition is factually inaccurate and cannot support the negative opinion rendered.  See Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. at 302-04 (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).  

The failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. at 312.  

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion in connection with the claim of service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).  Access to the claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the opinion.  If the clinician determines that an examination is necessary to provide the requested opinion, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the evidence of record, and examining the Veteran if deemed necessary, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current GERD had its onset in service or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury? 

(b)	If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD is caused by, or the result of, his use of NSAID medication to treat his service-connected right knee chondromalacia, right knee to include arthritis and degenerative arthritis, right knee (right knee disability)?  

(c)	If neither, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD is aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected right knee disability?  If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the disability, prior to aggravation.

In rendering the secondary service connection opinion, the clinician should consider the articles submitted by the Veteran in February 2023 entitled "Prevalence of Gastroesophageal Disease and Associated Risk Factors Among the Population in Al-Qunfudah" and "Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease."  

2. Obtain an addendum opinion in connection with the claim of service connection for a back disability.  Access to the claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the opinion.  If the clinician determines that an examination is necessary to provide the opinion, one should be scheduled.

After reviewing the evidence of record, and examining the Veteran if deemed necessary, the clinician should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability had its onset in service or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury, to include his right knee injury documented and treated in service, and/or his claimed in-service fall down a set of stairs in the barracks, and/or his claimed in-service activity of "running around the airfield."

The clinician is asked to address the significance, if any, of the February 1993 entrance Report of Medical Examination that reflects the Veteran was noted to have mild dorsal kyphosis.  

(b)	If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability is caused by, or the result of, his service-connected right knee disability?

(c)	If neither, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability is aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected right knee disability?  If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity prior to aggravation.  

In providing the requested secondary service connection opinion, the clinician is asked to consider the significance, if any, of VA treatment notes and VA examination reports that reflect the Veteran did not have an abnormal gait.  See April 2004, May 2008, and March 2010 VA examination reports; August 2013, October 2019, February 2020, September 2022, and October 2022 VA treatment notes.  The clinician is also asked to consider the finding in the March 2010 VA examination report that the Veteran had other evidence of abnormal weight bearing reflected in increased wear on the outside edge of the heels of both shoes. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The clinician is also asked to consider the articles submitted by the Veteran in February 2023 entitled "The Influence of Pain Distribution on Walking Velocity and Horizontal Ground Reaction Forces in Patients with Low Back Pain," "Chronic Joint Pain in the Lower Body Associated with Gait Differences Independent From Radiographic Osteoarthritis," and "Gait Disturbances.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Madison, Siobhan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.