Citation Nr: A25031053
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 190916-31673
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus (claimed as bilateral fallen arches) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1997 to August 2006 and from September 2007 to October 2018.

In a December 2023 decision, the Board denied the claims of entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity disability, bilateral pes planus, tremors of the right hand, and tremors of the left hand.  The Veteran appealed the issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  He did not challenge the other claims.

In November 2024, the Court returned the case to the Board for action consistent with a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR).  In the JMPR, the parties agreed that the Board failed to provide adequate reasons and bases.  The Court returned the matter to the Board for actions consistent with the JMPR.

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus (claimed as bilateral fallen arches) is remanded.

In order to comply with the JMPR, the Board finds a remand is warranted.

The Veteran has two periods of service.

In the first period of service from September 1997 to August 2006, the Veteran's entrance examination noted preexisting pes planus.

A veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of examination, acceptance, enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.   38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.

As the Veteran's pes planus was noted upon entrance into the Veteran's first period of service, the Veteran's pes planus is a preexisting condition. 

A VA medical opinion was obtained in July 2019.  The VA examiner provided a negative opinion with regard to aggravation, but only discussed the Veteran's first period of service from 1997 to 2006. 

With regard to the second period of service, from September 2007 to October 2018, there is not an entrance examination.  Therefore, the Veteran's pes planus was not noted upon entrance.  

If a disorder was not noted on entering service, the government must show clear and unmistakable evidence of both a preexisting condition and a lack of in-service aggravation to overcome the presumption of soundness.  Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096-97 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that the correct standard for rebutting the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111 requires the government to show by clear and unmistakable evidence that (1) the veteran's disability existed prior to service and (2) that the pre-existing disability was not aggravated during service.  If the government meets this burden, the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111 is rebutted, and the veteran is not entitled to service-connected benefits.  If the government fails to rebut the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111, a veteran's claim is one for direct service connection.  Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1097.

As the July 2019 VA opinion did not address the Veteran's second period of service, and there is no other VA opinion of record that addresses the second period of service, the Board finds a remand is warranted.  A remand is warranted to comply with the JMPR and address the pre-decision duty to assist error of not obtaining an adequate VA opinion that discusses the second period of service and whether the Veteran's pes planus clearly and unmistakably preexisted service, and if so, whether it was clear and unmistakable that the Veteran's pes planus was not aggravated during service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new VA opinion.  The claims file should be made available and reviewed by the examiner and the examiner should specifically note that such review was performed.  

Following consideration of the evidence of record (both lay and medical), the examiner is asked to address the following:

a.	Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran clearly and unmistakably had bilateral pes planus at the time of his entrance into his second period of service beginning September 2007.

b.	If the Veteran entered service with bilateral pes planus, provide an opinion as to whether the disorder clearly and unmistakably was not aggravated by his service from September 2007 to October 2018.

The examiner is reminded that temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service of a pre-existing injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened. 

c.	If the Veteran did not enter service with bilateral pes planus, provide an opinion as to whether any current bilateral pes planus is at least as likely as not causally related to his second period of active service.

The examiner must include in the medical report the rationale for any opinion expressed.

 

 

David H. Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Boyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.