Citation Nr: A25031704
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240408-432129
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS) and shin splints is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from November 2002 to November 2017. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for left knee PFPS and shin splints.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left knee PFPS and shin splits. Specifically, the Veteran contends that the August 2024 VA examination was inadequate because the VA examiner relied on the absence of corroborating medical records and did not consider the Veteran's statements regarding his chronic left knee pain. See April 2024 VA Form 10182 NOD; see also November 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review.  

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ or by a prior Board decision on an issue on appeal in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Board notes that the AOJ made favorable findings in the March 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability and that the evidence shows a qualifying injury in service. Indeed, during his August 2, 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with shin splints. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) also show that the Veteran reported of left knee pain/sprain in September 2015. Thus, the first and second elements of service connection are met.

The remaining issue before the Board is whether the Veteran's left knee disability is etiologically related to service. The Veteran initially filed a claim for a bilateral knee condition in May 2023. On August 2, 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his right knee where the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral knee PFPS and shin splints. The August 2, 2023, VA examiner discussed injury to the right knee in service and that right knee pain/instability was noted on the separation examination but did not discuss the Veteran's September 2015 left knee injury in service. Overall, the August 2, 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's right knee disability is etiologically related to service; however, did not offer an opinion discussing the Veteran's left knee disability. Considering this, the AOJ requested for an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's left knee disability. A new VA examiner reviewed the records and issued an August 2023 addendum medical opinion finding that the Veteran's left knee disability was less likely than not caused by service because the Veteran's medical records are negative for a left knee pain condition for the remainder of his active duty period following the injury.

The Board finds the August 2023 addendum medical opinion inadequate as it was based on the August 2023 VA examination for the right knee. The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his left knee disability.  This was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error not to provide an examination regarding whether the Veteran's left knee disability is due to service, to include his September 2015 complaints of left knee pain/sprain. Considering the Veteran's statements generally asserting that his disability is related to his active-duty service and the medical evidence of record, he should be afforded a VA examination with an opinion on this issue. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Therefore, a remand is necessary to correct the error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a new VA examination to determine the etiology of his left knee disability, to include left knee PFPS and shin splints. The entire claims file should be made available to and should be reviewed by the examiner, including a copy of this REMAND order. The clinician should provide an opinion as to the following: 

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left knee disability, to include left knee PFPS and shin splints, onset in service or is related to service, to include left knee pain/strain shown in the STRs on September 1, 2015, that led to the Veteran being put on a temporary profile until January 1, 2016? The clinician should address the Veteran's lay statements, to include his reports of chronic bilateral knees pain since service and that he has self-medicated for over the years. 

If it is not possible to provide the requested opinions without speculation, the examiner should state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

C.B. Iwanowski

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Mendoza, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.