Citation Nr: A25031328
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 230313-330130
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic otitis externa (claimed as otitis media) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus was incurred in service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1990 to March 1999. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from November 2022 and March 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the March 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the claim of entitlement to service connection for anxiety and at the time of the March 2023 rating decision for the claims of entitlement to service connection for migraines, chronic otitis externa, and an acquired psychiatric disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for migraines, chronic otitis externa and an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for tinnitus. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

Service connection may be granted for disabilities due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after discharge. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value. Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

In the instant case, regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current diagnosis, the March 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus. See also December 2022 VA Examination. Thus, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection.

Regarding the second element of service connection requiring an in-service event, the Veteran reported the onset of her tinnitus to be in 1995, which is during her period of active-duty service. See December 2022 VA Examination. Further, August 1996 service treatment records noted a history of ringing sounds in the ear. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the in-service event and the current disability, the December 2022 VA examination found that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) caused by or the result of military noise exposure. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran served in the Navy as a mess management specialist which had a low risk of hazardous noise exposure. Noise exposure is a known cause of hearing loss and tinnitus. The Veteran's entry audiogram dated August 23, 1990, indicated normal hearing thresholds, bilaterally, at enlistment. The Veteran's separation audiogram conducted on December 29, 1998, indicated no evidence of a standard threshold shift which would indicate acoustic damage from noise exposure. As no worsening of the Veteran's hearing during military service was recorded, there is no evidence to support exposure to hazardous noise causing acoustic damage. The Veteran's service treatment records are absent for a complaint of or treatment for tinnitus. There is no research evidence to support a claim of delayed-onset tinnitus following an incident of noise exposure. Tinnitus has an immediate onset after significant noise exposure according to medical literature. Therefore, the VA examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus was related to military service. 

The December 2022 VA examiner considered most of the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). However, the December 2022 VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's report that the onset of her tinnitus occurred in 1995. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms such as ringing in the ears and the time of its onset and, thus, such should be considered by the VA examiner in the nexus opinion. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470. Additionally, the VA examiner also incorrectly stated that there was no evidence of tinnitus in service. As noted above, August 1996 service treatment records show ringing in the ears. Accordingly, as the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements and failed to address relevant service treatment records, the Board assigns the December 2022 VA opinion little probative weight. 

Nonetheless, in the case of a wholly lay-observable disability such as tinnitus, the Veteran is competent to report both its onset date and its persistence since that date. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. In the December 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she began experiencing tinnitus in 1995 while in service. The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report the onset of lay-observable symptoms such as ringing in the ears. The Board also has no reason to doubt the veracity of her statements as they have been consistent throughout the appeal and are not contradicted by any evidence of record. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). In fact, as noted, August 1996 service treatment records note ringing in the ears. Complaints of tinnitus were further noted in July 2001 and October 2004. Therefore, the Board assigns the Veteran's statements regarding her current symptoms and the onset of tinnitus great probative weight.

Consequently, based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence to weigh in favor of the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. As such, service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraines.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for migraines. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinions, to include a nexus opinion for direct service connection as well as a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) opinion pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). 

A January 2023 VA opinion found that the claimed headache condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner explained that during active duty there are no records that reflect headache diagnosis or treatment during service. However, following service, the Veteran was noted as being seen on April 21, 2011, for headaches, on September 15, 2015, for tension type headaches, as well as on November 20, 2016, for tension type headaches. Therefore, the VA examiner concluded that it was less likely as not that the Veteran's headaches were related to service.

The Board finds the January 2023 VA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner found no in-service treatment for headaches based upon the Veteran's service treatment records. However, December 1991 service treatment records show treatment for headaches. As the VA examiner failed to address the relevant service treatment records, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion and allow for a VA examiner to consider the relevant medical evidence of record. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). 

Additionally, a February 2023 TERA opinion found that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran served in the United States Navy for ten years. The Veteran's record notes at least one day between the period of 1991 to 2001 as having served within a Southwest Asia Theater of operations and was exposed over permissible limits according to the TERA. See January 2023 Memorandum. The ILER was not present; however, the Veteran was employed in a clerical setting. Given the clerical nature of the Veteran's duties and the scantiness of the documentation regarding the Veteran's exposure, the VA examiner found that it was reasonable to make the following observations. First, the Veteran's documented complaints of headaches have an origin of greater than 5 years, or so, outside of her separation date. Second, typically exposure-related conditions will be grossly apparent at the time of incident. Third, the January 6, 2023, medical opinion was reviewed. Given lack of evidence of exposure or duration or extent and the duration between "exposure," again it was at least one day in a ten-year period, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed condition arose due to a cumulative synergistic event as a result of exposure. Therefore, the VA examiner rendered a negative opinion. 

The Board finds the February 2023 TERA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner noted the lack of evidence regarding the Veteran's toxic exposure during service. A TERA Memorandum outlining the specifics of the Veteran's toxic exposure was added to the file in April 2024. Such memorandum should have been of record at the time of the TERA opinion in order for the VA examiner to properly consider the connection between the Veteran's headaches and in-service toxic exposure. Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate TERA opinion, considering the April 2024 TERA Memorandum. 

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinions, to include a nexus opinion for direct service connection as well as a TERA opinion pursuant to the PACT Act.

2. Entitlement to service connection for chronic otitis externa.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for chronic otitis externa. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinions, to include nexus opinions for direct and secondary service connection as well as a TERA opinion pursuant to the PACT Act.

A January 2023 VA opinion found that the claimed otitis media and left tympanoplasty condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner further found that the Veteran's active-duty records do not include incidence/treatment or diagnosis of ear issues, nor does her exit examination on December 18, 1998. The Veteran was seen on March 1, 2008, for an earache. Therefore, it was less likely as not that the Veteran's otitis media and left tympanoplasty were related to service.

The Board finds the January 2023 VA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner found no evidence of treatment for ear issues in service. However, the Veteran's service treatment records show treatment for ear issues in February 1991, August 1991, December 1991, December 1992, August 1992, August 1994, August 1996, June 1997, and July 1997. As the VA examiner failed to address the relevant service treatment records, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion and allow for a VA examiner to consider the relevant medical evidence of record. Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 312.

Additionally, a February 2023 TERA opinion found that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner explained that the Veteran served in the United States Navy for ten years. The Veteran's record notes at least one day between the period of 1991 to 2001 as having served within a Southwest Asia Theater of operations and was exposed over permissible limits according to the TERA. See January 2023 Memorandum. The ILER was not present; however, the Veteran was employed in a clerical setting. Given the clerical nature of the Veteran's duties and the scantiness of the documentation regarding the Veteran's exposure, the VA examiner found that it was reasonable to make the following observations. First, the Veteran's documented complaints of otitis media have an origin of greater than 5 years, or so, outside of her separation date. Second, typically exposure-related conditions will be grossly apparent at the time of incident. Third, the January 6, 2023, medical opinion was reviewed. Given lack of evidence of exposure or duration or extent and the duration between "exposure," again it was at least one day in a ten-year period, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed condition arose due to a cumulative synergistic event as a result of exposure. Therefore, the VA examiner rendered a negative opinion. 

The Board finds the February 2023 TERA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. The VA examiner noted the lack of evidence regarding the Veteran's toxic exposure during service. A TERA Memorandum outlining the specifics of the Veteran's toxic exposure was added to the file in April 2024. Such memorandum should have been of record at the time of the TERA opinion in order for the VA examiner to properly consider the connection between the Veteran's ear condition and in-service toxic exposure. Therefore, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate TERA opinion, considering the April 2024 TERA Memorandum. 

VA must provide a VA medical examination and/or medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

In the instant case, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic otitis externa. See January 2023 VA Examination. Additionally, the Veteran is currently service connected for chronic sinusitis with non-allergic rhinitis. Regarding an indication the Veteran's current diagnosis may be associated with an already service-connected disability, during the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she started to get a lot of ear infections, especially with upper respiratory infections or sinus infections. As such evidence indicates a potential connection between chronic otitis externa and the Veteran's service-connected chronic sinusitis, and the VA has insufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim, a remand is necessary to obtain a nexus opinion for secondary service connection to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed ear condition. 

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate VA examination and opinions, to include nexus opinions for direct and secondary service connection as well as a TERA opinion pursuant to the PACT Act

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for anxiety. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Board finds a remand for a VA examination pursuant to McLendon is warranted. First, September 2016 private treatment records note the Veteran's anxiety and November 2010 private treatment records note depression. March 1992 service treatment records show that the Veteran reported feeling "very anxious." Additionally, private treatment records noted anxiety in February, March, April and November 2015. As there is insufficient evidence of record for VA to make a decision on the claim, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and a obtain a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's migraines. The claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner. All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the examiner should be accomplished.

Applying general medical principles, the examiner's experience, the clinical records (including December 1991 service treatment records), and the Veteran's lay statements, the examiner is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraines condition was incurred in or caused by active service. 

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraines condition was incurred in or caused by toxic exposure in service. In so opining, the examiner is required to consider the synergistic, combined effects of the Veteran's exposure to any and all toxins in service.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

2. Schedule a VA examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's ear condition, to include chronic otitis externa. The claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner. All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the examiner should be accomplished.

The VA examiner must consider the Veteran's service treatment records, including February 1991, August 1991, December 1991, December 1992, August 1992 August 1994, August 1996, June 1997, and July 1997 service treatment records. Applying general medical principles, the examiner's experience, the clinical records, and the Veteran's lay statements, the examiner is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's chronic otitis externa was incurred in or caused by active service. 

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's chronic otitis externa was due to or aggravated by service-connected chronic sinusitis with non-allergic rhinitis.

i.	State whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected disability, she would not have a current disability of chronic otitis externa.

ii.	State whether the Veteran's chronic otitis externa condition would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected disability.

iii.	If the examiner opines that chronic otitis externa would result in less functional impairment but for a service-connected disability, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

(c)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's chronic otitis externa was incurred in or caused by toxic exposure in service. In so opining, the examiner is required to consider the synergistic, combined effects of the Veteran's exposure to any and all toxins in service.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression. The examiner must review the entire claims file, including but not limited to a copy of this REMAND, the Veteran's lay statements and the Veteran's service treatment records (including March 1992 service treatment records). The examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

Identify by diagnosis each psychiatric disability present during the pendency of the appeal.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For each diagnosed psychiatric disability, identify the etiology. The examiner should specifically address for each diagnosed psychiatric disability whether the Veteran's diagnosed psychiatric disability was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, her active service. 

Any opinion expressed must include a complete explanation of rationale, citation to supporting factual data and medical principles, as deemed appropriate. If an opinion sought cannot be provided other than through speculation, there must be explanation why that is so.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.