Citation Nr: A25031968
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-460737
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1989 to January 1993.  This matter came before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

The Board notes that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202 (c)(2), a claimant may modify the VA Form 10182 to change the Board docket being requested.  The time limit for such modification is "within one year from the date that the [AOJ] mails notice of the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date that the Board receives the [NOD], whichever is later."  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202 (c)(2).  "[T]he Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up."  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).

In this matter, the Board notes that the time period to change dockets has not expired.  However, as the Board is remanding the current appeal, the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence.  Additionally, this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal.  Thus, the Veteran will not be prejudiced by the Board proceeding in this matter prior to the expiration of the time period to change dockets.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension

The Veteran was afforded a VA hypertension examination in April 2024.  The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of hypertension and that an etiology opinion was therefore not warranted.  However, the April 2024 blood pressure readings worksheet accompanying the examination indicate that the Veteran was on prescribed medication for hypertension.  VA treatment records show also show current prescriptions for medications commonly used to treat high blood pressure and reflect a current diagnosis of hypertension.  See e.g., April 2024 VA Treatment Record.  The examiner did not address this conflicting medication information when rendering the diagnostic opinion.  The examination is therefore inadequate to resolve the issue on appeal.  See Nieves- Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).  As the rating decision on appeal relied on this inadequate medical report, remand is required to correct this duty to assist error. 

The Board's review of the record also indicates that there may have been outstanding private treatment records at the time the AOJ rendered the rating decision on appeal.  As noted above, the VA treatment records note that the Veteran had prescriptions for medications commonly used to treat high blood pressure.  They also note that these prescriptions were not initiated by VA, and that the Veteran was seeing private providers.  See April 2024 VA Treatment Record.  The record is silent for any indication that the AOJ attempted to obtain the relevant treatment records.  Remand is also required to correct this duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for the private providers who treated him for his hypertension.  Make two requests for the authorized records from these providers unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination, to determine the nature and etiology of any current hypertension.  The examiner should review the file and provide a complete rationale for all opinions expressed.  

For any current hypertension found to be diagnosed, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least in approximate balance or nearly equal) that any such disability is related to the Veteran's active service, to include his in-service toxic exposure.  The examiner must consider the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure through all applicable military deployments, as well as the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  In providing the opinion, the examiner should consider and discuss any lay statements of record, to include the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and persistence of his symptoms.  

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Bock

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.