Citation Nr: A25031259
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240205-414629
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for respiratory condition, claimed as bronchitis, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for neck condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar spine condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right ear laceration scar is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition, including patellofemoral pain syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition, including patellofemoral pain syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for lateral collateral ligament sprain of the left ankle is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a respiratory condition, claimed as bronchitis, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a neck condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a thoracolumbar spine condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right shoulder condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left shoulder condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a right elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

7. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a left elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

8. The Veteran's right ear laceration scar is not manifest by a characteristic of disfigurement.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for respiratory condition, claimed as bronchitis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for neck condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar spine condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right ear laceration scar have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7800.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from March 1999 to June 2003.  These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from October 2023 (respiratory condition, left ankle, right ear scar, left knee, left shoulder, neck, right elbow, right shoulder, and  low back) and January 2024 (tinnitus, left shoulder, and right knee) rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In a February 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  For the claims decided herein, the Board may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a supplemental claim and submit (or identify) this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

For the four remanded claims, the additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in its adjudication of those claims.

With respect to the claims decided herein, the AOJ has duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating their claim for VA benefits.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5100, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5126; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.326(a).  These duties have been satisfied in this case.  Appropriate notice was included in the Veteran's October 2022 and April 2023 claims form.  

The AOJ associated the Veteran's service records and VA medical center (VAMC) records with the claims file.  No other relevant records have been identified and are outstanding.  

Regarding VA examinations, VA must provide an examination in initial service-connection claims where there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability (or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability) may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The requirement that a disability may be associated with service is a "low threshold" standard.  Id. at 83.

The AOJ provided appropriate VA examinations and opinions as required.  The VA examinations are adequate because they evaluated the Veteran; made findings necessary to identify his current disabilities; and, as needed, include findings necessary to apply the rating criteria.  Similarly, the VA medical opinions are adequate because they considered the evidence in the claims file and applied medical knowledge to the Veteran's specific facts.  The Board will address the medical conditions for which the AOJ did not obtain a VA examination and/or VA medical opinion in their respective sections.

The Board finds that the AOJ has satisfied its duty to assist with the procurement of relevant records.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  The Veteran has not raised any issues with the duties to notify or assist.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: '(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service' - the so-called 'nexus' requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service - absent an intercurrent cause - if they were shown as chronic in service; if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

Respiratory Condition, Claimed as Bronchitis

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a respiratory condition, claimed as bronchitis.  The Board has determined that service connection is not warranted because there is neither a current disability nor a nexus to service.

The only evidence in the claims file of a respiratory condition is two VAMC records in March 2011 and December 2016, years prior to filing his claim, and the April 2023 claim.  The evidence does not otherwise document any respiratory condition.

The March 2011 VAMC record documented flu-like symptoms of "fever 100.0, body ache, fatigue, productive cough with yellow/clear sputum, headache, and sore throat" for four days.  The December 2016 VAMC record noted 

Nasal congestion - 3 months of "head congestion."  Blowing nose all day, yellow and thick in the AM and clear after that.  Sneezing all day long. No sinus pain.  Nose feels dry and irritated.  Mild cough this week only, productive only in the morning. Also mild diffuse myalgias and reduced exercise tolerance at the gym this week.

The doctor assessed "Nasal congestion - Likely new allergic rhinitis given duration of symptoms and clear discharge.  Superimposed viral URI [upper respiratory infection] this week likely given mild new cough, mylagias, mild fatigue.  Mild wheeze suggests adult RAD [reactive airway disease], however not bothersome enough to treat, per patient" in the December 2016 record.

The VAMC records are otherwise silent for any respiratory symptoms or diagnoses, despite treatment beginning in April 2008.  He sought treatment for other conditions such as weekly chest pain for the past year (April 2008); heart palpitations (April 2008); left forearm and hand tingling (April 2008, October 2008); neck rash (December 2009); possible urinary tract infection (July 2010); stye in eye (August 2010); elevated liver enzymes (March 2011, June 2016); and nail separation (June 2016).  On examination, pulmonary results in June 2016 and February 2018 VAMC records were "CTAB [clear to auscultation bilaterally], no w/r/r [wheezes/rhonchi/rales], normal chest expansion, no dullness to percussion."  A February 2020 VAMC annual examination assessed hyperlipidemia as his only health issue.

In the April 2023 claim, he reported "I am constantly congested and coughing in the morning and hacking up phlegm," which he classified as bronchitis.  Although the Veteran believes he has a current respiratory disability, there is no evidence that he has the expertise to diagnose a respiratory disability.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (lay persons not competent to diagnose cancer).  He can describe symptoms he observes.  Here, however, his reported observations are at odds with his repeated statements to doctors.  Even when seen by a respiratory technician (in connection with a claim of chest tightness), the veteran denied cough, sputum, or shortness of breath. The Board therefore finds he does not have a current disability.

Finally, the Board notes that the AOJ did not provide a VA examination for respiratory conditions.  An examination was not required, however, due to the lack of evidence showing an in-service event, injury, or disease and demonstrating that the condition may be associated with his service.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.

Entitlement to service connection for respiratory condition, claimed as bronchitis, is accordingly denied.

Neck Condition

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a neck condition.  The Board has determined that service connection is not warranted because there is insufficient evidence of a current disability.

The sole reference to a neck condition in the claims file is the Veteran's October 2022 claim in which he attributed the unspecified condition to an in-service turret injury to his chin.  There is otherwise no lay or medical evidence documenting a neck condition in service or after separation.

An STR dated November 15, 2001, noted two lacerations to bottom of his chin after the Veteran stated he "was knocked out by the blow of the turret.  Pt [patient] states he was out for only a few seconds."  In a follow up the next day, the Veteran "denie[d] any headaches, blurred vision, double vision, or passing out since the accident."  The May 2003 separation physical found the Veteran "physically qualified for separation"; noted that he had "[n]o pertinent past physical history/ medical history" since his entrance examination in December 1998; and indicated that no focused physical examinations were needed.  

The VAMC records lack any reference to neck symptoms or diagnoses, other than a rash in December 2009, despite seeking treatment for other conditions.  Moreover, VAMC records noted his history of bodybuilding (June 2016); "Work[ing] out daily, weights and cardio" (February 2019); and "Remain[ing] physically active" with an "Excellent exercise" level (February 2020).  

In the October 2022 claim, the Veteran reported a "neck condition" with no additional details regarding the types of symptoms he experiences or their onset, duration, frequency, or severity.  There is also no information on how any neck condition impacts his ability to work and/or his daily activities.  

Regarding the AOJ's duty to assist, it was not required to provide a VA neck examination because the claims file lacked evidence showing a current disability or symptoms.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.  

Because there is no evidence of a disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim, entitlement to service connection for neck condition is denied.

Thoracolumbar Spine Condition

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for a thoracolumbar condition.  The Board has determined that service connection is not warranted because there is insufficient evidence of a current disability.

The October 2022 claim is the only reference to a thoracolumbar spine condition in the claims file.  In that claim, he listed the current disability as "Musculoskeletal - Mid/Lower Back (Thoracolumbar Spine)."  There were no additional details regarding the types of symptoms he experiences or their onset, duration, frequency, or severity.  There was also no information on how any back condition impacts his ability to work and/or his daily activities.  

The STRs do not mention symptoms, treatment, or diagnoses related to his spine. The May 2003 separation physical found the Veteran "physically qualified for separation"; noted that he had "[n]o pertinent past physical history/ medical history" since his entrance examination in December 1998; and indicated that no focused physical examinations were needed.  

The VAMC records similarly lack any reference to back symptoms or diagnoses, despite seeking treatment for other conditions.  VAMC records noted his history of bodybuilding (June 2016); "Work[ing] out daily, weights and cardio" (February 2019); and "Remain[ing] physically active" with an "Excellent exercise" level (February 2020).  

Regarding the AOJ's duty to assist, it was not required to provide a VA low back/thoracolumbar spine examination because the claims file lacked evidence showing a current disability or symptoms.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.  

Because there is no current disability or a nexus to service, entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine condition is denied.

Bilateral Shoulder Condition

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a bilateral shoulder condition.  The Board has found that service connection is not warranted because there is neither a current disability nor a nexus to service. 

The only evidence in the claims file of a left or right shoulder condition is the October 2022 claim in which he listed "shoulder condition, bilateral."  There were no additional details regarding the types of symptoms he experiences or their onset, duration, frequency, or severity.  There was also no information on how his shoulder conditions impact his ability to work and/or his daily activities.  

The evidence does not otherwise document any condition in either shoulder.  The STRs do not mention symptoms, treatment, or diagnoses related to his shoulders. The May 2003 separation physical found the Veteran "physically qualified for separation"; noted that he had "[n]o pertinent past physical history/ medical history" since his entrance examination in December 1998; and indicated that no focused physical examinations were needed.

The VAMC records similarly lack any reference to shoulder symptoms or diagnoses, although he sought treatment for other conditions.  VAMC records also noted his history of bodybuilding (June 2016); "Work[ing] out daily, weights and cardio" (February 2019); and "Remain[ing] physically active" with an "Excellent exercise" level (February 2020).  

The Board therefore finds he does not have a current shoulder disability.

Regarding the AOJ's duty to assist, it was not required to provide a VA shoulder examination because the claims file lacked evidence showing a current disability or symptoms.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.  

Thus, entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition and left shoulder condition is denied.

Right Elbow Condition, Including Lateral and Medial Epicondylitis

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for right elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis.  The Board has determined that service connection is not warranted because there is no nexus to service.

The first two service-connection elements - a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease - are met.  An April 2023 VA examination diagnosed lateral epicondylitis and medial epicondylitis of the right elbow.  The Veteran  reported his right "elbow condition" was related to in-service "climbing, jumping, fast roping, crawling during stalks in sniper platoon" in the October 2022 claim.  Because such actions are consistent with service, they are sufficient to show an in-service event.   

The third element - a nexus to service - is not met, however.  There is no evidence of a right elbow condition in service or in the years that followed.  The STRs did not document right elbow complaints, diagnosis, or treatment, and the May 2003 separation physical found him "physically qualified for separation"; noted that he had "[n]o pertinent past physical history/ medical history" since his entrance examination in December 1998; and indicated that no focused physical examinations were needed.  Years later, the April 2023 VA examination listed the date of diagnosis as the April 24, 2023 (the date of the examination).

The VAMC records also lack any reference to elbow symptoms or diagnoses, despite seeking treatment for other conditions.  VAMC records noted his history of bodybuilding (June 2016); "Work[ing] out daily, weights and cardio" (February 2019); and "Remain[ing] physically active" with an "Excellent exercise" level (February 2020).  

Furthermore, an April 2023 VA medical opinion determined that the bilateral medial and lateral epicondylitis were less likely than not incurred in or caused by in-service injury, event, or illness because the STRS showed no complaints of elbow symptoms during service; there was no in-service tendonitis or epicondylitis; and there was no documentation of overuse during active duty.  

At this juncture, the Board notes the Veteran's report of "persisting bilateral elbow pain" in the VA examination.  To the extent this was intended as a report of elbow pain continuing since active service, the Board finds it is not credible.  As noted, the STRs and VAMC records are silent for any right elbow complaints, despite treatment for other disabilities in service and after.  Thus, any statement of continuing elbow pain is contradicted by contemporaneous treatment records, which have greater credibility because they were recorded at the time in dispute instead of decades later and were given for medical treatment, which encourages honest reports for comprehensive treatment.  For these reasons, a statement of elbow pain since service is not credible.

Due to the lack of a nexus to service, entitlement to service connection for right elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, is denied.

Left Elbow Condition, Including Lateral and Medial Epicondylitis

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for left elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis.  The Board has determined that service connection is not warranted because there is no nexus to service.

As with the right elbow, the April 2023 VA examination diagnosed lateral epicondylitis and medial epicondylitis, meeting the current-disability element for service connection.  In addition, the Veteran complained of a "laceration/puncture wound to L [left] elbow" that required eight stitches in a January 2000 STR.  A February 2000 STR noted "L elbow pain x 2/3 days. Pt has recently has [sic] 8 nylon sutures removed."  Thus, the second element - an in-service injury - has also been met.

For the final element, the April 2023 VA medical opinion determined that the bilateral medial and lateral epicondylitis were less likely than not incurred in or caused by in-service injury, event, or illness because the STRS showed no complaints of elbow symptoms during service; there was no in-service tendonitis or epicondylitis; and there was no documentation of overuse during active duty.  The November 2023 addendum opinion clarified its prior finding, noting the January 2000 STR and the "single" follow up in February 2000, which 

describe[ed] complaints of left elbow pain for 2-3 days, after having the sutures removed.  Tenderness to palpation, erythema, and edema were noted.  No elbow diagnosis was made, there is no record of any treatment, and there is no further follow up documentation.  This is most consistent with inflammation due to the laceration, sutures, or suture removal.  Notes regarding this laceration therefore do not suggest severity, chronicity, or any relationship to the diagnosed epicondylitis.  Medial and lateral epicondylitis is related to overuse and is not in any plausible way related to a local laceration.

The addendum opinion also cited the unilateral nature of the laceration versus the bilateral diagnosis of epicondylitis in 2023 as well as the lack of "documentation of epicondylitis symptoms or condition during active duty" as support for its conclusion that the elbow conditions less likely than not "developed during active duty."

As with the right elbow, the Board notes the Veteran's report of "persisting bilateral elbow pain" in the VA examination.  To the extent this was intended as a report of elbow pain continuing since active service, the Board has determined it is not credible.  Following the February 2000 STR, the STRs and VAMC records are silent for any left elbow complaints, despite treatment for other disabilities in service and after.  Thus, any statement of continuing elbow pain is contradicted by contemporaneous treatment records, which have greater credibility because they were recorded at the time in dispute instead of decades later and were given for medical treatment, which encourages honest reports for comprehensive treatment.  For these reasons, a statement of elbow pain since service is not credible.

Accordingly, service connection for left elbow condition, including lateral and medial epicondylitis, is denied.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptomatology with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code (Code), the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in the veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

When assigning disability ratings, VA reviews the veteran's entire history.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  In cases where, as here, the propriety of the initial disability rating assigned is in question, however, VA is required to evaluate the evidence since the grant of service connection and consider the appropriateness of a "staged rating."  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  A staged rating compensates the veteran for variations in the disability's severity since the effective date of his award.  

The right ear laceration scar is rated under Code 7800, which applies to burn scars of the head, face, or neck; scars of the head, face, or neck due to other causes; and other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck.  Under this Code, a scar with one characteristic of disfigurement warrants a 10 percent rating.  A scar with visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion or asymmetry of one feature or paired set of features (nose, chin, forehead, eyes (including eyelids), ears (auricles), cheeks, lips) warrants a 30 percent rating.  Alternatively, a scar with two or three characteristics of disfigurement is also assigned a 30 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118.  

A scar with visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion or asymmetry of two features or paired sets of features (nose, chin, forehead, eyes (including eyelids), ears (auricles), cheeks, lips) is assigned a 50 percent rating.  As an alternative, a scar with four or five characteristics of disfigurement also receives a 50 percent rating.  A scar with visible or palpable tissue loss and either gross distortion of three or more features or paired sets of features (nose, chin, forehead, eyes (including eyelids), ears (auricles), cheeks, lips) warrants an 80 percent rating.  Alternatively, a scar with six or more characteristics of disfigurement is also assigned an 80 percent rating.  Id.

Note 1 to Code 7800 identifies the eight characteristics of disfigurement: (1) a scar 5 or more inches (13 or more centimeters (cm.)) in length; (2) a scar at least one-quarter inch (0.6 cm.) wide at its widest part; (3) a scar with surface contour that is elevated or depressed on palpation; (4) a scar adherent to underlying tissue; (5) a scar with hypo- or hyper-pigmented skin in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); (6) a scar with abnormal skin texture in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); (7) a scar with missing underlying soft tissue in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square cm.); and (7) a scar with indurated and inflexible skin in an area exceeding six square inches (39 square in.).  Id.  

In addition, tissue loss of the auricle (ear) is rated under Code 6207 (loss of auricle) "as appropriate."  Id, Note 2.  Under Code 6207, deformity of one auricle, with loss of one-third or more of the substance, warrants a 10 percent rating.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for complete loss of one auricle.  Complete loss of both auricles warrants a 50 percent rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.87.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable rating under Code 7800 because the Veteran does not have at least one characteristic of disfigurement.  Review of VAMC records from April 2008 to the March 2023 fails to reveal any characteristics of disfigurement.  In an April 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had no symptoms related to his scar and was not receiving any treatment for it.  The VA examination indicated that the scar was 2.5 cm. by 0.4 cm.; it was neither painful nor unstable; its surface contour was neither elevated nor depressed on palpation; it did not adhere to underlying tissue; it had no abnormal pigmentation; it had no abnormal texture; it had no missing underlying soft tissue; and it lacked induration and inflexibility.  The VA examination also noted that there was no gross distortion or asymmetry of the auricle or palpable tissue loss.  Thus, the Board finds his right ear laceration scar most nearly approximates a noncompensable rating.

The Board has considered the other Codes pertaining to scars.  In addition to affecting a different part of the body than is covered by Codes 7801 and 7802, he does not meet the affected-area requirements for either Code.  Moreover, the Veteran's right ear laceration scar is not unstable or painful.  Therefore, Codes 7801, 7802, and 7804 are inapplicable.  Finally, the evidence of record shows there are no other disabling effects not considered in a rating provided under Codes 7800 to 7804, as contemplated under Code 7805.

In sum, the evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced regarding whether a compensable rating is warranted for his scar.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), and entitlement to a compensable rating for right ear laceration scar is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Remand is permitted only to correct a pre-decisional error or any other failure to fulfill a statutory or regulatory duty, the correction of which raises a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  In this case, remand is necessary to secure VA examinations and opinions, which will correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors.

Bilateral Knee Condition, Including Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome

The January 2000 STR that noted a left elbow laceration also mentioned "abrasion to knee," although the specific knee affected was not identified.  April 2023 and November 2023 VA medical opinions failed to address this knee abrasion.  In addition, those opinions based their determinations solely on the lack of documented "knee conditions, diagnoses, exam, or evaluation" (April 2023) in service records.  See Smith v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 137, 140 (1992) (finding an examination inadequate because it relied solely on lack of evidence in STRs to provide a negative opinion).  Thus, remand is necessary to obtain a VA medical opinion.

Tinnitus 

The AOJ denied service connection for tinnitus because the Veteran failed to report to a VA examination.  The cited VA examination form, however, stated that the Veteran was "unavailable for more than one month" without providing additional information.  Moreover, the letter informing the Veteran that a VA examination may be needed (and that he might receive a call from an audiologist) shares its date with the VA examination form.  Thus, it is unlikely the Veteran was aware a call might take place, and he had no warning that failure to comply could negative impact his claim. Finally, the AOJ failed to state why no attempt to reschedule after one month had been made.  Thus, remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination.  

Lateral Collateral Ligament Sprain of the Left Ankle 

The AOJ obtained an April 2023 VA examination for the left ankle.  Unfortunately, this VA examination is insufficient because it listed contradictory findings without explaining the contradiction.  In the Medical History section, the Veteran reported having functional loss and/or impairment, including with repeated use over time, saying "I don't run, hike, tennis, and I don't play basketball because I'll roll it."  Later, however, the clinician indicated that the Veteran's statements do not suggest symptoms which significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time.  On remand, a VA examination must address the Veteran's statement or explain any contradictory findings.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA knee examination.  The claims file must be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.

The examiner must identify all current conditions of the left and right knees, and for each must opine as to whether such at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service, including the knee abrasion noted in the January 2000 STR. 

A full and complete rationale that supports any opinion expressed is required.  

2. Schedule a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed tinnitus. The claims file must be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.

The examiner must opine as to whether tinnitus is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service.

A full and complete rationale to support any opinion expressed is required.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA ankle examination.? The examiner must provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the disability under the rating criteria.

The clinician must address the Veteran's report in the April 2023 VA examination of having functional loss and/or impairment, including with repeated use over time

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Donnelly, William H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.