Citation Nr: A25031406
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-469086
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity (claimed as left nerve damage) is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity (claimed as right nerve damage) is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for asthma (claimed as respiratory condition/difficulties) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for blackout spells/episodes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition (now claimed as skin sores in summer months) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for a bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 30 percent for other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

Entitlement to a total rating for compensation based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from January 1968 to February 1971.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). AMA became effective on February 19, 2019.

In a March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was denied service connection for left and right nerve damage, a compensable rating for hypertension and a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus. In a May 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was denied service connection for blackout spells, a skin disorder, asthma, GERD, and obstructive sleep apnea. In another May 2024 rating decision, he was denied a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss and a rating higher than 30 percent for other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder. 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement (VA Form 10182) to the March 2024 and May 2024 rating decisions, and elected the hearing appeal docket. In June 2024, the Veteran provided testimony before an Acting Veterans Law Judge. A transcript of the hearing is of record. 

Under the AMA, when a claimant seeks appellate review through the Board's hearing docket, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, additional evidence submitted on the date of the Board hearing (including testimony), and additional evidence submitted within 90 days of the hearing. 38 U.S.C. § 7113(b). This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

The Board notes that a claim for a total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is considered part and parcel of any claim for an increased rating, when reasonably raised by the record. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The issue of TDIU was reasonably raised during the Veteran's October 2024 Board hearing. 

One feature of the AMA is the Board's limited authority to remand cases for further development and opinion. Remands under the AMA are limited to pre-decisional duty to assist errors and "correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim." 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). This framework creates a clear demarcation of evaluating evidence and theories raised before the AOJ adjudication, and evidence and theories raised in the evidentiary window after the AOJ adjudication. 

In October 2024, the Veteran's representative expressed that the AOJ relied upon the VA examination reports in November 2023 by A.E, NP; November 2023 and January 2024 by M.K.W, NP; March 2024 by B.S. AuD; and May 2024 by S.H.W., PhD. The representative argued, however, that they did not have enough information to challenge the competency of the VA examiners. The representative, therefore, requested a copy of the examiners personnel file with the Department of Veterans Affairs or, alternatively, at a minimum, the examiners CV showing, at least, the examiners education, training, experience and any discipline imposed by the VA or by any licensing board. 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) issued a panel decision in Francway v. Wilkie, 930 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2019), affirming the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) which found that when a challenge to the competency of the medical examiner is raised, the Board must make a factual finding as to whether the medical examiner is competent. Francway v. Wilkie, 940 F.3d 1304, 1307-08 (Fed. Cir. 2019). The Court held that the challenge must be more than a general assertion that an examination or opinion is inadequate and must be raised by the Veteran in the first instance. Id. A challenge raised under the above circumstances rebuts the presumption of competency and VA must satisfy its burden of persuasion as to the examiner's qualifications by providing the Veteran with information about the qualifications of the examiner. Furthermore, the Federal Circuit has observed that the question of whether an examiner is competent and whether he or she has rendered an adequate examination are two separate inquiries. Id at 1309.

The Francway request was raised after the AOJ decision on appeal precluding the Board, by law, to remand the case to the AOJ to provide a copy of the examiners personnel file with the Department of Veterans Affairs or, alternatively, at a minimum, the examiners CV showing, at least, the examiners education, training, experience and any discipline imposed by the VA or by any licensing board. Notably, a personnel file is likely protected from disclosure by law and would be subject to a Freedom of Information challenge.

In this situation, the Board processed the Francway request as a Privacy Act request. In December 2024, the Veteran's representative took issue with the Privacy Act handling of the Francway request arguing that Francway "requests are made as a part of the Department's duty to assist the veteran in legacy cases and as a part of the Board's obligation to provide the necessary information to allow us to assess whether there is a valid basis for a more specific objection to the examiners competence which ultimately becomes part of the Board's duty to provide reasons and bases for any determination that the examiners are competent in AMA cases." Here, the representative is conceding that the Francway request is a duty to assist obligation - but, unlike legacy appeals, the Board's authority to remand in AMA cases is specifically limited to pre-adjudicatory AOJ errors. The Board is not attempting to "escape its obligations," but rather observes that Congress intended that the "duty to assist ... shall not apply ... to review on appeal by the Board of Veteran's Appeals." Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, 158 (2021) (citing 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e)(2)).

The Veteran's attorney should re-raise the issue to the AOJ to avoid a potential remand in the event the AOJ does not recognize an outstanding Francway request.

As addressed below, the record before the AOJ reasonably raised a theory of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea and GERD as secondary to service-connected PTSD. After the AOJ adjudication, the Veteran also raised theories that his obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to obesity caused by service-connected disabilities and/or service-connected diabetes mellitus and hypertension. The Board has no duty to assist, and the Veteran's attorney is advised the alert the AOJ to these newly raised theories.

The Veteran appeals the denial of service connection for left and right nerve damage, blackout spells, a skin disorder, asthma, GERD, and obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran also appeals the denial of increased ratings for his service-connected hypertension, bilateral hearing loss disability, other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder and diabetes mellitus.

After review of the record, the Board finds that further development is needed for proper adjudication of the claims. To that end, the Board notes that there are outstanding relevant VA treatment records. Specifically, the Veteran's VA treatment records contain scanned documents into the VistA Imaging system and Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS) that are not associated with the claims file, and the Board does not have access to VistA Imaging or CPRS. 

In various outpatient treatment records, to include on March 24, 2022, it was noted that "all changes in medications, including all non-VA/Herbal/OTC medications were entered into CPRS." In the March 2023 VA audio examination, the examiner noted that he reviewed the record which included records in the CPRS. In the April 2024 VA examination for other specified trauma and stressor-related disorder, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran "has had two appointments on 2/27 and 4/26 but neither note is available in CPRS at this time." Outpatient treatment records, to include a March 15, 2023, note, also show that documents have been scanned via Vista Imaging. The Court has held that VA medical records are in constructive possession of the agency and must be obtained if pertinent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2); see Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611 (1992).

Additionally, during the April 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he was being treated at Gardner Vet Center and that he was seeing a therapist there but she retired about a year ago. Vet Center records are deemed in the constructive possession of VA, see Dunn v. West, 11 Vet. App. 462, 466-67 (1998), and there is a pre-adjudicatory error in not obtaining these records. He also reports continuing care by a private primary care physician and seeking treatment at Haywood Hospital as necessary. These records were last obtained in 2022, which is 2 years before the record closed. These records should have been updated prior to the AOJ adjudication on appeal.

The Board also notes that a remand is warranted to afford the Veteran an examination for his claim for service connection for a skin disability. On August 10, 2022, the President signed into law the Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act of 2022. Under the PACT Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can establish participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, records showing participation in a TERA, VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim or file has a claim attribute for toxic exposure, a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure, medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as VHA exposure screening, or any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures.

Here, the Veteran has submitted a claim for compensation, demonstrated a current disability and has military service that presumptively qualifies as participation in a TERA, while there is insufficient evidence to grant the claim.

The sub-regulatory guidance defines four exceptions to the requirement to obtain a TERA examination and medical opinion: physical trauma, mental disorders, disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide agents exposure, and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure (to include due to post-service events). VBA Letter 20-22-10, 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022). These exceptions do not apply in this case.

The PACT Act, including the requirement to provide an examination, was in effect at the time of the May 2024 rating decision. However, an examination was not provided for this claim. Thus, a remand is also necessary to provide the Veteran with an examination that complies with the statutory duty imposed by the PACT Act. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

With regard to the claim for an increased rating for diabetes mellitus, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. The VA examination report shows that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus required prescribed oral hypoglycemic agents and regulation of activities. Insulin was not listed as a requirement for treatment. During his October 2024 Board hearing, however, the Veteran testified that he stopped taking insulin for his diabetes mellitus in April or May of the year prior and that he had been on insulin for three to four years prior to that. Outpatient treatment records show insulin as an active medication until January 2024 which conflicts with the VA examination report. The issue of insulin prescription is a matter of fact not requiring medical opinion. The issue is deferred pending receipt of records within constructive possession of VA but not yet associated with the claims folder.

The Board also notes that, during the November 2023 VA examination, it was determined that the Veteran had diabetic retinopathy and erectile dysfunction as complications of his diabetes mellitus. The examiner, however, noted that the neurological examination was abnormal. Outpatient treatment records show findings of mild peripheral neuropathy. In March 2023, it was noted that "this may be due to EtOH rather than DM given the limited duration of diabetes." In light of the outpatient treatment records showing peripheral neuropathy and the VA examination noting abnormal neurological examination, the Board finds that the record is unclear as to whether the Veteran has peripheral neuropathy as a complication of diabetes mellitus. For that reason, another examination is warranted on this matter. 

Finally, prior to the AOJ adjudication on appeal, the Veteran specifically raised theories that his sleep apnea and GERD were secondary to his PTSD. A March 2019 VA examiner noted that PTSD generally could be an aggravating factor, and an addendum opinion did not adequately address the aggravation theory. The Board must correct this duty to assist error. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).  

Furthermore, as the claim for entitlement to TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the claims for an increased rating, it must also be remanded. See Parker v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 116 (1994); Harris v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain and associate with the claims file any outstanding relevant records viewable in VistA Imaging and CPRS. See, e.g., CAPRI, March 24, 2022, record noting "all changes in medications, including all non-VA/Herbal/OTC medications were entered into CPRS," the March 26, 2024, Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ showing review of records in CPRS, and CAPRI, March 15, 2023 "VistA Imaging - Scanned Document."

2. Obtain and associate with the file any outstanding records from Gardner Vet Center. 

3. Assist the Veteran in obtaining records from Haywood Hospital and his private care physician since February 2022.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a TERA examination regarding his claim for a skin condition in compliance with the PACT Act. The examiner should specifically review VA records in June 1979 where the Veteran described a history of recurrent rashes in the summer months which had occurred every year for the past 9 years; a biopsy was performed at that time. See Medical Treatment Record-Government Facility received July 9, 2016. 

5. Schedule the Veteran for VA hypertension examination. The examiner should obtain a history from the Veteran regarding the frequency, severity and duration of his headache and dizziness episodes, review his historical blood pressure readings, and provide opinion as to whether his reported symptoms of headache and dizziness episodes are medically related to his hypertension and, if so, please identify the approximate blood pressure reading(s) which cause headache and/or dizziness symptoms. See VA examination dated November 2023 (general description of severe headaches when blood pressure gets to high, or dizziness when low).

6. Afford the Veteran a VA peripheral nerve examination. The examiner should clarify whether the Veteran demonstrates neurologic impairment of the left and/or right lower extremity and, if so, opine whether there is a nearly equal probability or greater than such neurologic impairment is a complication of service-connected diabetes mellitus. In so doing, the examiner should review VA outpatient treatment records showing findings of mild peripheral neuropathy with a March 2023 assessment that such disorder "may be due to EtOH rather than DM given the limited duration of diabetes." 

7. Forward the Veteran's claims file to a qualified examiner for an addendum opinion addressing whether the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is related to service or PTSD. The examiner should answer the following questions:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea began during active service?

(b) Is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD caused a medically discernible increase in disability or functional impairment of obstructive sleep apnea. Specifically, would the obstructive sleep apnea have been less severe "but-for" the service-connected PTSD including symptomatology which may interfere with proper treatment such as use of a CPAP?

The examiner should identify the criteria for diagnosing sleep apnea, and discuss whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's belief that he manifested symptoms of sleep apnea since service. The examiner should specifically review the Veteran's June 1981 statement describing intermittent drowsiness and a January 1982 VA examination wherein he described being very tired and sleeping a lot. Additionally, the examiner should consider the March 2019 VA examination report citing PTSD as a clinical risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea.

8. Forward the Veteran's claims file to a qualified examiner for an addendum opinion addressing whether the Veteran's diagnosed GERD is related to service or service-connected PTSD. The examiner should answer the following questions:

a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD began during active service?

(b) Is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD caused a medically discernible increase in disability or functional impairment of GERD. Specifically, would the GERD have been less severe "but-for" the service-connected PTSD including symptomatology which may interfere with proper treatment or medications which could cause increased symptoms?

The examiner should discuss whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's belief that he manifested symptoms of GERD since service. The examiner should specifically review the STRs regarding gastrointestinal complaints and explain why or why not this was a manifestation of GERD.

9. Forward the Veteran's claims file to a qualified examiner for an addendum opinion addressing whether the Veteran's diagnosed asthma began in service or is related to service. The examiner should opine as to whether it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's asthma began during active service? In so doing, the examiner should specifically discuss the significance in the STRs of dry cough associated with chest pain, an October 1979 VA treatment record noting report of chest pain and shortness of breath, and private medical records noting a history of environmental allergens and asthma.

 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T.S. Willie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.