Citation Nr: A25031687
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-411127
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear as secondary to torn rotator cuff with impingement syndrome and Acromioclavicular (AC) arthritis of the right shoulder is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1978 to October 2000.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO); therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In March 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear as secondary to torn rotator cuff with impingement syndrome and Acromioclavicular (AC) arthritis of the right shoulder most recently addressed in a January 2022 rating decision.  In July 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2022 decision.  In March 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior July 2022 decision.  

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear as secondary to torn rotator cuff with impingement syndrome and Acromioclavicular (AC) arthritis, right shoulder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran's representative, Mr. Robert Chisholm, in September 2024, filed a motion to withdraw as counsel in this matter before the Board. The Veteran has authorized the withdrawal as the motion was accompanied by a signed statement from the Veteran himself. The Board finds that the representative has met all procedural requirements necessary to request withdrawal of representation as required in § 20.6. 

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear as secondary to torn rotator cuff with impingement syndrome and Acromioclavicular (AC) arthritis, right shoulder is remanded. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear which he contends is secondary to his service-connected torn rotator cuff with impingement syndrome and acromioclavicular arthritis of the right shoulder. See March 2022 VA Form 20-0995.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2021. The examiner noted a diagnosis of left shoulder acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear. The examiner opined that the Veteran's condition is less likely than not the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner noted it is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but one joint's disease does not 'spread' to another or cause damage to it. The Board notes that the examiner did not include an opinion regarding aggravation. A medical opinion addressing secondary service connection must address causation and aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Therefore, the opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022. The examiner noted a diagnosis of left should acromioclavicular osteoarthritis and rotator cuff tear.  The Veteran reported functional loss or functional impairment as being unable to life his arms above shoulder level. The examiner noted that regardless of the Veteran's current employment status his condition impacts his ability to perform any occupational task because he is unable to life his arms above shoulder level. The Board notes that the examiner did not provide a nexus opinion.

The Board finds that, while the AOJ took steps to obtain a VA opinion on the Veteran's behalf, it did not ensure that it was adequate for the purposes of the determination being made. Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for the purposes of the determination being made. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). This constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be corrected on remand.

In light of the above, the Board finds that remand is required to obtain an adequate medical opinion regarding the Veteran's left shoulder disability before VA can render an informed decision on the claim. See Douglas v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 19, 26 (2009). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate clinician addressing service connection for the Veteran's left shoulder disability secondary to his service-connected right shoulder disability. The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the clinician proffering the opinion.

The clinician must review the claims file in its entirety and the review should be noted in the report.

Thereafter, the clinician should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the left shoulder disability was caused by his service-connected right shoulder disability.

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left shoulder disability was aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder disability.

In rendering an opinion, the clinician should consider the relevant medical evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements. 

In properly addressing the matter of aggravation, the clinician is reminded that it is not required that the claimed disability is shown to be aggravated predominantly or permanently by the service-connected disability, but rather, whether there is any contributing degree of aggravation beyond the natural progression of the claimed disability.

The clinician must provide a complete rationale for any opinions offered, citing to the clinician's own expertise, medical principals, and/or evidence in the Veteran's claims file, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached. If the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or a deficiency in the examiner (i.e., the examiner does not have the requisite knowledge or training).

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Fuller, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.