Citation Nr: A25031342
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-478799
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Eligibility for benefits under the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The?Veteran?served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 1965 to April 1969.  

The case is on appeal from a July 2024 decision of the?Veterans?Health Administration (VHA), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. §?20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date of the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the date of the Board hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Eligibility for benefits under VA PCAFC.

The Veteran in this case has a combined service-connected disability rating of 100 percent since July 2008.  He and his son applied for Caregiver Program benefits in June 2024.

This appeal is remanded because the medical opinion upon which the decision was based is legally inadequate to support the decision made.

The July 2024 Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT) determination that the Veteran is not in need of personal care services is contradicted by the medical evidence, conclusory, and unexplained.  A medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008).   

Here, the CEAT provided no reasoning, rationale, or justification for this decision.  The CEAT stated that the Veteran was able to independently perform all ADLs and was not in need of regular or extensive instruction or supervision.  While it cited to medical evidence supporting the decision, it ignored evidence contradicting this finding.  This is significant because the functional assessment concluded that the Veteran was in need of some assistance with several activities of daily living.  Further, the functional assessment notes that the Veteran needs help with medication management, is minimally able to take action in a potentially harmful situation, and is at risk of self-neglect.  

As such, remand is warranted for a more detailed and thoroughly explained medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion from the CEAT as to whether the Veteran: 

(a.) Requires personal care services each time he completes one or more of the following: 

1.	Dressing or undressing oneself; 

2.	Bathing; 

3.	Grooming oneself in order to keep oneself clean and presentable; 

4.	Adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, that by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without assistance (this does not include the adjustment of appliances that nondisabled persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);

5.	Toileting or attending to toileting; 

6.	Feeding oneself due to loss of coordination of upper extremities, extreme weakness, inability to swallow, or the need for a non-oral means of nutrition; or 

7.	Mobility (walking, going up stairs, transferring from bed to chair, etc.) 

(b.) Has a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or 

(c.) Has a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired. 

In answering all questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2)?explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.

The Board recognizes that the CEAT need not address all of the evidence in the record.  However, they are asked to address relevant and potentially positive evidence, such as the Veteran being minimally able to take action in potentially harmful situations. 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Uller, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.