Citation Nr: A25031842
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452349
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, left hand, is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, right hand, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A December 2021 rating decision denied direct service connection for tremors; a supplemental claim was received within one year.

2. An August 12, 2022, rating decision denied direct service connection for tremors.  

3. On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was signed into law which, among other changes, established changes to medical examination requirements when there is documented toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

4. A June 2023 TERA Memorandum indicated that the Veteran had in-service garrison exposure, including exposure to jet fuel.

5. A November 2023 VA examiner attributed the Veteran's current tremors to his in-service TERAs.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, left hand, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400; Pub. L. 117-168.

2. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, right hand, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400; Pub. L. 117-168.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1975 to August 1979 and from April 1984 to February 1990.  For his meritorious service, he received an Air Force Good Conduct Medal with 1 Oak Leaf Cluster and Air Force Longevity Service Award Ribbon with 1 Oak Leaf Cluster, among others.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, left hand.

2. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for benign essential tremor, right hand.

Liberalizing Laws

Generally, the effective date for the grant of service connection based upon an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase is either the day following separation from active service, or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, it will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b).

A claim is a formal or informal communication, in writing, requesting a determination of entitlement, or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p).  VA amended its regulations on March 24, 2015, to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 57660 (Sept. 25, 2014).

Where compensation benefits are awarded pursuant to a liberalizing law, the effective date of such award shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the effective date of the liberalizing regulation.  In order for a claimant to be eligible for a retroactive payment the evidence must show that the claimant met all eligibility criteria for the liberalized benefit on the effective date of the liberalizing law and that such eligibility existed continuously from that date to the date of claim or administrative determination of entitlement.  38 C.F.R. § 3.114(a), § 5110(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.114(a); see also McCay v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 183, 187 (1996) (confirming that the plain language of section 5110(g) "prohibits a retroactive award prior to the effective date of the legislation"), aff'd, 106 F.3d 1577 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

Although the term "liberalizing law" remains undefined in the regulations governing VA, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has determined that a liberalizing law is one which brought about a substantive change in the law creating a new and different entitlement to a benefit.  That is, if a new law provides for benefits not previously available, even though grounded on some but not all of the same facts adjudicated under an earlier law, a new cause of action is created along with a new entitlement to a remedy.  Brown v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 290, 295 (2007).

An intent to file a claim for service connection was received by VA on March 3, 2020. 

On March 31, 2020, VA received a formal application, VA Form 21-526EZ, for service connection for tremors, noting exposure to solvents.   

A December 2021 rating decision denied service connection for tremors.  The AOJ noted that the service treatment records (STRs) were negative for any mention of a tremor.  The decision noted that private medical records reflected treatment for tremors.  No VA examination was completed.  

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim, requesting service connection for tremors.  

An August 12, 2022, rating decision denied direct service connection for tremors.  The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current diagnosis.  

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a Toxicologic Assessment of Jet-Propulsion Fuel 8, completed by the National Research Council of the National Academies.  The assessment did not indicate a relationship between jet fuel and tremors.  The Veteran also submitted a PFAS Exposure Test and Exposure Blood test, but again, do not provide evidence specific to the Veteran or discussion of tremors.

A September 2022 rating decision noted that new evidence was received and again denied service connection for tremors.  The AOJ noted the absence of a report of tremors in the STRs and no link between the current condition and service.  The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current diagnosis.  

In January 2023, the Veteran requested higher-level review of the September 2022 rating decision.  

A January 2023 rating decision determined that a duty-to-assist error had been made by the September 2022 rating decision.  It was noted that the AOJ failed to get clarification of an examination and develop for a TERA memorandum.  The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's exposure to jet fuel was consistent with his duties of jet engine maintenance.

A June 2023 TERA memorandum found that the Veteran participated in a TERA.  The memorandum determined that there was environmental contamination with chromium, copper, zinc, lead and cadmium due to weapons usage/discharge due to the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of Nuclear Weapons Specialist.  In addition, he had exposure to jet engine emissions which similar to diesel exhaust emissions included volatile organic compounds and particulate matter consisting of an inorganic carbon core with associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and metals.  Diesel exhaust was classified as carcinogenic and the particulate fraction.  The Veteran also had exposure to aircraft pollutants such as benzene, toluene, and chlorinated compounds, volatile organic compounds such as C02, NOx, CO, Sox and low molecular weight polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and particulate matter with associated PAH and metals based on duties of Aircrew Flight Engineer Specialist.  He also had exposure to jet engine emissions which similar to diesel exhaust emissions which include volatile organic compounds and particulate matter consisting of an inorganic carbon core with associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and metals.  Diesel exhaust was classified as carcinogenic and the particulate fraction.  He had exposure to aircraft pollutants such as benzene, toluene, and chlorinated compounds, volatile organic compounds such as C02, NOx, CO, Sox and low molecular weight polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and particulate matter with associated PAH and metals based on his MOS of Aerospace Propulsion Specialist.

A November 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.  The examiner addressed the Veteran's TERAs and referenced medical literature which showed that toxins including but not limited to lead and toluene were known to aggravate essential tremors and quite likely to cause them.  

A November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for benign essential tremor, left hand, and granted service connection for benign essential tremor, right hand.  The AOJ assigned the effective date of August 10, 2022, to the awards of service connection.  The AOJ explained that the criteria for a grant of service connection were met effective the date of the law change.  

PACT Act and effective dates

On August 10, 2022, the PACT Act was signed into law which established new presumptions of exposure to toxins for certain Veterans, and service connection on a presumptive basis for certain listed diseases.   

The PACT Act also provides that where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA during active military service and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the toxic exposure risk activity. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

Here, the Veteran was diagnosed with tremors and considered a TERA Veteran based on his garrison exposure from his MOS duties.  VA was therefore required to provide the Veteran with an examination that complied with the statutory duty imposed by the PACT Act.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

As noted above, the November 2023 VA examiner provided a positive nexus opinion, relating the tremors to the Veteran's TERAs.  For claims granted pursuant to the PACT Act and filed prior to or within one year of the Act, the earliest effective date assignable is August 10, 2022, which is the effective date assigned to the awards of service connection for benign essential tumor of the left hand and benign essential tumor of the right hand.  38 C.F.R. § 3.114.

The Veteran argues that the correct effective date for the awards of service connection is March 3, 2020, when VA received his intent-to-file and his claim had been continuously prosecuted since that time.  See July 2024 NOD, attached argument.  The Veteran further argues that the TERA examination process from the PACT Act was not a liberalizing law.  Rather, the Veteran contends that the portion of the Act pertaining to examinations established new duty-to-assist processes, and no new substantive rights were created.  In fact, the Veteran stated that a TERA medical opinion was nothing other than a specialist form of medical opinion on direct service connection.  The Veteran argued that there is nothing in the PACT Act that established a new theory of entitlement for the Veteran's essential tremor disability.  He asserts that the normal effective date provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 apply and the Veteran was entitled to an effective date of March 3, 2020, based on the date of the initial continuously pursued claim because entitlement arose prior to that date by the positive direct nexus opinion obtained by VA through the TERA process.  

The Board respectfully disagrees.  The new 38 U.S.C. § 1168 authority created by the PACT Act, which changed the medical examination requirements when there is documented TERA, is a liberalizing law.  See Spencer v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 283, 287 (1993), aff'd, 17 F.3d 368 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (recognizing as a liberalizing law "a provision of law or regulation [that] creates a new basis for entitlement to benefits, as through liberalization of the requirements for entitlement to a benefit.").  The PACT Act essentially created a new theory of service connection through participation in a TERA during active service which did not exist prior to the PACT Act.  

Direct service connection

Nonetheless, the Board has reviewed the record to determine whether the claims may be granted on a basis other than the PACT Act.  

The Veteran's tremor is not a presumptive condition and, therefore, service connection is not warranted on a presumptive basis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a)-(f).  

As to direct service connection, the evidence reflects a current disability.  

Concerning an in-service injury, event or illness, in May 2021, the Veteran described his reported exposures to chemicals such as tricholorethane, trichloroethylene (TCE), tolulene, trichlorotrifloroethane, aceton and methylethylketone (MEK).  He also alleged that he was exposed to ground water contaminated with Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA).  He stated that acute exposure to jet fuels had been associated with neurologic effects in humans, including headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, fatigue, incoordination, irritability, problems with attention and memory, narcosis, and gait disturbances.  The Veteran stated that persistent effects could include peripheral neuropathy and behavioral changes, such as reduced performance on tests of attention and psychomotor speed.  He noted that he spent ten years of military service with the Reserve/Air National Guard and performed jet engine maintenance with exposure to JP-8.  

However, the STRs were absent for any indication or complaint of a tremor.  

The November 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion for direct service connection, noting the Veteran's report of onset and that a May 2016 VA neurology note indicated onset approximately eight years ago, years after separation from service.  

The Veteran submitted medical literature in August 2022, but these articles were of a general nature, did not address tremors, and were not otherwise specific to the Veteran and his medical history and risk factors for tremors.  Sacks v. West, 11 Vet. App. 314, 317 (1998) (holding that generic medical treatise evidence cannot, without more, provide the medical nexus necessary to establish entitlement to benefits).

A May 2021 private treatment record reflects a diagnosis of essential tremor with reported onset of symptoms in 2008.  The physician discussed the Veteran's reported chemical exposures and report of exposure to contaminated groundwater.  The physician noted that the Veteran presented medical literature with research on acute exposure to JP-8 fuel resulting in neurological effects such as peripheral neuropathy and reduced performance on attention and psychomotor speed.  The physician noted an impression of tremor affecting both hands.  The physician explained that an essential tremor typically slowly worsens over time.  The physician explained that the etiology of tremor is unknown and at times tremors, such as essential tremors, may also be due to exposures to toxic or other metabolic disturbances.  It seemed that there was a "reasonable" chance that his tremors "may be" due to past exposures if these are so documented through his service records.  The physician then stated that she had no experience in toxicological compounds to which the Veteran was exposed but there were certainly occupational medicine physicians who could be experts and could potentially render opinions of possible connections.  The Board finds the physician's opinion is entitled to little probative value as she used speculative terms.  See Polovick v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 48, 54 (2009) (holding that a doctor's statement that a veteran's brain tumor "may well be" connected to Agent Orange exposure was speculative); Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (noting that the use of the term "could," without other rationale or supporting data, is speculative); Obert v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 30, 33 (1993) (noting that a medical opinion expressed in terms of "may" also implies "may or may not" and is too speculative to establish a causal relationship).

Here, the evidence upon which service connection was granted attributed the current diagnoses of benign essential tremor of the left hand and benign essential tremor of the right hand to the in-service TERAs, and not as having been initially manifest during service or as otherwise attributable to service on a direct basis.  Thus, an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the awards of service connection is not warranted. 

For all of the above reasons, August 10, 2022, is the earliest effective date allowable for the awards of service connection for benign essential tremor, left hand, and benign essential tremor, right hand.  The persuasive evidence weighs against the claim and the claim is denied.  

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seay, Jessica M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.