Citation Nr: A25031269
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-474014
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral eye disorder, diagnosed as pigmentary glaucoma (previously pigment dispersion syndrome), is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's pigment dispersion syndrome that later converted to the current diagnosis of pigmentary glaucoma is a hereditary disease, but there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the disease was not aggravated by his military service.

2.  The Veteran's pigmentary glaucoma is related to his military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for pigmentary glaucoma (previously pigment dispersion syndrome) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1966 to August 1967.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 rating decision in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) determined that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim (then characterized as chorioretinitis with secondary open angle glaucoma), but it continued the denial of the underlying merits.  The Board will not disturb the favorable finding as to new and relevant evidence.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in August 2024 and elected to have a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 AOJ decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision and prior to the Board hearing or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38?C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  Nevertheless, this decision represents a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.

A hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in December 2024, and a hearing transcript is of record.

Law and Analysis

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in the active military, naval, air, or space service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Congenital or developmental defects are not diseases or injuries for VA compensation purposes.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 4.9.  VA regulations specifically prohibit service connection for a congenital or developmental defect, unless it was subjected to a superimposed disease or injury which created additional disability.  See VAOPGCPREC 82-90 (1990) (cited at 55 Fed. Reg. 45,711) (Oct. 30, 1990) (service connection may not be granted for defects of congenital, developmental, or familial origin, unless the defect was subject to a superimposed disease or injury).  See also Carpenter v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 240 (1995); Monroe v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 513 (1993).  On the other hand, service connection may be granted for diseases of congenital, developmental, or familial origin.  While a defect is defined as a structural or inherent abnormality or condition which is more or less stationary in nature, a disease is defined as any deviation from or interruption of the normal structure or function of any part, organ, or system of the body that is manifested by a characteristic set of symptoms and signs and whose etiology, pathology, and prognosis may be known or unknown.  See VAOPGCPREC 82-90.

A veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.  Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  A history of preservice existence of conditions recorded at the time of examination does not constitute a notation of such conditions but will be considered together with all other material evidence in determinations as to inception.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b)(1); see also Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238 (1994).

Where the presumption of soundness has initially attached, the burden is on VA to rebut the presumption by clear and unmistakable evidence that the disease or injury was both preexisting and not aggravated by service.  See, e.g., McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 23 (2016) (citing Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004), Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 234 (2012), and Bagby v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 225, 227 (1991)).  VA is not precluded from determining that the presumption of soundness is rebutted, even if there is conflicting evidence.  See Kent v. Principi, 389 F.3d 1380, 1383 (Fed. Cir. 2004) ("The clear and unmistakable evidentiary standard . . . does not require the absence of conflicting evidence.").  A determination that a condition had its onset prior to service may be supported by contemporaneous evidence or recorded history in the record which provides a sufficient factual predicate to support a medical opinion (Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998)), or a later medical opinion based on statements made by a veteran about the preservice history of the condition (Harris v. West, 203 F.3d 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2000)).

A preexisting injury or disease is considered to have been aggravated by service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability was due to the natural progress of the condition.  See Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096 (holding that when no preexisting condition noted on entry to service, government may show lack of aggravation by establishing that any increase was due to the natural progress of the preexisting condition).  In addressing the aggravation prong of the presumption of soundness, VA must rely on affirmative evidence to prove that there was no aggravation, rather than the notion that the record contains insufficient evidence of aggravation.  See Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 235.

The clear and unmistakable evidentiary standard requires that the no-aggravation result be "undebatable."  Cotant v. West, 17 Vet. App. 116, 131 (2003) (citations omitted); Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254, 258 (1999) (noting that "clear and convincing" burden of proof, while a higher standard than a preponderance of the evidence, is a lower burden to satisfy than clear and unmistakable evidence).

The presumption of soundness does not apply to congenital defects because such defects are not diseases or injuries within the meaning of 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1111.  However, the presumption of soundness still applies to congenital diseases that are not noted at entry.  See Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 396-397 (2009) (citing 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c), Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (holding that the presumption of soundness does not apply to congenital defects), and Winn v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 510 (1996) (holding that a non-disease or non-injury entity such as a congenital defect is not the type of disease- or injury-related defect to which the presumption of soundness can apply)).  

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has subsequently clarified that in cases of congenital, developmental, or hereditary conditions that qualify as diseases, VA rebuts the part of the presumption of soundness that the disease did not preexist service by showing that it is hereditary.  The Federal Circuit explained that the relevant factual question is whether the congenital condition manifested in service, "i.e., '[a]t what point the individual starts to manifest the symptoms' and whether the symptoms have 'progresse[d] during service at a greater rate than normally expected according to accepted medical authority.'"  O'Bryan v. McDonald, 771 F.3d 1376, 1380-1381 (Fed. Cir. 2014) (citing VAOPGCPREC 67-90).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits.  VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for pigmentary glaucoma (previously pigment dispersion syndrome).

The Veteran has essentially contended that his current pigmentary glaucoma is the result of aggravation of his initial pigment dispersion syndrome from in-service physical exertion/heavy exercise, such as jogging and marching, that affected his intraocular pressure (IOP).  He has indicated that he was previously unaware of any eye problems prior to his military service except for needing glasses, but he later learned from one of his treatment providers, a glaucoma specialist, that the disease is a family, hereditary type condition that he had all along.  See, e.g., written statements from May 2022, June 2022 (on supplemental claim application form), and May 2023; December 2024 Bd. Hrg. Tr.

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral eye open angle glaucoma that is binding on the Board.  38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4), 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  The record also supports that determination.  See, e.g., June 2023 VA examination report; May 2022 private medical opinion from Dr. S.P. (initials used to protect privacy).  In May 2022 and June 2024 medical opinions, Dr. S.P., the Veteran's treating ophthalmologist, provided the most probative determinations on the questions of the specific diagnosis and the development of the disease and its relationship to the Veteran's military service, as discussed in detail throughout the decision below, along with the remaining medical evidence on those matters.

Regarding the specific diagnosis, some records indicate that the Veteran had bilateral eye chorioretinitis with secondary open angle glaucoma or primary open angle glaucoma.  See, e.g., May 1967 narrative summary in service treatment records; June 2023 VA examination report.  However, Dr. S.P. indicated that the proper current diagnosis is pigmentary glaucoma, a type of open angle glaucoma.  In addition, she explained that the Veteran had pigment dispersion syndrome that later converted to pigmentary glaucoma, a hereditary disease, rather than chorioretinitis with secondary open angle glaucoma.  She further explained that the disease is very different than the standard "primary open angle glaucoma," and the Veteran had a "VERY" different ocular appearance to his retinal scars than that of patients she had either seen or read about who had both chorioretinitis and elevated eye pressure/glaucoma.  See also, e.g., April 2024 VA treatment record (review of treatment records from staff optometrist who noted current diagnosis and ongoing treatment for bilateral eye pigmentary glaucoma with Dr. S.P.).

In addition, the Veteran's competent reports of in-service training exercises are consistent with the circumstances of his service and constitute an in-service event.  See also, e.g., February 1967 consultation sheet in service treatment records (referral for treatment from military training center (MTC)).

The Veteran's service treatment records show that his eyes were found to be normal at the time of the August 1966 entrance examination, except for a finding of defective vision (20/400 in the right eye and 20/70 in the left eye).  The corresponding report of medical history shows the Veteran reported a history of eye trouble, noted by the examiner as defective vision - right eye particularly weak; however, the examiner did not provide a specific finding under the summary of defects and diagnoses section of the examination report to clearly identify that this symptomatology represented glaucoma or an early stage of the disease at the time.  Rather, the examiner noted that the Veteran had defective vision but was fit for military service, assigning an E1 in the "PULHES" physical profile for eyes.  See Odiorne v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 456, 457 (1992) (PULHES profile reflects the overall physical and psychiatric condition of a veteran on a scale of 1 (high level of fitness) to 4 (a medical condition or physical defect which is below the level of medical fitness for retention in the military service)).  The Veteran also had a physical inspection when he entered into active duty in October 1966, and the examiner at that time determined that he had no additional defects discovered and was fit for military service.  Thus, the Veteran is legally presumed to have been sound at entrance to service as to glaucoma.

Nevertheless, the preexisting prong of the presumption of soundness has been rebutted because the Veteran's pigment dispersion syndrome with associated pigmentary glaucoma is a hereditary disease.  O'Bryan, supra.  As noted above, the Veteran testified that he learned of the hereditary nature of the disorder from one of his treatment providers. See also, e.g., February 1967 service treatment record (notation that Veteran reported a strong family history of glaucoma on his father's side).  In the 2022 medical opinion, Dr. S.P. similarly explained that pigment dispersion syndrome is a genetic condition that results in abnormal anatomy in which the iris of the eye rubs against the lens of the eye and that action causes the iris to shed pigment particles, which then leads to the released pigment clogging up the trabecular meshwork of the eye, resulting in higher eye pressure.  She noted that, if those episodes happen frequently, the high eye pressure becomes sustained enough to cut off blood flow to the optic nerve, killing off part of the nerve and resulting in permanent nerve damage.  She further explained that not all patients with pigment dispersion syndrome develop pigmentary glaucoma, but there are risk factors for developing the glaucoma portion, one of which she found applicable in this case.

Nevertheless, there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the disease was not aggravated by the Veteran's military service.  His service treatment records contain a March 1967 letter from one of his treatment providers, Dr. S.H., obtained in connection with his in-service hospitalization discussed below, that shows treatment for his eyes in November 1964 and January 1965.  In the first instance, it was noted that the Veteran wore myopic glasses with corrected vision of 20/20-4, showed a small patch of chorioretinitis in the left eye with IOP of 20 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) in the right eye and 26 mmHg in the left eye, and the fundus was clearing five days later.  The letter also notes that the Veteran had a family history of glaucoma.  In the second instance, the right eye showed a patch of chorioretinitis that was subsiding with vision still approximately 20/20- in each eye with glasses.  It was noted that treatment consisted essentially of aspirin and rest.

During service, the Veteran was initially seen in the optometry clinic in mid-October 1966 for prescription glasses.  In February 1967 (February 21), he sought treatment for vision complaints starting the prior day with associated periorbital pain, and he reported that he had similar symptoms about four times in the past 10 years (noted in the next record to have last occurred a year and a half prior with no cause found), but he did not know the diagnosis provided by the specialists he saw.  Based on examination findings, the Veteran was referred to the ophthalmology clinic for an emergency consultation that same day where slit lamp testing revealed epithelial edema in the right eye and a pigment deposit in the left eye and tonometry testing revealed IOP of 50 mmHg in the right eye and 21 mmHg in the left eye.  There was a pronounced choroidal pattern in the periphery of the eyes with a salt and pepper pigment pattern.  It was also noted that the Veteran's IOP lowered to 36 mmHg in the right eye and 12 mmHg in the left eye when measured after he was given medication (diamox), glycerin, and orange juice, and the recommendation was hospital admission.

The Veteran then underwent hospital treatment for evaluation and therapy from that same day in February 1967 to May 1967, which included a period of convalescent leave.  The May 1967 narrative summary provides an overview of that treatment.  The history of the present illness section details the treatment earlier in the day at the ophthalmology clinic, including a notation that the Veteran was found to have markedly elevated intraocular pressure in the right eye as well as corneal edema at that time.  It was noted that he had experienced several similar episodes in the past since age 16, which had at various times involved both eyes, also detailing the content of the March 1967 letter from Dr. S.H. above, but the present attack was the most severe and prolonged that he had experienced to date.  It was also noted that he was not on any medications.

The physical examination findings included the initial IOP measurements and other details of the findings in both eyes.  For the right eye, it was noted that there was a dull cornea; epithelial edema and 1+ cells and flare in the anterior chamber on slit lamp examination; and the fundus showed a chorioretinitis lesion in the infero-nasal quadrant approximately 3 disc diopters from the disc, with the largest lesion measuring approximately 1 disc diameter across, with a few scattered adjacent depigmented areas as well as an elevated lesion at the medial border that appeared to be an area of active retinitis.  For the left eye, it was noted that the cornea showed a Krukenberg's spindle deposit on the endothelium, and the fundus showed a group of old chorioretinitis lesions 3 disc diopters superior to the disc, as well as two small lesions at the posterior pole at the infero-temporal quadrant.  Visual field examinations revealed an enlarged blind spot and a nasal step bilaterally.

The hospital course description included a diagnosis of an acute attack of open angle glaucoma in the right eye, with applanation pressures noted to be down to 18 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye the following day.  There were subsequent flare and pressure issues and treatment that included various medications, including eye drops and an oral corticosteroid.  The final diagnosis was bilateral eye recurrent chorioretinitis (active right eye, inactive left eye, etiology undetermined, treated, improved) with secondary open angle glaucoma (treated, improved).  Both diagnoses were noted to have existed prior to service (EPTS).  The recommendation was for a Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) for medical discharge from active duty because the Veteran was not considered fit for retention due to the history of recurrent bilateral chorioretinitis, in addition to open angle glaucoma of unknown duration.  The June 1967 PEB examination reflected the same findings, with the revised PULHES eye profile of 4, along with a determination that the Veteran was medically unacceptable for continued service.  The subsequent June 1967 Medical Board Proceedings reflect that the Veteran was medically unfit for further military service with notations that both diagnoses EPTS, starting in approximately November 1964, and were not aggravated by active duty.

Other clinical records in the service treatment records from the hospital admission show that the Veteran received treatment for both eyes and experienced issues such as elevated IOPs and changes to the eyes.  See, e.g., 1967 service treatment records from February 24, March 8 (pressure), March 10 (pressure), March 12 (pressure), March 30 (noted ?new lesion on right eye), April 14 and April 17 (pressure with second record showing had episode of severe right eye pain and headache two days ago but exam unchanged; also slightly more cells on left eye), and May 4 (pressure).  A March 1968 letter from Dr. T.P., the Veteran's ophthalmologist shortly after his military service shows that he was noted to have a serious eye problem consisting of chronic simple, open angle glaucoma, and he was on medication for control of pressure in both eyes.  Dr. T.P. also noted that the Veteran had an old chorioretinitis scar that was treated during his in-service hospitalization.  The impression was chronic open angle glaucoma with good fields; old chronic chorioretinitis lesions, right eye, healed at present.

In the 2022 and 2024 medical opinions, in addition to the explanation about the genetic nature of pigment dispersion syndrome that developed into pigmentary glaucoma in this case, Dr. S.P. further explained that the risk factors for developing the glaucoma portion include increased contact between the iris and lens.  She noted that fact supported the idea that the Veteran's rigorous physical activity of training and active duty generally caused him to have greater physical activity than he would have as a civilian, causing more of that iris/lens contact and resulting higher IOP, and that the higher than average pressure could have led to optic nerve damage and glaucoma that may not have developed with a more sedentary lifestyle.  In addition, she explained that pigment dispersion syndrome is diagnosed at a much earlier age than other types of glaucoma, especially in males, where signs of the disease can be seen as early as ages 12 to 15, including pigment particles on the endothelium of the cornea and small transillumination defects of the iris when examined with retroillumination - both of which she noted can be seen with a standard slit lamp.  She further noted that observing the signs required good skills of the examiner, but not special technology, and that most ophthalmologists have such skills, but many optometrists do not.  Dr. S.P. concluded with stating that she had seen many patients with pigment dispersion syndrome and pigmentary glaucoma and that the severity of the Veteran's disease was significantly worse than the majority of those prior patients.  As such, she explained that it was very possible that the intense physical activity of training and active duty worsened the Veteran's condition, leading to permanent optic nerve damage.

In addition, Dr. S.P. noted that she was asked to address whether a previous diagnosis of chorioretinitis was the reason for the Veteran's acute glaucoma that occurred while he was in service.  She explained that, although she was not aware of chorioretinitis leading to pigment dispersion syndrome, she did review medical literature and could find no connections between chorioretinitis and pigment dispersion or any new information to her when reviewing chorioretinitis and glaucoma.  She further explained that glaucoma is a disease of the optic nerve caused by elevated IOP, with details of relevance to the Veteran explained in her prior letter; chorioretinitis affects the choroid and retina of the eye, which are distinctly different parts of the eye from the optic nerve; and that the only cases she had either seen or read about where a patient had both chorioretinitis and elevated eye pressure/glaucoma were the extremely rare and severe cases with profound blindness and "VERY" different ocular appearances to the scars found in the Veteran's retina.  See also, e.g., February 2021 historical private treatment record from Dr. S.P. (ocular history including diagnoses of bilateral eye pigmentary glaucoma and chorioretinal scars).  She further noted that she felt confident that the cause of the elevated ocular pressure that affected the Veteran during his time in service was "NOT" related to any type of chorioretinitis, along with indicating that she repeated her opinion from the prior letter that intense physical activity can trigger an attack of pigment dispersion resulting in clogging of trabecular meshwork and elevated eye pressure, leading to glaucoma.

In other words, Dr. S.P. determined that any chorioretinal scarring was a sign of the development of the Veteran's pigmentary glaucoma, rather than any type of chorioretinitis.  She also explained how the Veteran's in-service activity level resulted in an increase beyond the normal progression of the disease.  To the extent that the record otherwise indicates that the Veteran's ocular presentation is consistent with chorioretinitis and subsequent scarring, Dr. S.P. further indicated that the in-service elevated IOPs the Veteran had leading to his glaucoma were not related to that issue.  

Dr. S.P.'s 2022 and 2024 medical opinions, taken together, are entitled to probative weight because they address the central medical issues in the case and are based on her familiarity with the Veteran's medical history as his treating ophthalmologist, including in-service considerations, and current medical understanding.  Her determinations are also consistent with the details of the service treatment records.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012) (an examination is not rendered inadequate where the rationale provided by an examiner "did not explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion"); Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294 (2012) (medical reports must be read as a whole and in the context of the evidence of record).  In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a copy of the online medical articles, including the one referenced by Dr. S.P. and another that is generally supportive of her determination; it discussed IOP changes in soldiers during military marches, noting results of IOP measurements being significantly lower after the march, then increasing gradually 30 minutes thereafter.

On the other hand, the September 1967 original rating decision where one of the rating specialists was a medical doctor includes relevant service treatment record information, along with a determination that the episode the Veteran suffered from in service was considered to be a maturation of is pre-service disability (with the same diagnoses provided in the service treatment records) with no evidence of a material increase, beyond natural progress, in level of disability shown in service that would warrant service connection by aggravation without further rationale.  The determination was also not based on a contemporaneous VA examination, and it was issued prior to the March 1968 private treatment record close in time to the Veteran's separation from service in which he was found to have a serious eye problem, as discussed above.  The March 1968 reconsideration rating decision, also with a medical doctor as a rating specialist, continued the denial of the claim after receipt of the additional medical information; however, the rationale provided was in significant part based on the fact that the evidence received was from after service, rather than a discussion of any medical significance of the evidence.

The June 2023 VA examination report somewhat similarly shows diagnoses of bilateral eye primary open angle glaucoma (noted as first diagnosed in 1967) and bilateral peripheral chorioretinal scarring (noted as due the Veteran having chorioretinitis in the early 1960s prior to service).  In an October 2023 VA medical opinion, another VA examiner determined that the Veteran's glaucoma and chorioretinal scarring clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service and were clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond their natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  In so finding, the examiner explained that primary open angle glaucoma is a chronic, degenerative optic neuropathy caused by reduced aqueous outflow, which commonly leads to increased IOP with subsequent gradual loss of vision.  The examiner listed various risk factors and systemic risk factors and determined that there was no evidence showing an aggravation beyond the natural progression of the disease.  In addition, the examiner noted that the Veteran had chorioretinitis prior to service that resulted in chorioretinal scarring, noting that it was usually due to an infectious etiology, but that there was no medical evidence to support in-service aggravation.  Although the VA examiner identified various risk factors for the development of glaucoma, he did not address them in connection with the specific facts in this case.  He also did not provide a rationale for the lack of aggravation beyond the natural progression or discuss the post-service findings in the March 1968 treatment record or the information from Dr. S.P.'s opinion as to the Veteran's current diagnosis and presentation.

While adequate for reasons and bases adjudication purposes, the information in the historical rating decisions above is insufficient to address the medical questions in the current appeal.  The 2023 VA medical opinion is also not adequate to decide the case for the reasons discussed above.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993); Black v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 177, 180 (1993) (an opinion based on an inaccurate (or unsubstantiated) factual premise has limited, if any, probative value); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

Based on the foregoing, it is at least debatable whether there was aggravation of the Veteran's preexisting pigmentary glaucoma (previously pigment dispersion syndrome) beyond the natural progress of the disease during the Veteran's military service.  Because the presumption of soundness has not been rebutted, the claim is converted into one for direct service connection.  See Cotant and Wagner, supra.  Regarding the question of nexus, Dr. S.P.'s 2022 and 2024 probative medical opinions establish that the Veteran's in-service elevated IOPs were early manifestations of his current pigmentary glaucoma, as detailed above.  Although the 2023 VA examiner's medical opinion is not adequate to decide the case on its own, it is supportive of the determination that the in-service symptomatology is related to the current diagnosis as well, as it listed an onset date of 1967.

In summary, resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, service connection for pigmentary glaucoma (previously pigment dispersion syndrome) is warranted, and the appeal is granted.  This decision represents a full grant of this benefit sought on appeal based on the Veteran's clarification provided after the December 2024 Board hearing, which is consistent with his contentions prior to that time during the course of the claim as well.  See, e.g., written statements from March 2024 March 2025.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.