Citation Nr: A25031235
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-471087
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence of the record favors a finding that the Veteran's service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability aggravated her obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability, have been met.? 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107;?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.310.? 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1989 to April 1992.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act.  

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, in its review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability with subsequent sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity.  See August 2024 Summary of Argument.  The Veteran explained that her service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities kept her from exercising and from sleeping on her side.  She further explained that the pain from her service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities made it difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep.  She endorsed pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, trouble sleeping with frequent awakening, headaches upon awakening, daytime fatigue, poor concentration, and difficulty completing tasks.  See June 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

The Board notes that service connection may be established on a direct or a secondary basis.  However, as the Veteran seeks service connection on a secondary basis, and the Board is granting the claim on that basis, the Board will limit its discussion accordingly and not address?service connection on a direct basis. 

Applicable Law

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a).? A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or chronically aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury is considered service-connected, and when thus established, this secondary condition is considered a part of the original condition.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.310(a) and (b).  Establishing service connection on this secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.? Allen v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?439 (1995) (en?banc).? 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Walsh v. Wilkie that obesity?as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection can be established on either a causal or aggravation basis.? See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32?Vet. App.?300, 306-307 (2020).? Furthermore, the Court concluded that General Counsel Precedent Opinion 1-2017, which determined that?obesity?can constitute an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis, not only applies when a service-connected disability causes?obesity, but also when a service-connected disability aggravates?obesity.? See id.? 

Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.? See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).? 

Analysis

As to a current disability, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran has a current obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis.  As to a separate disability already subject to service connection, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for right knee patellar instability and internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis.  See October 2023 Rating Decision.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).  Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to or aggravated by her service-connected right knee patellar instability and internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis.  See Allen, 7?Vet. App.?at 439. 

As to a nexus, or link, there are several opinions of record.  Against the claim, there is an August 2023 opinion that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's sleep apnea, right knee patellar instability, and internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis diagnoses.  The examiner also acknowledged that the conditions caused the Veteran chronic pain.  The examiner explained that chronic pain and sleep disturbances appeared to have a bidirectional relationship.  Citing to a medical article, the examiner stated that evidence supported increased sleep apnea prevalence in patients that suffered from chronic pain, a bidirectional relationship existed between pain and sleep disturbances, pain fragments sleep continuity impaired sleep quality and disrupted normal sleep architecture, poor quality or insufficient sleep quality may decrease the pian threshold or further exacerbate the pain response, and painful stimuli produced microarousals which disrupted sleep continuity and altered normal sleep.  See August 2023 VA Medical Opinion.  

In conclusion, the examiner determined that while there was an association between sleep apnea and chronic pain, medical literature does not note a causal relationship, and therefore, it is less likely than not that the current obstructive sleep apnea is due to or the result of the right knee patellar instability and internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis.  See id.  Here, as the examiner failed to address aggravation, the Board affords the August 2023 VA Medical Opinion little probative weight.  

For the claim, there is a June 2023 medical opinion that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain is due to her service-connected condition of internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability and that the Veteran's overweight condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current obstructive sleep apnea.  In forming the opinion, the examiner reviewed all available pertinent medical records, lay statements inclusive of obstructive sleep apnea symptomatology, and obstructive sleep apnea screen tool, STOP-BANG.  As a rationale, the examiner explained that the Veteran has service-connected disabilities that can lead to or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances related to pain, forced sleep positions, diminished motivation, and comfort overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure which leads to and/or promotes weight gain.  Citing to medical literature, the examiner stated that it is documented that weight gain is known to predispose patients to directly cause obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner further stated that it is described from a pathophysiological perspective how obstructive sleep apnea is associated with weight gain, exacerbates hyperglycemia and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the obstructive sleep apnea condition and that sleep loss results in metabolic and endocrine alternations which can lead to increased body mass index and becoming overweight.  In conclusion, the examiner discussed the STOP-BANG test, which is a screening tool for obstructive sleep apnea in adult subjects, and conducted a STOP-BANG questionnaire regarding the Veteran.  See June 2023 Private Medical Opinion. 

Satisfying the final element for service connection, the Board finds there is a nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability.  Specifically, the rationale rendered by the June 2023 examiner is logical, well-reasoned, thorough, and relied upon consideration of the entire record.  Additionally, the opinion is probative and persuasive as to the question of whether the Veteran's service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability aggravated her obstructive sleep apnea, based on the intermediate step of?obesity.? The opinion was based on a review of all the Veteran's available pertinent medical records, was supported by relevant treatise evidence, and is consistent with the Court's holding in Walsh and the General Counsel's precedential opinion regarding obesity serving as an intermediate step for the award of service connection.  The Board affords the medical opinion?great probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 301 (2008) (explaining that a medical examination report must contain clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two).? 

In sum, as all three elements for service connection on a secondary basis have been met, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected internal derangement of right knee with degenerative arthritis and right knee patellar instability, is granted.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Lynch,?21 F.4th at 776. 

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.