Citation Nr: A25031813
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 201223-128609
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than an other specified anxiety disorder, to include but not limited to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, panic disorder, or an adjustment disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran service on active duty from August 2006 to August 2010 with service as a combat medic in Iraq.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 18, 2024 before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge; a hearing transcript has been associated with the claims file. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the December 202 VA Form 10182 that forms the basis for the instant appeal, the Veteran noted disagreement with a May 28, 2020 rating decision and issues described as post-traumatic stress disorder and depression, with associated descriptions of symptomatology. After a careful review of the record, the Board notes that there is no corresponding May 2020 rating decision of record but notes that there is a November 2020 rating decision that denied service connection for PTSD and depression. The Board also notes that the Veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD and depression is dated May 28, 2020, and that the Veteran also submitted a Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) (VA Form 21-0781) on May 28, 2020. Therefore, the Board has liberally construed the December 2020 VA Form 10182 as a timely appeal of the November 2020 rating decision which denied service connection for PTSD and depression. 38 C.F.R §§ 19.2, 20.202.

Relevant to the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorders, the Veteran's claim was adjudicated by the AOJ as separate claims for entitlement to service connection for other specified anxiety disorder, depression, and PTSD. In the November 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted service connection for other specified anxiety disorder but denied service connection for depression and PTSD. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he suffers from more than one distinct psychiatric disorder. In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, (2009), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim; symptoms described; and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. Considering the Court's decision in Clemons, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include but not limited to PTSD, depression, panic disorder or an adjustment disorder.  

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorders other than an other specified anxiety disorder, to include but not limited to PTSD, depression, panic disorder, or an adjustment disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for PTSD and depression as etiologically related to service. The Veteran contends that in addition to his service-connected other specified anxiety disorder, he also suffers from distinct disorders of PTSD and depression. See May 2020 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ); December 2024 hearing transcript. In a May 2020 VA Form 21-0781, the Veteran described mortar attacks three days after reaching combat zone in Iraq that caused the death of multiple battle buddies and subsequent heavy alcohol use while assigned to his infantry battalion in Alaska. At a December 2024 hearing, the Veteran testified that in addition to his anxiety, he has been treated by a therapist for PTSD, and has a long history of depression. The Veteran testified that he was seeking service connection for his additional, distinct psychiatric disorders because he believed that they started in Iraq when he witnessed the death of multiple friends and he wanted to ensure they were service connected. The Veteran contends that lack of assistance from VA in identifying these disorders may have contributed to his involuntary commitment for psychiatric treatment in January 2024. See December 2024 hearing transcript.

The November 2024 rating decision found that VA treatment records showed a diagnosis of depression post-service and that the Veteran served in an imminent danger area in Iraq. The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

The Veteran's service records showed that he was assigned as a medic to an infantry battalion in Iraq in 2008 to 2009. See, e.g., DD Form 214; August 2009, September 2009 post-deployment health assessments. In an August 2009 post-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported that emotional problems in the prior month made it very difficult to do his work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people. The Veteran reported that during deployment he encountered dead bodies or saw coalition members killed or wounded. In a September 2009 post-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported that in the prior month emotional problems had not made it difficult at all to do his work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people, but did report that medical or dental problems developed during the deployment. In a March 2010 post-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported that emotional problems in the prior month made it somewhat difficult for him to do his work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people. The Veteran also reported that in the prior month he had felt numb or detached from others, activities, or his surroundings due to an experience that was frightening, horrible, or upsetting, that he had used alcohol more than he meant to, consumed alcohol four or more times a week, and drank ten or more drinks at a time. The Veteran also reported that he had little interest or pleasure in doing things and felt down, depressed, or hopeless few or several days. The Veteran's health care provider identified depression symptoms as a concern and referred the Veteran to behavioral health. In a 2013 Reserve Health Readiness assessment the Veteran reported drinking alcohol two to three times a week, having 10 or more drinks at a time, and consuming six or more drinks on one occasion weekly.

VA treatment records associated with the Veteran's file prior to the November 2020 rating decision on appeal showed symptoms of and treatment for mental health symptoms, diagnoses of panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, and a provisional diagnosis of adjustment disorder with other symptoms. August 2019 VA treatment records showed that the Veteran was referred by his VA primary care physician for mental health care due to stress. At that visit, the Veteran reported being in combat in Iraq and described symptoms of hypervigilance, hyper-startle response, isolative behavior, withdrawal, and weekly panic attacks with the most recent two days prior to the visit. The records also showed a positive score for depression screening. November 2019 VA treatment records showed a diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder. February 2020 VA treatment record showed a provisional diagnosis of adjustment disorder with other symptoms. July 2020 VA treatment records showed symptoms of irritability, sleep disturbances, anxiety, low mood, relationship conflicts and withdrawal, and treatment for both depression and anxiety. August 2020 VA treatment records showed an active problem of panic disorder.

Private treatment records submitted during an applicable evidentiary window showed diagnoses of major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, bipolar disorder, and PTSD, but did not include an etiology opinion.  

The Veteran was afforded an initial PTSD VA examination on in August 2020. Contrary to the medical evidence of record at that time, the examiner noted only one diagnosis, other specified anxiety disorder. The examiner did not consider the Veteran's diagnosis of panic disorder or the provisional diagnosis of adjustment disorder with other symptoms in concluding that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD. Because the examiner did not consider all the Veteran's diagnoses of record, the examiner did not differentiate whether the Veteran's symptoms could be attributed to more than one diagnosis throughout the remainder of the examination. The examiner noted the Veteran's 2009 post-deployment health assessment to the extent that the Veteran reported that emotional problems had not made it difficult at all to do his work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people, but did not address the two other post-deployment health assessments where the Veteran reported significant emotional difficulty in these same areas and using more alcohol than he intended. The examiner did find that the Veteran's reported stressor, the death of soldiers in the Veteran's unit due to mortar fire, was adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and was related to the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity. The examiner also noted the Veteran's reports of being easily startled by people approaching from behind or by loud noise. However, in the portion of the examination related to evaluating PTSD diagnostic criteria, the examiner marked "no" to the question of whether the Veteran had marked alterations in arousal. In the portion of the exam related to symptoms, the examiner noted only anxiety and chronic sleep impairment, despite the medical evidence of record of weekly panic attacks, hypervigilance, hyper-startle response, irritability, low mood, and withdrawal, and alcohol misuse, among other symptoms. Finally, because the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD, no etiology opinion was rendered. Accordingly, the Board finds the August 2020 examination incomplete to decide the claim because the examiner did not consider all the Veteran's diagnoses of record, made inconsistent findings related to PTSD diagnostic criteria, did not accurately report the Veteran's symptoms, and did not sufficiently consider the Veteran's prior medical history. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); see also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is not probative).  

Therefore, the Board concludes that a new examination and medical opinion is required to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder other than an other specified anxiety disorder. Where VA provides a veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination and etiology opinion must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an adequate examination and etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a psychiatrist or other appropriate medical professional to offer an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder(s) other than an other specified anxiety disorder. The record, to include a copy of this Remand, should be made available to the examiner. should be made available to the examiner, and all indicated tests should be conducted. Further physical examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. 

(A) The examiner is asked to identify all the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders that met the diagnostic criteria identified during the pendency of this claim. The examiner is asked to specifically address the Veteran's contentions that he has PTSD. If PTSD is diagnosed, the examiner should identify the stressor(s) supporting such diagnosis. If PTSD is not diagnosed, the examiner must reconcile any conflicting evidence of record. 

For any diagnosis referable to an acquired psychiatric disorder, the examiner is asked to furnish an opinion with respect to the following question:

(B) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the acquired psychiatric disorder had its onset and/or is otherwise etiologically related to service? 

In rendering this opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's pertinent medical history and statements. The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's reports of emotional difficulty and alcohol use in the August 2009, September 2009, and March 2010 post-deployment health screenings; August 2019 reports to VA treatment providers of high stress and symptoms of hypervigilance, hyper-startle response, isolative behavior, withdrawal, and weekly panic attacks; and reports to the August 2020 VA examiner that the Veteran was easily startled, had difficulty sleeping, and had a six-month history of post-deployment alcohol misuse in 2010. The examiner must also address VA treatment records showing diagnoses of panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder in 2019 and a provisional diagnosis of  adjustment disorder with other symptoms in August 2020.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resorting to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Cusker, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.