Citation Nr: A25031481
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240705-459949
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected migraine headaches, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from March 1988 to October 2009.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).  The Veteran initially filed a VA Form 10182 (NOD) in July 2024 and identified a February 2022 rating decision.  He was notified in July 2024 that his NOD was untimely and to request a time extension to submit his NOD.  In August 2024, the Veteran filed another NOD and identified the July 2023, which would have been considered untimely.  Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's initial July 2024 NOD applied to the July 2023 rating decision and finds that the Veteran submitted a timely NOD for the issue of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  

On the July 2024 NOD, the Veteran requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  Under direct review, the Board cannot hold a hearing or accept additional evidence into the record.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301 (2019).  Therefore, the Board will consider the evidence of record as of July 25, 2023, the date of the notification letter for the rating decision on appeal.  Id.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected migraine headaches, is remanded.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the claim must be remanded to allow the AOJ to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the issuance of the July 2023 rating decision.  The Board sincerely regrets the additional delay caused by this remand but wishes to assure the Veteran that it is necessary for a full and fair adjudication of his claim.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in June 2020, in which he reported excessive snoring and gasping for air while sleeping beginning in 1988.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected headaches.  

The Veteran appeared for another VA examination in March 2023.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  She explained that the most common cause of obstructive sleep apnea in adults was obesity, male sex, and advancing age.  

The March 2023 examiner provided an addendum opinion in July 2023.  She opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not related to his service despite acknowledging the provisional diagnosis of sleep apnea in September and October 2008.  She explained that the Veteran's current sleep apnea was not the result of symptoms in service because the diagnostic polysomnography was negative for sleep apnea.  

The Board finds all VA opinions inadequate for adjudication purposes.  First, the June 2020 examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches could have aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26?Vet. App.?136 (2013) (opinions regarding secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation).  She also failed to provide a direct service connection opinion based on the Veteran's in-service sleep problems, which has since been acknowledged by the RO.  See July 2023 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Second, the March 2023 examiner failed to meaningfully address the now CONCEDED in-service incurrence.  Merely stating that the Veteran did not have an actual diagnosis of sleep apnea in service without addressing the documented in-service sleep problems he had is conclusory.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (medical opinions are regarded as more probative when they include clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and the conclusions); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (a medical opinion must clearly "support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  The March 2023 examiner also failed to provide a secondary service connection opinion.  

Given that the AOJ found the June 2020, March 2023, and July 2023 opinions adequate, and this was prior to the decision on the claim, the Board finds that this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand under the AMA and implementing regulations.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).  Accordingly, remand for a new VA examination and etiological opinion is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his obstructive sleep apnea.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.  

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following: 

(a.) Determine whether it is at least as likely as not that Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in or is related to service, to include CONCEDED in-service incurrence.  See July 2023 Rating Decision.   

(b.) Determine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches.? 

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. L. Park, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.