Citation Nr: A25031903
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-437685
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1995 to November 2002. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in December 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran contends his obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in or is otherwise directly related to his military service, to include the environment. During the appeal, the Veteran has also noted that while in service he was exposed to diesel exhaust. Thus, the Board finds evidence of record raises the contention the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include his allergic rhinitis.

Prior to the issuance of the rating decision on appeal, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022). Pursuant to the PACT Act, VA must provide a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) when such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

In the present case, the Veteran's military personnel records indicate the Veteran's military occupational specialty was that of an assault amphibian vehicle crewman. See DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty and Post Deployment Health Assessment. The Veteran asserts during his time as an assault amphibian vehicle crewman he was exposed to diesel fuel. Further, the Veteran's service treatment records indicate the Veteran may have been exposed to asbestos while in service. The Board finds that the evidence of record reflects that, based on the totality of the circumstances of the Veteran's service, he participated in a TERA and therefore must be provided with a TERA opinion.

Consequently, the Board finds an opinion should have been obtained prior to adjudication of the issue and a remand is warranted for such to correct the pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

Further, April 2019 VA treatment records indicate the Veteran's wife complains of his snoring and "he is a mouth breather due to his severe allergies." Pursuant to McLendon v. Nicholson, a VA examination must be provided when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing an event, injury or disease occurred in-service, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or current symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 82 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4). Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds the low threshold of McLendon has been met and a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred by not providing the Veteran an opinion related to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by or aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis. Accordingly, a remand is necessary to correct such pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The need for additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician. Based on review of the claims file and examination, if conducted, the clinician should address the following inquiries:

1. Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, his military service?

The examiner should also address the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

2. Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not due to or caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, alone or in combination?

3. Is the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea at least as likely as not aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, alone or in combination?

The term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in disability - any additional impairment of earning capacity above the degree of disability existing before the increase, regardless of permanence.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hager, William J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.