Citation Nr: A25031516
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 231208-398775
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of 20 percent for right shoulder condition is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's right shoulder condition was 0 percent prior to his use of a cane for his service-connected knee condition.

2. Subtracting the pre-aggravation baseline of 0 percent from the Veteran's current 20 percent, amounts to 20 percent.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased rating of 20 percent for right shoulder condition have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from May 1991 to January 1996. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision by the Regional Office (RO). In November 2022, the Veteran filed a Higher-Level Review request in response to October and November 2022 rating decisions.

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October and November 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of cervical strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an increased rating of 20 percent for right shoulder condition is granted.

The Veteran contends his right shoulder disability warrants an increased rating of 20 percent. Specifically, the Veteran's representative asserts that his pre-aggravation baseline impairment of his right shoulder conditions was 0 percent pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5201, based on occasional pain, and the condition has worsened to its existing level of impairment of 20 percent, therefore the 20 percent rating is warranted after subtracting the pre-aggravation baseline of 0 percent from the Veteran's current 20 percent disability. See Notice of Disagreement, December 2023. As discussed below, the Board agrees.

In general, disabilities of the shoulder and arm are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes (DCs) 5200 through 5203. In the November 2022 rating decision, the RO assigned the rating for the Veteran's right shoulder disability under DC 5201.

The record reflects the Veteran is right hand dominant, thus his disability is rated for that of the major arm under 38 C.F.R. § 4.69.

DC 5201, which pertains to limitation of motion of the arm, provided a 20 percent rating is warranted when motion is limited to the shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90°). A 30 percent rating is warranted when motion is limited to midway between the side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45°). The maximum 40 percent rating is warranted when motion is limited to 25 degrees from the side. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.

Also, in every instance where the schedule does not provide a noncompensable evaluation for a diagnostic code, a noncompensable evaluation will be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

When a disorder is found to have been aggravated by a service-connected disability, VA must review the severity of the disability before and after aggravation, if possible. Any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). The Veteran shall be compensated for the degree of disability over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.322(b). In other words, where a disease is service connected on the basis of aggravation, the level of compensation is equal to the post-aggravation level of disability minus the pre-aggravation level of disability.

Here, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for his service-connected knee disability in October 2020. The Veteran was noted to use crutches occasionally and a cane constantly for his knee condition.

The Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in January 2022. The Veteran was diagnosed with right shoulder impingement syndrome, with an onset of 2021. The Veteran's flexion endpoint on initial testing was 90 degrees. The January 2022 examiner stated that it was possible that the Veteran's right shoulder impingement was due to the use of a cane for 18 months following left knee surgery.

The Veteran sought treatment for his right shoulder condition in May 2022. He told the clinician that he had experienced right shoulder pain for about 3 years, but it had increased when he was using a cane due to left knee symptoms from increased weight on his arm. He reported pain with right shoulder abduction, elevation and rotation.

An August 2022 examiner clarified that the Veteran's right shoulder had increased after having to use a cane for the left knee. The examiner opined that the Veteran's right shoulder condition was not caused by the Veteran's left knee condition, but rather aggravated by it. She cited to the Veteran's May 2022 treatment record which "clearly indicate the veteran's right shoulder condition started prior to the use of a cane for the [service-connected] left knee." The examiner described the Veteran's treatment with physical therapy and steroid injections. The examiner stated that the baseline for the Veteran's shoulder condition was "occasional shoulder pain" prior to the need for steroid injections. The examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the claimed right shoulder condition, to include impingement syndrome, was aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with shin splints. 

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the evidence supports a finding that prior to his use of a cane and crutches for his service-connected knee condition, the Veteran did not experience arm limitation of motion at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90°) as required by the 20 percent criteria under diagnostic code 5201. The evidence shows the Veteran was using a cane constantly in October 2020, the Veteran's shoulder showed loss of ROM in a January 2022 VA examination. The Veteran sought treatment for his increased shoulder pain and loss of motion in May 2022. The August 2022 examiner described the Veteran's pre-aggravation baseline as "occasional pain," and did not state that he experienced loss of ROM. The Veteran's symptoms increased such that they met the 20 percent rating criteria after he began using a cane for his left knee condition. Therefore, he did not meet the requirements for a compensable rating under DC 5201 until his condition was aggravated beyond its natural progression by his constant cane use for his left knee condition. After subtracting his original 0 percent evaluation from his current 20 percent evaluation, the Veteran's condition warrants a 20 percent evaluation.

In light of the above, and after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for a 20 percent rating for right shoulder condition has been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b). Accordingly, the assignment of a 20 percent rating is warranted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for cervical strain is remanded.

Remand is permitted only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, or for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

After review of the record, a remand is required in this case to ensure that VA's responsibilities under the duty to assist are followed and that the Veteran is afforded every possible consideration. 38 U.S.C. § 5103(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. The VA has a duty to assist veterans in developing their claims for benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  

When the Secretary provides a veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it must be adequate.  A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and describes the disability in detail sufficient for the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability to be fully informed.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); See also Martinak v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 447 (2007).  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his cervical strain disability in August 2022. The Veteran explained that his condition had worsened since onset and he experienced symptoms of stiffness, decreased ROM, and grinding sounds. He had difficulty turning side to side and reaching overhead. The Veteran described daily flare ups of moderate sharp pain that lasted for a few hours, and were alleviated by medication. Upon examination, the examiner found forward flexion at 45 degrees on initial active and passive motion, as well as during flare ups and after repeated use over time. The examiner acknowledged that pain limited functional ability with flare ups, but found no additional functional loss on forward flexion, only on extension endpoint, right and left lateral rotation endpoints.

If not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria, a higher rating may not be denied based on relief provided by medication. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). The holding of Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), applies when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities if the relevant Diagnostic Code (DC) does not reference medication use. Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327. The Veteran is rated under 5237 for cervical strain which is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine and does not contemplate medication.

Prior VA examinations have not addressed whether and how the Veteran's range of motion could be affected without his medication treatment. Remand is required for a supplemental medical opinion to consider this contention.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a supplemental medical opinion regarding the use of pain medication and its effects on the Veteran's cervical strain disability.  A new examination may be scheduled at the AOJ's or the examiner's discretion.

Musculoskeletal symptoms should be described in terms of range of motion to include during any flare-ups, functional loss due to pain, during passive and active motion, while weight-bearing and non-weight bearing, and after repetitive use over time.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Leuer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.