Citation Nr: A25031187
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240428-436060
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left knee strain is granted. 

Service connection for plantar fasciitis of the left foot is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran experienced symptoms of pain following a left knee injury during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

2. The probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran experienced symptoms of left foot pain during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for the establishment of service connection for a left knee strain have been met.?38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.  

2. The criteria for the establishment of service connection for plantar fasciitis of the left foot have been met.?38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2010 to June 2013. This matter comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).??? 

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), seeking?direct?review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Under?Direct?Review, all evidence available at the time of the decision on appeal is considered.??? 

1. Service connection for a left knee strain is granted. 

Legal Criteria

To prevail on the issue of?service?connection?there must be evidence of a current disability, in-service?incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during?service. See Shedden v. Principi,?381 F.3d 1163, 116667 (Fed. Cir. 2004).?Service?connection?may also be established under?38 C.F.R. § 3.303?(b) for a current disability on the basis of a presumption under the law that certain chronic diseases manifesting themselves to a certain degree within a certain time after?service?must have had their onset in?service; and?service?connection?may be established by evidence of continuity of symptomatology.?38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309(a).? 

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). 

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a November 2023 VA examination, during which he reported that he injured his left knee while performing a ruck march during service. The Veteran stated that his left knee has continued to bother him since exiting from service. The Veteran reported symptoms of pain, stiffness, weakness, swelling, popping, and limited range of motion of the left knee. The Veteran also reported that his left knee injuries led to issues with his right knee.

The November 2023 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee strain is causally related to service. As a rationale, the examiner explained that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for left knee complaints. 

The examiner also opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee condition is causally related to his plantar fasciitis of the right foot. As a rationale, the examiner explained that the medical records suggest that the Veteran's right knee started bothering him before his left knee because he started complaining about his right knee around 2015. The examiner opined that the Veteran's right knee injury could have led to him overcompensating with his left knee and causing strain on his left knee. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's left knee condition was causally related to his right knee condition rather than his plantar fasciitis of the right foot. 

The Veteran was afforded a March 2024 VA examination, during which he reported that he started having issues with his left knee when he injured it during a ruck march. The Veteran explained that his left knee symptoms have worsened since exiting from service. 

The March 2024 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's knee condition is due to a toxic exposure during service. As a rationale, the examiner explained that there is no literature to support that a knee strain is due to a toxic exposure event therefore unable to establish a connection for toxic exposure.

Analysis

The record indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of a left knee strain. Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met. 

The Board finds the Veteran competent and credible to report that he experienced left knee pain during service following a ruck because such symptoms are readily observable. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board also finds that the Veteran is competent and credible to report that his left knee pain has worsened since exiting from service. Id.

The Board acknowledges that the November 2023 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee condition was directly related to service. However, the examiner based his opinion on a lack of reports of left knee symptoms in the service treatment records. Accordingly, the Board does not assign probative evidence to this opinion. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Additionally, the examiner erroneously stated that the Veteran's right knee started bothering him before his left knee. A review of the November 2023 VA examination indicates that the Veteran reported that he initially injured his left knee, which subsequently led to issues with his right knee. 

Given the above, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran experienced symptoms of pain following a left knee injury during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

As such and resolving all benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for a left knee strain is granted. 

2. Service connection for plantar fasciitis of the left foot is granted. 

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a December 2023 VA examination during which he reported that his left foot pain started during service in 2011. The Veteran reported that his left foot pain has worsened since exiting from service. 

The conducting examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left foot condition was causally related to service. As a rationale, the examiner explained that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for complaints of left foot pain. 

The conducting physician also opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's left foot condition was proximately due to or the result of his plantar fasciitis of the right foot. As a rationale, the examiner explained that no medical literature illustrates that plantar fasciitis of one foot could directly result in the plantar fasciitis diagnosis of another foot.

The Veteran was then afforded a March 2024 VA examination, during which he reported that he started having issues with his left foot during training at Air Assault school for the military in 2011. The Veteran indicated that his symptoms have not improved. 

The March 2024 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's condition is due to a toxic exposure during service. As a rationale, the examiner explained that no literature supports that plantar fasciitis is due to a toxic exposure event; therefore, a connection for toxic exposure cannot be established.

Analysis

The record indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of plantar fasciitis of the left foot. Accordingly, the first element of service connection has been met. 

The Board finds the Veteran competent and credible to report that he experienced left foot pain during service because such symptoms are readily observable. See Jandreau surpa. The Board also finds that the Veteran is competent and credible to report that his left foot pain has worsened since exiting from service. Id.

The Board acknowledges that the November 2023 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's pes planus of the left foot was directly related to service. However, the examiner based his opinion on a lack of reports of left foot symptoms in the service treatment records. Accordingly, the Board does not assign probative evidence to this opinion. See Buchanan supra.

Given the above, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran experienced symptoms of left foot pain during service, which has persisted since exiting from service. 

As such and resolving all benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for pes planus of the left foot is granted. 

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bahus, Alexander

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.