Citation Nr: A25031867
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 250228-517408
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for diabetes mellitus, which is currently 20 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for femoral nerve peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for femoral nerve peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for sciatic nerve peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for sciatic nerve peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from March 1964 to March 1967. During his active service, the Veteran was awarded several awards for his service in Vietnam to include a Purple Heart Metal. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of increased rating for diabetes mellitus and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy most recently addressed in a March 2023 rating decision.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.  

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the Veteran waived the remaining time to switch dockets under the AMA in a February 28, 2025, correspondence. See Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 934, (June 21, 2024).

The Board notes the issues listed above have been recharacterized to reflect the Veteran's appeal for increased rating for the issues of diabetes and peripheral neuropathy as opposed to earlier effective date claims listed by the AOJ in the rating decision on appeal. See VA Form 10182: Notice of Disagreement. 

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for diabetes mellitus, which is currently 20 percent disabling, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for femoral nerve peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an increased rating for femoral nerve peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

4. Entitlement to an increased rating for sciatic nerve peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

5. Entitlement to an increased rating for sciatic nerve peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

In the November 2023 Supplemental Claim, the Veteran requested an increased rating for his diabetes mellitus and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy based on worsening as evidenced by private medical opinions and an October 2022 hospitalization. 

In general, disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disabilities adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set for the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings represent, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Board has identified a duty to assist error that occurred before the April 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Veteran was not afforded a new VA examination for his peripheral neuropathy based on the Veteran's November 2023 private treatment records and October 2022 hospitalization reported int the November 2023 Supplemental Claim. Further, the Veteran asserts his diabetes mellitus manifests with a plantar ulcer that required hospitalization. See November 2023 Supplemental Claim. The Board must remand these claims for updated VA examinations regarding the Veteran's current severity and manifestation of diabetes mellitus and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected diabetes mellitus.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  The examiner should also address the Veteran's plantar ulcer, subsequent October 2022 hospitalization, and any additional private treatment records provided by the Veteran. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy including femoral nerve and sciatic nerves.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

 

T. Raymond

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tiffany P. Elling

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.