Citation Nr: A25031971
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231016-385168
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

The appellant's character of discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, exclusive of health care benefits under Chapter 17, Title U.S.C. and 38?C.F.R. §?3.360(a); the appeal is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for VA compensation purposes for hypertension is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The appellant enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on September 12, 2011; for a period of four years on active duty.  

2.  The appellant was discharged from active military service on September 25, 2015, under other than honorable (OTH) conditions, due to a pattern of misconduct.  

3.  The appellant was subjected to nonjudicial punishment (NJP) and sentenced by Summary Court Martial after being convicted of multiple violations of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) during service.  

4.  The appellant's in-service misconduct was willful and persistent and did not consist of a mere minor offense offset by otherwise honest, faithful, and meritorious service of benefit to the Nation.  

5.  The evidence does not show compelling circumstances mitigated the appellant's acts of misconduct.  

6.  There has been no removal of the bar to VA benefits via an upgrade to the appellant's character of discharge; nor is there evidence showing that the appellant was insane at the time of his offenses.  

7.  The appellant is eligible for healthcare and related benefits authorized by Chapter 17 of title 38 U.S.C.  

8.  Service connection for VA compensation purposes is not available due to the appellant's discharge being found dishonorable for VA purposes. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The character of the appellant's discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of VA compensation benefits.  38?U.S.C. §?5303; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.12, 3.13, 3.354, 3.360.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The appellant served on active duty from September 2011 to September 2015; the character of his discharge is the subject of this appeal.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that found, inter alia, the appellant's discharge from service is dishonorable for VA purposes and VA compensation benefits are not payable for his hypertension condition.

In the appellant's October 2023 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Notice of Disagreement (NOD), he elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  

The Board highlights, if evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claims in the present appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  

CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE CLAIM

The appellant, in sum, asserts that his character of discharge should not be a bar to VA compensation benefits because his misconduct was due to a condition of anxiety that he suffered from during service.

Specifically, he reports his in-service anxiety was due to being away from family and loved ones, money stress and sleep disturbances, as well as witnessing a suicide during his first week in service during training.

For the reasons explained below, the Board disagrees with the appellant in this case.  

1. The appellant's character of discharge from service

The appellant essentially seeks "veteran" status for VA purposes for his periods of service.  

In making a determination regarding the character of a person's discharge, VA must consider whether any bar to benefits applies, as well as whether any applicable bar may be lifted.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12.  

Initially, the Board highlights recent amendments updating the regulation governing character of discharge claims, and applying to all cases pending before VA.  See Update and Clarify Regulatory Bars to Benefits Based on Character of Discharge, 89 Fed. Reg. 32,361 (April 26, 2024) (codified at 38?C.F.R. §3.12) (effective June 25, 2024).  

Importantly, if a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the appellant will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(g).  If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change.  38 U.S.C. § 5110.  

In this case, the Board will consider the appellant's claim under the old criteria prior to the June 25, 2024 effective date of the amendment and under both the old and new rating criteria from June 25, 2024.  The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied, as permitted by law.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand to provide the appellant with notice of the change in the regulation is not required.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?426, 430 (1994) (remands which would only result in unnecessarily imposing additional burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the veteran are to be avoided).  

Bars to VA Benefits

For purposes of a VA claim for benefits, a veteran is a person discharged or released from active service under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 101(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(d). 

Thus, VA benefits are not payable unless VA determines that the period of service upon which the claim was based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 101(18); 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).  

Importantly, a dishonorable discharge, a statutory bar, or a regulatory bar will deprive the claimant of all gratuitous VA benefits.  Such a discharge, statutory bar, or regulatory bar is binding on VA as to the character of discharge unless an exception, discussed below, applies.  

Notably, there are two types of bars establishing entitlement for VA benefits: statutory bars found at 38?U.S.C. §?5303(a) and 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c) and regulatory bars listed in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d).  

In this claim, the statutory bars under 38?U.S.C. §?5303(a) and 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c) are not applicable and need no further discussion. 

As to the regulatory bars, the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d) state that a discharge or release because of one of the following offenses is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions: (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-marital; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude (this includes, generally, conviction of a felony); (4) willful and persistent misconduct.  

Relevant to the issue on appeal, a discharge or release because of willful and persistent misconduct is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions for VA benefit purposes.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(4) (2023); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2)(ii) (effective June 25, 2024). 

The term "willful misconduct" under both the pre- and post-amendment versions of the regulation governing character of discharge, means an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n).  It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  Id.  Mere technical violation of police regulations or ordinances will not per se constitute willful misconduct.  Id.  

Prior to the regulatory amendments, "persistent misconduct" was not defined by statute or regulation; however, the plain meaning of the terms contemplated misconduct that is ongoing over a period of time or conduct that recurs on more than one occasion.  MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY 865 (10th ed. 2000).  

Nonetheless, under the amended 2024 regulation "persistent misconduct" is now defined as instances of minor misconduct occurring within two years of each other are persistent; an instance of minor misconduct occurring within two years of more serious misconduct is persistent; and instances of more serious misconduct occurring within five years of each other are persistent.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2)(ii). 

Moreover, prior to the regulatory changes on June 25, 2024, any discharge because of a minor offense would not be considered willful and persistent misconduct if service was otherwise honest, faithful and meritorious.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(4) (2023).  However, minor misconduct itself was not defined.  Id.  

Nonetheless, the Board notes that any offense interfering with or precluding the performance of military duties cannot be characterized as a minor offense.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 448 (1995); Cropper v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?450 (1991).  

For example, being absent without official leave (AWOL) has been found to constitute willful and persistent misconduct rather than a minor offense.  See e.g., Struck v. Brown, 9?Vet. App.?145 (1996); Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 445 (1995) (four AWOL violations and a failure to obey a lawful order was willful and persistent misconduct); Winter v. Principi, 4?Vet. App.?29, 32 (1993).  

Now, under the amended 2024 regulation, "minor misconduct" is defined as misconduct for which the maximum sentence imposable pursuant to the Manual for Courts-Martial United States would not include a dishonorable discharge or confinement for longer than one year if tried by general court-martial.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2)(ii).   

Compelling circumstances

An important change made by the regulatory amendments on June 25, 2024, is that the bar to benefits for willful and persistent misconduct will not be applied if compelling circumstances can be shown to have mitigated the misconduct at issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12 (effective June 25, 2024). 

Now, the regulation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e) outlines the factors to be considered in a determination of the compelling circumstances exception.  

Under the first compelling circumstances factor, the Board must consider the claimant's length and character of service, exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct, which should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful, and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(1).  

The second factor to consider are the reasons for prolonged AWOL or misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2).   

Reasons under § 3.12(e)(2) to consider include: (i) mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the prolonged AWOL or misconduct, to include but not limited to a clinical diagnosis of (or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities; (ii) Physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication; (iii) combat-related or overseas-related hardship; (iv) sexual abuse/assault; (v) duress, coercion, or desperation; (vi) family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties; as well as (vii) age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity.  

Additionally, the Board must also consider whether a valid legal defense would have precluded a conviction for AWOL or misconduct under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3).  For purposes of §3.12(e)(3), the defense must go directly to the substantive issue of absence or misconduct rather than to procedures, technicalities, or formalities.  

Insanity

Lastly, the Board highlights that no bar to benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 shall be applied if VA determines that the former service member was insane at the time he or she committed the offense(s) leading to the discharge or release under dishonorable conditions.  See 38 U.S.C. 5303(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12(b), 3.354.  

Under VA regulations, an insane person is one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, (1) a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or (2) who interferes with the peace of society; or (3) who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides.  38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a); see also VAOPGCPREC 20-97 (May 22, 1997) (clarifying VA's definition of insanity); Zang v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?246, 253 (1995) (stating that phrase "due to disease" applies to all three circumstances provided in § 3.354(a)).  

In all cases, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the appellant where VA must determine whether a claimant possesses veteran status.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Newman v. McDonough, 35?Vet. App.?310 (2022).  

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

Turning to the evidence, the appellant enlisted in the United States Marine Corps in September 2011, for a total period of four years.    

He was discharged from service in September 2011 for a pattern of misconduct, which is described below.  

On October 31, 2012, the appellant was counseled for multiple violations of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), under Article 92, for failure to obey lawful order or regulations, in that he had knowledge of lawful order issued by Sergeant M. not to consume alcoholic beverages 8 hours prior to radio watch, an order which it was his duty to obey and did at Patong Thailand on or about 24 October 2012, fail to obey; under Article 95, for flight from apprehension, in that he did at Patong, Thailand, on or about 24 October 2012, flee apprehension by 15th MEU Shore patrol, persons authorized to apprehend him; and under Article 134, for disorderly conduct, drunkenness, in that he was at Patong, Thailand on 24 October 2012 drunk and disorderly which conduct was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.

Recommended for corrective action to obey the orders of his superior officers and conduct himself in a manner not to bring discredit upon the armed forces at all times.  The appellant was warned that failure to take corrective action and any further violations of the UCMJ may result in judicial or adverse administrative action including but not limited to separation.  The appellant opted not to make a statement at that time regarding his misconduct.

On November 28, 2012, the appellant was counseled by his superior officer that he was selected but will not be promoted to Lance Corporal for December 2012 due to recent or pending legal actions.

In June 2015, the appellant was awarded a company-level NJP for the UCMJ violation of Article 86 (unauthorized absence (UA)) on or about June 3, 2015.

In July 2015, the appellant was awarded a battalion-level NJP for the UCMJ violation of Article 112a (wrongful use, possession, etc. of controlled substance) on or about June 3, 2015. 

From July 2015 to August 2015, the appellant was found to be in violation of Article 112a (wrongful use, possession, etc. of controlled substance) on two additional instances. 

From July 22, 2015 through July 27, 2015, the appellant was found to be in violation of Article 86 (unauthorized absence (UA)) for an additional six days.

On September 22, 2015, the appellant was found guilty by Summary Court-Martial on all charges for: Charge I, two counts of violating Article 86 (unauthorized absence (UA)); Charge II, three counts of violating Article 112a (wrongful use, possession, etc. of controlled substance); and Charge III, violating Article 134 (breaking restriction). 

The appellant was sentenced to confinement for 30 days, forfeiture of 2/3 of one month's pay, and reduction in rank to the lowest pay grade (E-1).  He elected not to be represented by counsel and did not object to the result of the summary court martial.

His commanding officer's recommendation for separation stated that the appellant "possesses neither the potential for rehabilitation nor the potential for continued service as a US Marine. Despite his many opportunities to correct deficiencies, he continues to let down his fellow Marine's and he cannot be relied upon."

The appellant was credited with 21 days of pre-trial confinement served and then administratively separated from the service with an other than honorable character of discharge, on September 25, 2015.

There is no evidence that the appellant submitted an application seeking to upgrade his discharge to the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB) or Board of Corrections of Naval Records (BCNR). 

ANALYSIS OF THE CLAIM

With all of the above in mind, the determination as to whether a discharge is dishonorable for VA purposes based on willful and persistent misconduct is a matter of fact to be determined by the Board.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 447 (1995).  

Based on the following analysis, the Board finds the appellant's other than honorable discharge is a bar to VA compensation benefits due to willful and persistent misconduct.  

Willful and Persistent Misconduct

Under both the pre- and post-amendment versions of the regulation § 3.12, an under other than honorable discharge due to willful and persistent misconduct, is a discharge under dishonorable conditions for VA purposes and is a regulatory bar to VA benefits.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(4) (2023); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2) (June 25, 2024).  

Initially, the Board highlights the appellant's conduct was willful under the regulations.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n).   

Notably, the appellant has not argued that his misconduct was not willful.  Moreover, there is no evidence in the record indicating that the appellant's actions were not willful or that he actually did not understand his actions and the potential consequences at the time of the misconduct.

In fact, the service personnel records show the appellant was counseled on several occasions about the help available to him in the Marine Corps and he continued to engage in the same or similar misconduct over many months, without reaching out for help for his problems.  As noted by his commander on his administrative discharge paperwork, "[d]espite his many opportunities to correct deficiencies" he persisted in the misconduct that led to his other than honorable discharge.

Accordingly, the Board finds the misconduct was deliberate or, at a minimum, intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of the probable consequences.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n).  

Next, the Board finds the appellant's acts of misconduct were serious and non-minor under the pre- and post-amendment regulations.

In this regard, the appellant was found guilty of violating the UCMJ throughout his time in service under Article 86 (two instances; 1 day, 6 days), Article 92 (failure to obey lawful order by NCO), Article 95 (flight from apprehension of patrol officer), Article 112a (thee instances) and Article 134 (two instances; disorderly conduct, drunkenness; and breaking restriction).

Overall, under the pre-amendment regulations, the Board does not consider the combined effect of the offenses as minor in the context of his total time in service.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 445 (1995) (four AWOL violations and a failure to obey a lawful order was willful and persistent misconduct).

Put simply, from the perspective of the pre-amendment regulations, the Board finds all of the violations of the UCMJ committed by the appellant in service, when taken together, fundamentally interfered with his service duties, detracted from his unit's operation, forced his command to expend resources to correct the appellant and resulted in his administrative separation from service.    

Additionally, under the current regulations, while some of the appellant's misconduct was considered minor, many instances were also considered serious and non-minor under the Manual for Courts-Martial (MCM), United States, 2012 Edition, Part IV.

In this regard, for his violations of Article 86, for failing to go to, or from, the appointed place of duty, the appellant faced maximum punishment of confinement for one month; and for absence from unit, organization or other place of duty, for more than three days but not more than thirty days, the appellant faced maximum punishment of confinement for six months.  For violation of Article 92, for failure to obey other lawful order, the appellant faced maximum punishment of bad conduct discharge and confinement for six months.  For violation of Article 95, for flight from apprehension, the appellant faced maximum punishment of bad conduct discharge and confinement for one year.  For violation of Article 112a, for wrongful use, possession, etc., of controlled substances, to wit, marijuana, the appellant faced maximum punishment of dishonorable discharge and confinement for two years, for each of three instances of misconduct.  For violation of Article 134, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, the appellant faced maximum punishment of confinement for three months; and for breaking restriction, the appellant faced maximum punishment of confinement for three months.

Accordingly, the Board finds the appellant's acts of misconduct, overall, were serious in nature and not minor under the pre- and post-amendment regulations.

Moreover, the appellant's acts of misconduct were persistent under the pre- and post-amendment regulations.   

To the extent the pre-amendment regulations do not define "persistent", the appellant's misconduct falls squarely within the plain meaning of the term "persistent misconduct," as shown above, exhibiting an ongoing problem, over an extended period of time, throughout service.  

Under the post-amendment regulations, the Board finds there are instances of serious misconduct occurring within five years of each other (e.g., October 2012 violation of Article 95; June 2015 violation of Article 112a) as well as incidents of minor misconduct occurring within two years of serious misconduct (e.g., June 2015 violation of Article 112a; July 2015 violations of Article 86 and Article 134).  See 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2)(ii).

Accordingly, the Board finds the appellant's misconduct is considered to be persistent under the old and new versions of the regulations.  

Lastly, the Board acknowledges that under the pre-amendment regulations, the Board must also consider any discharge because of a minor offense would not be considered willful and persistent misconduct if service was otherwise honest, faithful and meritorious.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(4) (2023).  In this case, however, the Board finds the appellant was not discharged because of a minor offense, for the reasons already outlined above and therefore consideration of this pre-amendment regulation does not apply. 

Based on all of the above, the Board finds that the character of the appellant's discharge from service is a bar to entitlement to VA compensation benefits due to willful and persistent misconduct under the pre- and post-regulatory criteria.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d). 

COMPELLING CIRCUMSTANCES DEFENSE

Importantly, under the post-amendment regulations, the bar to benefits under § 3.12(d)(2)(ii) for willful and persistent misconduct will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the misconduct at issue. 

The Board must first consider the compelling circumstance factors found in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(e)(1), including service, exclusive of his incidents of misconduct.

In this case, the Board finds that the appellant's service outside of the incidents of misconduct is not shown to be of such quality and length that it can now be characterized as meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.

Chiefly, the appellant's (then-acting) commander, replying to a request for recommendation for discharge, made competent, credible and probative statements that the appellant "possesses neither the potential for rehabilitation nor the potential for continued service as a US Marine. Despite his many opportunities to correct deficiencies, he continues to let down his fellow Marine's and he cannot be relied upon."

The Board finds that the service records support the in-service commander's assessment that the appellant had multiple opportunities to correct his misconduct, during periods exclusive of it, but chose not to and instead persisted in his misconduct during service, leading to an administrative separation.  As such, the Board finds the commanders assessment is highly probative in assessing the appellant's characterization of service, outside of his periods of misconduct, because it is supported by the other competent and credible evidence in the service records.

Such evidence is indicative of the appellant being give "many opportunities" to correct his deficient behavior during service, exclusive of his misconduct, which he ignored.

While he received the Good Conduct Medal, the National Defense Service Medal and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, such medals are awarded by virtue of time in service, not based on meritorious performance. 

The Board highlights the Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal (MCGCM) is awarded to enlisted Marines for three years of honorable and faithful service, requiring continuous active duty with no court-martial convictions and limited non-judicial punishments.  Thus, it is not awarded based on merit.

In addition to the above, a review of the appellant's remaining service personnel records demonstrate that the appellant received no work-related awards and he did not receive any awards for training and/or for duty performance, and there are no other awards made to this appellant during his 48 months of service, but prior to testing positive on three separate urinalysis' in June 2015 and July 2015 and going AWOL in the same period, for which he was ultimately discharged.  

Put simply, even if the Board were to consider the appellant's work performance as "honorable and faithful" or otherwise at or above average for the entire period, to include his period of service for which he received the Good Conduct Medal, which is not the case in reviewing the appellant's performance counseling records, his so-called "good" behavior at work does not negate or outweigh the seriousness of the crimes or the lengthy and otherwise serious pattern of misconduct with which the appellant conducted himself during the entirety of his service, to include admitting guilt of multiple violations of UCMJ between October 2012 and July 2015.

Considering all the above, the Board does not find the appellant's service, exclusive of the misconduct, can be characterized as meritorious, and of benefit to the Nation, despite being noted as honest and faithful.  In fact, his misconduct continued throughout service, even where such misconduct was not punished under the UCMJ, in October 2012, in order to provide him with a chance to correct the misconduct.

Next, considering factors under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2), the Board must also consider any reasons for the misconduct.  

Importantly, the appellant has not made any assertions regarding the reasons for his misconduct.

However, the Board is cognizant and acknowledges the appellant's filings in this claim.  See July 2022 VA Mental Health Examination.

In this regard, the appellant's claims for VA benefits, in sum, show he has a current mental impairment that includes an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.  In support of that claim, he reported in-service stressors related to being away from family and loved ones on deployment, money stress, as well as the effects of witnessing a suicide during service, in support of his claim for a service-connected mental health disability.

However, simply stated, the Board finds that the claimant's prior statements in service completely undermine any current contention that his adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and reported stressors in service caused any of the misconduct for which he was discharged for during service.  

In this regard, the Board must weigh the evidence and finds that the claimant's prior in-service statements have more probative value than his current contentions.   

On his entrance medical examination, the appellant was marked as being psychiatrically normal and reported no depression or anxiety.

In May 2012, the appellant was seen for complaints for a "feared medical condition not demonstrated" and the examiner opined the appellant was "most likely having anxiety on inguinal hernia at this point."

On a September 2013 Periodic Health Assessment (PHA), the appellant self-reported, on question 11 - "how often do you feel that your work situation is putting you under too much stress" - the appellant responded, "Rarely."  On question 10 - "in general, how satisfied are you with your life" - the appellant responded, "Very Satisfied."

On a routine examination on March 11, 2015, Review of Systems (ROS) shows the examiner noted the appellant's psychological symptoms were normal and he was "not thinking about suicide. No homicidal thoughts."

On a routine examination on March 18, 2015, Review of Systems (ROS) shows the examiner noted the appellant's psychological symptoms were normal and he reported "no symptoms."

On his May 2015 Report of Medical History form, the appellant reported he experienced "nervous trouble of any sort (anxiety or panic attacks)" and "frequent trouble sleeping" and he reported he had not "received counseling of any type" and experienced no "depression or excessive worry" or had ever been "evaluated or treated for a mental condition."  

He self-reported his anxiety attacks as, "[w]hen given tasks, I get easily stressed, sweat a lot and [have] anxiety."  He also noted that "[e]ver since I've gotten back from deployment I wake up every hour on the hour."

Based on an examination of the appellant at that time and when considering his lay report of having anxiety attacks, the examiner in service opined the appellant had "situational anxiety" and noted it to be "NCD" or, not considered disabling.

The Board acknowledges that while the appellant is certainly competent to report as to the observable symptoms he experienced and their history, he is not competent to diagnose a disabling mental health condition during service, or render an opinion as to the etiology of his current disability since service, because of the medically complex nature of such a diagnosis or opinion.  Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465 (1994); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis); Kahana v. Shinseki, 24?Vet. App.?428, 435 (2011).

The Board finds the May 2015 in-service medical examiner's opinion the most probative evidence of record because it is provided after a review of the record during service, to include the appellant's May 2015 statements in-service and an examination of the appellant at that time, as well as because it is supported by the evidence found in the record and controlling medical principles.  See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 473 (1993) ("the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches.... As is true with any piece of evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to these opinions [are] within the province of the [Board as] adjudicators...").

In addition to the above, the Board highlights that the appellant was also examined in June 2015 during service at the Mental Health Outpatient Clinic Camp Pendleton Naval Hospital for his complaints of anxiety and in-service stressors.  

On examination in service, the appellant reported that he experienced anxiety and that with respect to his then-pending UCMJ misconduct, "on Monday June 1st, 2015, he called his command telling them he had appointments, when in reality he went with his wife to court because she had to appear before the judge due to a DUI, patient states that on Tuesday, he, "...didn't feel like going to work, and did not call them or showed up to work."

Moreover, he reported that "he is currently experiencing anxiety...every day, when I start talking to new people. And I pick a lot at the back of my head, because I have acne all over my body."  

The 2015 in-service mental health examiner diagnosed him with an adjustment disorder with disturbance of conduct, alcohol use, and cannabis use.

Notably, in September 2015 the competent, credible and probative service records also show the appellant "was appropriately screened for PTSD/TBI with no issues noted."

With regard to the above, the Board notes that the reasons for the appellant's misconduct are not shown to be due to a mental health condition, or any mental health impairment, but rather because he simply chose to go "with his wife to court" and "didn't feel like going to work."  His instances of AWOL are listed on his summary court martial for which he was discharged in September 2015.  There is no evidence that his alleged in-service stressors caused any of his misconduct during service.

For the reasons explained above, the appellant's service records in this case, which are detailed, provide highly probative evidence against this claim that his anxiety (or any mental health impairment) caused his misconduct for which he was discharged for in September 2015.

On the facts of this case, in particular, the appellant's 2022 statements on their own, are not enough to raise the weight of the probative evidence to an approximate balance, when weighed against the other highly probative evidence from service that is against the claim.  See Caluza v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?498 (1995) (giving factors to consider when assessing the credibility of evidence, to include facial plausibility, internal consistency, consistency with other evidence, self-interest or bias, and lay statements made during treatment); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) ("When assessing the credibility of lay statements, the Board may consider factors such as facial plausibility, bias, self-interest, and consistency with other evidence of record.").

In addition, after a thorough review of the medical and lay evidence, the Board finds the appellant does not assert and the competent, credible and probative evidence of record does not raise the issue of mitigating circumstances during service due to factors listed as: other mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the misconduct (§ 3.12(e)(2)(i)), physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication (§ 3.12(e)(2)(ii)), combat-related or overseas-related hardship (§ 3.12(e)(2)(iii)), sexual abuse/assault (§ 3.12(e)(2)(iv)), duress, coercion, or desperation (§ 3.12(e)(2)(v)), due to family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties (§ 3.12(e)(2)(vi)), or to age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity (38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2)(vii)).

Accordingly, without competent, credible or probative evidence relating to these factors, the Board finds further discussion on them is not warranted in this claim.  See Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2009) ("Although the Board must interpret a claimant's submissions broadly, 'the Board is not required to conjure up issues that were not raised by the claimant.'" (citing Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32, 35 (1998)).

Finally, considering factors under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3), there is no evidence that a valid legal defense would have precluded conviction under the UCMJ.  First, the appellant accepted nonjudicial punishment and had not raised any issues with his legal proceedings or with legal counsel that he elected not to consult with in service.  Second, the appellant acknowledged that he engaged in willful misconduct during service.  Third, the appellant has submitted no evidence that such a valid defense exists to preclude conviction for his multiple offenses.  

Based on the analysis of the record, the Board finds there compelling circumstances do not mitigate the appellant's willful and persistent misconduct under 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(e).  

Insanity Defense

Furthermore, no bar to benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 shall be applied if VA determines that the former service member was insane at the time he or she committed the offense(s) leading to the discharge or release under dishonorable conditions.  See 38 U.S.C. 5303(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12(b), 3.354.  

When the question is whether an individual was insane at the time of an offense leading to his court-martial or discharge, the rating agency will base its decision on all the evidence procurable relating to the period involved and apply the definition of paragraph (a) of 38?C.F.R. §?3.354.  

In addition, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that "a determination of whether a person is insane is, in effect, a determination of whether the person's actions were intentional, and, thus, the result of willful misconduct."  Zang v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?246, 254 (1995).  

The Court further indicated such a determination is not warranted when the record does not reflect a Veteran suffered from insanity due to disease or that he or she did not know or understand the nature or consequences of his or her acts, or that what he or she was doing was wrong.  Id.  

Significantly, the burden is on the appellant to submit competent medical evidence that the Veteran was insane at the time of the offenses.  Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 449 (1995).  

In this regard, the appellant, nor his representative, have raised any issues with regard to insanity, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin,28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

As noted above, the record clearly shows that the appellant chose to go AWOL rather than report for work, break restriction, and admitted to using drugs while on active duty, rather than report for active duty, despite knowing the consequences of his actions.  

As such, there is no evidence the appellant's misconduct was not intentional, and, thus, the result of willful misconduct. 

In this regard, the appellant has not raised any other issues with regard to insanity, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28?Vet. App.?366, 69-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

With all of the above in mind, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether the appellant's character of discharge constitutes a bar to the receipt of VA benefits.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Therefore, the appeal must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Newman v. McDonough, 35?Vet. App.?310 (2022).  

Chapter 17 Healthcare Eligibility

The healthcare and related benefits authorized by Chapter 17 of title 38 U.S.C. shall be provided to certain former service persons with administrative discharges under other than honorable conditions for any disability incurred or aggravated during active military, naval, or air service in line of duty.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360.  

In this case, the Board finds that the appellant's discharge was not the result of a general or special court-martial's finding of bad conduct and the bars listed in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c) do not otherwise apply to his claim.   38 C.F.R. § 3.360. 

In this regard, the Board highlights the appellant is already service connected for healthcare and related benefits authorized by Chapter 17 of title 38 U.S.C. for his hypertension disability.  He should use these recourses to address his hypertension over time.  

SERVICE CONNECTION CLAIMS

Entitlement to service connection for VA compensation purposes for hypertension

Service connection for VA compensation purposes is not available for any disability where the appellant's discharge is found to be dishonorable for VA purposes, as has been shown above.  As such, service connection for VA compensation purposes for his claim is not warranted where his character of discharge is found to be dishonorable for VA purposes under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii) for willful and persistent misconduct.  Therefore, the claim for VA compensation is denied. 

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Davidson, Christopher M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.