Citation Nr: A25031694
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 231228-403346
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain is denied. 

Service connection for an anxiety disorder is denied. 

Service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Service connection for scar(s) of the neck is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a depressive disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbosacral strain was manifested by forward flexion of the lumbar spine limited to less than 30 degrees with pain; there was no ankylosis or equivalent functional impairment and no incapacitating episodes requiring physician-prescribed bedrest totaling at least 4 weeks. 

2. An anxiety disorder was not caused or aggravated by a neck disability for which service connection has been granted. 

3. Right upper extremity radiculopathy was not caused or aggravated by a neck disability for which service connection has been granted.

4. Left upper extremity radiculopathy was not caused or aggravated by a neck disability for which service connection has been granted.

5. Scar(s) of the neck were not caused or aggravated by a neck disability for which service connection has been granted.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

2. The criteria for service connection for an anxiety disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

4. The criteria for service connection for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

5. The criteria for service connection for scar(s) of the neck are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2001 to July 2002.

The rating decision on appeal was issued under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

An August 2022 rating decision adjudicated issues claimed in a May 2022 application for benefits. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbosacral strain and granted a separate 10 percent rating each for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve. In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the August 2022 decision with respect to the ratings assigned. In November 2022, the AOJ issued a HLR decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2022 decision. 

The Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim in February 2023 again contending that higher ratings were warranted for his lumbar spine and lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy. A rating decision on the Supplemental Claim was issued in May 2023, which denied increased ratings for the lumbar spine and left lower extremity disabilities and granted an increase in the rating from 10 percent to 20 percent for the right lower extremity.

Another May 2023 rating decision addressed a March 2023 application for benefits. In the decision, the AOJ denied service connection for an anxiety disorder, depression, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, scars of the neck, and sleep apnea.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review of the November 2022 HLR decision and May 2023 rating decisions. Under the AMA, it is impermissible to request higher-level review of an HLR decision. However, the issues addressed in the November 2022 HLR decision were also addressed in the May 2023 rating decision issued in response to a February 2023 Supplemental Claim. Therefore, the July 2023 request for higher-level review is reasonably construed as a request for review of the May 2023 rating decision as to the issues of entitlement to increased ratings for the lumbar spine, right lower extremity, and left lower extremity disabilities. 

After an HLR conference in October 2023, an HLR decision was issued which found a duty-to-assist error in the adjudication of the rating evaluations assigned for the right and left lower extremity radiculopathy. These issues were then transferred to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. The Supplemental Claim decision was issued in April 2024, and those issues are not before the Board.

The remaining issues were appealed in a December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), on which the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The October 2023 HLR decision increased the rating assigned to the lumbosacral strain to 40 percent effective November 18, 2021. However, as this rating is not the maximum benefit allowed, the issue is still on appeal. See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).

In the December 2023 Board appeal, the Veteran listed 12 issues total. He indicated that he was appealing both the November 2022 and May 2023 decisions. However, with respect to the issues on appeal, May 2023 decisions addressed the same issues as the November 2022 decision. Thus, he had listed the same six issues twice, and there were only six distinct issues on appeal.

The Board has considered whether adjudication of a claim for a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is warranted as part of the increased rating appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Nevertheless, while the evidence reflects that his service-connected lumbosacral spine disability impacts his work, it also shows that the Veteran has been employed full-time during the appeal period. Therefore, further consideration of entitlement to a TDIU is not necessary.

Finally, in the March 2023 Fully Developed Claim application, the Veteran included claims for service connection for a neck disorder and for nerve damage. As these claims were previously denied in an April 2020 rating decision, the AOJ advised him that he needed to file the appropriate form - a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995). A completed Supplemental Claim form was received in April 2023. However, the AOJ did not adjudicate the issues of entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder and entitlement to service connection for nerve damage. Therefore, the Board cannot adjudicate those issues at this time. The Veteran may resubmit the claims to the AOJ or notify the AOJ that the issues are still pending.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claim for a depressive disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain.  

Cervical and lumbar spine disabilities are rated under the General Rating Formula for Rating Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (Spine Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DCs 5237-5243. IVDS is rated under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes (IVDS Formula), whichever method results in the higher rating when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

The rating schedule for musculoskeletal disabilities was amended effective February 7, 2021. The amended regulations clarify that DC 5243 is to be assigned only when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root; assign DC 5242 for all other disc diagnoses. No other changes were made to the rating criteria for the spine.     

The Veteran's lumbosacral spine disability has been assigned a 40 percent rating from November 18, 2021, the date the Intent to File that preceded the formal application was received. The Board will consider all relevant diagnostic codes.

Pursuant to the Spine Formula, a rating in excess of 40 percent will be warranted when the objective medical evidence shows the following:

"	unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine (50 percent under DC 5242).

"	unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine (100 percent under DC 5242).

"	incapacitating episodes of IVDS having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months (60 percent under DC 5243)

For purposes of evaluations under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243, Note 1.

Turning to the evidence, in a January 2022 private Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (received by VA in May 2022), the diagnosis was again lumbosacral strain, which the Veteran reported had worsened since onset. The Veteran indicated he was unable to get out of bed without assistance, unable to lift anything, including his 2-year-old, and unable to participate in any physical activity during painful flare-ups. He also stated that he could not carry his 2-month-old in a car seat. Functional impairment was described as difficulty with bending, sleeping, exercising, physical activities, lifting anything heavy, and with getting out of bed.

The Veteran also reported constant, daily pain and indicated that he would work from home when his back pain was severe. He described that he would be on bed rest six to seven times per month when working from home. He also indicated that he missed work three to four times per month and would also be on bedrest on those days. 

Clinical examination found active range of motion to 80 degrees forward flexion and 30 degrees each for each of extension, bilateral flexion, and bilateral rotation. The examiner indicated that pain, weakness, fatigability, lack of endurance, and incoordination caused the limitation of range of motion. The Veteran was able to perform three repetitions of each movement without additional loss of function. Passive range of motion was the same. 

The examiner noted pain with weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, active range of motion, and rest. No pain was documented with passive range of motion. 

Range of motion during flare-ups was estimated to be forward flexion and extension to 5 degrees, right lateral flexion to 10 degrees, left lateral flexion to 15 degrees, right lateral rotation to 15 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees. 

Guarding and muscle spasm were not noted to result in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. Additional factors of the disability included interference with sitting, standing, disturbance of locomotion, less movement than normal, and weakened movement. The examiner documented no ankylosis and no IVDS.

The Veteran's private treatment records from the Medical University of South Carolina have also been reviewed; they reflect treatment for chronic low back pain and include findings consistent with those demonstrated during the January 2022 private examination.  

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain has been rated at 40 percent pursuant to DC 5237 throughout the appeal period. The rating contemplates the forward flexion of the lumbar spine to 5 degrees with consideration of the effects of pain, as well as weakness, fatigability, incoordination, and lack of endurance. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). A higher rating requires the presence of ankylosis or incapacitating episodes of IVDS warranting physician-prescribed bedrest having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. The evidence does not demonstrate such findings. While the Veteran reported periods of bedrest when working from home and when missing work due to back pain, he does not have a diagnosis of IVDS. Further, the bedrest was not shown to be due to incapacitation or to have been prescribed by a physician. 

Likewise, consideration has been given as to whether there is functional ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine disability. See Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). Ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure." DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY, 94 (32nd ed. 2012). Here, the Veteran has neither reported, nor does the record suggest, that his lumbosacral spine is immobile. While the Veteran's lumbosacral spine disability has limited motion, even with pain, flare-ups or after repeated use, it is not fixed or immobile.

Therefore, the weight of the evidence is against assigment of a rating in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain at any time during the appeal period. The Board has considered the lay statements of the Veteran and his wife in support of the appeal. In a March 2023 statement, the Veteran's wife described the Veteran as having severe pain in his lower back such that he needs to sleep on the floor to help ease the pain. In an April 2023 statement, the Veteran described living with constant back pain which he treated with steroid injections. The pain and limitation of motion and activities described in those statements are consistent with the findings in the medical evidence of record, as well as with the rating assigned. The degree of limitation described in the lay evidence does not demonstrate ankylosis of the spine or its functional equivalent or physician-prescribed bedrest for incapacitating episodes. 

Therefore, the evidence persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 40 percent for the lumbosacral strain. The appeal is denied.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may also be granted on a presumptive basis for diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 under the following circumstances: (1) where a chronic disease or injury is shown in service and subsequent manifestations of the same disease or injury are shown at a later date unless clearly attributable to an intercurrent cause; or (2) where there is continuity of symptomatology since service; or (3) by showing that the disorder manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is aggravated by, proximately due to, or the result of a service-connected disease or injury under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). In order to establish service connection on a secondary basis, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical evidence establishing a link between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, and scar(s) of the neck. 

The Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, and scar(s) as secondary to his neck/upper back (cervical spine). See March 2023 Fully Developed Claim application. In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, he argued that his neck and back were injured at the same time in service.   

Initially, the medical evidence does not reflect symptoms or diagnoses of an anxiety disorder or of left upper extremity radiculopathy during the appeal period. A diagnosis of radiculopathy of the right upper extremity, as well as scars of the neck are of record. Therefore, the criterion of a current disability is met only for the right upper extremity and scar claims on appeal. 

In any case, service connection is not in effect for a neck disability, and as discussed above, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review such a claim. Therefore, regardless of diagnosis, there is no primary diagnosis through which the claimed disorders may be service connected on a secondary basis. Service connection for an anxiety disorder, right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, and scars of the neck as secondary to the neck disability must be denied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

VA must consider all theories of entitlement to benefits that are either raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record. Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 553 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, the Veteran has not claimed or argued in favor of service connection on either a direct or presumptive basis for any of these disabilities. He contended that his neck was injured at the same time as his back in service, but he did not contend that the disabilities of anxiety disorder, bilateral upper radiculopathy, and scars manifested in service. Service treatment records also do not reflect complaint of, treatment for, or a diagnosis associated with any of these disorders, and the record does not otherwise raise such theories of entitlement. 

The record also does not suggest that an anxiety disorder, right upper extremity radiculopathy, left upper extremity radiculopathy and/or scars of the neck were caused or aggravated by one or more of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, which include unspecified depressive disorder, lumbosacral strain, right lower extremity radiculopathy, left lower extremity radiculopathy, tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and hypertension. Therefore, as service connection is not in effect for a neck disability, there is no primary disability with which an anxiety disorder, right and left upper extremity radiculopathy, and scars of the neck may be associated on a secondary basis. The appeals are denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a depressive disorder is remanded.

Initially, it is acknowledged that subsequent to certification of the appeal to the Board in January 2024, service connection for an unspecified depressive disorder was granted in a July 2024 rating decision. However, the effective date for that award is September 23, 2023, which is after the date of the claim currently before the Board. In Johnson v. Collins, No. 23-7589 (Vet. App. Mar. 26, 2025), the United States Court of Veterans Claims held that a subsequent grant of service connection in a separate claim stream does not moot the service connection issue pending in a different claim stream. Therefore, the claim for service connection for depression filed in March 2023 is still pending. 

Generally, under the AMA an appeal may only be remanded when an error is made in the development of a claim prior to the initial decision. In this case, prior to the May 2023 decision, the Board finds the evidence met the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination and/or opinion. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). Thus, not obtaining at least an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's depressive disorder was a pre-decisional error. 	

In a March 2023 Fully Developed Claim application, the Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for depression as secondary to his neck/upper back (cervical spine). However, the Board must consider all theories of entitlement raised by the record. Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. at 553.

Service connection is in effect for lumbosacral strain, and in a March 2023 statement, the Veteran's spouse described how pain in the Veteran's lower back and the resulting limitation of function and ability to engage in physical activities, such as picking up their children, had caused a steady decline in his mental state and increase in his "depressive state." His spouse is competent to describe her observations of the Veteran's physical behavior and outward expressions of his mental state. Therefore, prior to the May 2023 decision, there was evidence of a primary disability, a secondary disability, and an indication of a relationship between the two that was sufficient to warrant ordering a VA examination and/or opinion. 

A clinical examination for the purpose of assessing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was performed in May 2024. Therefore, a remand for another clinical examination is unnecessary. However, as the effective date granted for the unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress was approximately six months after the date of the claim on appeal before the Board, an opinion as to whether the Veteran had a depressive disorder that was caused or aggravated by his lumbosacral strain during the period on appeal is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Direct the claims file to a clinician to address the existence and etiology a depressive disorder contemporaneous with the March 2023 claim. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, and the Veteran's lay statements, the clinician is asked to address the following:

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that a diagnosable depressive disorder was present at or around the time of the March 2023 application for benefits?

"	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, or higher) that a diagnosable depressive disorder present at or around the time of the March 2023 claim was caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain to include associated changes in his physical ability and activity?

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. 

A telephone interview with the Veteran should be conducted. A clinical examination need not be scheduled unless the clinician cannot answer the questions presented without one. 

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. M. Schaefer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.