Citation Nr: A25031093
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 210831-182861
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to individual unemployability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from September 1969 to May 1971.

In December 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to a TDIU most recently addressed in an August 2020 rating decision.  In May 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In June 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the May 2021 decision.  In August 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2021 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  On November 19, 2024, the Veteran testified at a hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  A transcript is associated with the claims folder.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  

If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to TDIU remanded.

The Veteran seeks a TDIU based on his service-connected residuals of prostate cancer and deviated septum with sleep disturbances. 

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Id. 

The Veteran has the following disabilities that are service-connected: residuals of prostate cancer rated 60 percent from April 17, 2018; tinnitus rated 10 percent from October 27, 2019; erectile dysfunction associated with residuals of prostate cancer rated noncompensable from April 27, 2009; scar associated with residuals of prostate cancer rated noncompensable from February 20, 2018; and deviated septum with sleep disturbances rated noncompensable from October 27, 2019. As relevant to this appeal, his combined disability rating is 60 percent.  Based on the forgoing, the Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria for a TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

The Board may not consider a claim for a TDIU during the period when he did not meet the schedular requirements in the first instance, but will refer it to the Director, Compensation Service (Director) if it is shown that the Veteran is unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b). As described in Ray v. Wilkie, the correct standard for referral is whether there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a Veteran is unemployable by reason of his service-connected disabilities." 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019). 

After a review of the evidentiary record and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable by reason of his service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran's DD Form 214 reflects a military occupational specialty of vehicle driver.  Historically, an October 2012 VA prostate cancer examination report shows the Veteran reported working as a crane operator for approximately thirty-three years; and was then working as a part-time truck driver.

A November 2019 VA Form 21-4192 from Joshen Paper indicates the Veteran worked as a part-time truck driver from July 2012 to September 2016, when he retired.

In April 2020 and December 2020 VA Forms 21-8940, the Veteran noted that he last worked full-time in September 2016, when he became too disabled to work.  He reports he completed high school but did not have any other education or training before or since becoming too disabled to work.

In an August 2020 Individual Unemployability Statement for prostate cancer, a VA examiner indicates that it is at least as likely as not that related to the Veteran's service connected conditions, he is able to perform the following in a normal eight hour work day: "medium work," which is defined as exerting 20 to 50 pounds of force occasionally, and/or 10 to 25 pounds of force frequently, and/or greater than negligible up to 10 pounds of force constantly to move objects.

In a December 2020 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran reports that after his prostate cancer, his urinary frequency increased to the point that he was no longer employable.  He reports that he is overly tired because he struggles with sleep due to his deviated septum and has frequent urination. 

A December 2020 private opinion by A.H., RN FNP, indicates that the Veteran has had issues with bowel and bladder control ever since his proctectomy for prostate cancer.  The private clinician indicates that the Veteran wakes up frequently throughout the night to use the bathroom; the disruption in sleep causes excessive fatigue during the day; and his incontinence of bowel and bladder with urinary frequency make employment very difficult.  The private clinician indicates that the Veteran had to quit work at age 63 and that his employers were unable to accommodate his need for frequent need and access to the bathroom.  The private clinician indicates that the Veteran continues to struggle with bowel and bladder control; that the lack of control causes problems with his quality of life; and that he continues to be fatigued from the nighttime disruption.  

A May 2021 VA prostate cancer residuals and urinary incontinence examination report indicates that the Veteran's residuals of prostate cancer have progressed and worsened and that his current symptom is urinary leaking/incontinence.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran has a voiding dysfunction as a complication of his radical prostatectomy, and that this dysfunction causes urine leakage requiring absorbent material which must be changed more than 4 times per day.  The examiner also opined that the voiding dysfunction causes increased urinary frequency which causes nighttime wakening to void 5 or more times.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's residuals of prostate cancer impacted his ability to work, stating that severe urinary leaking/incontinence preclude him from doing his routine daily ADLs (activities of daily living).

Regarding the non-economic component of Ray, the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his limited (i.e., high school) education and relevant work history (as a crane operator and truck driver) appears to be significantly impacted by the physical effects of his service-connected residuals of prostate cancer and deviated septum with sleep disturbances.  The severity and frequency of his urinary leakage would reasonably limit his ability to work efficiently and effectively in any job that requires uninterrupted and sustained physical exertion and/or mental focus because of the need to urinate on a frequent basis.  Further, the Veteran's reported difficulty staying awake during the day and daytime fatigue (due to his impaired sleep due to the prostate cancer residuals and deviated septum) and the safety risk it poses, especially for commercial driving and/or operating a crane or other similar heavy construction equipment, would reasonably limit his ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.

The Board finds there was sufficient evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran was unemployable by reason of his service-connected disabilities such that a referral to the Director for extraschedular TDIU consideration was warranted. Failure to do so was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, the appeal is remanded.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the application for TDIU to the Director of Compensation Service for a determination as to whether the Veteran is entitled to an extraschedular TDIU in accordance with the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b). 

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.