Citation Nr: A25031925
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-456683
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the U. S. Navy from August 1990 to August 1996.

A rating decision in March 2024 denied service connection for vertigo. In July 2024, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review Docket, a process by which the Board is only allowed to review the evidence up to the March 2024 rating decision.  However, since the Board is remanding the issues for further development, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) will review any evidence received after the March 2024 rating decision that the Board could not consider in this decision.  

A VA examination in March 2024 diagnosed the Veteran with Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV). He reported that the condition began in around 1998, in that he felt the room was spinning when he was lying down flat. The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's vertigo was caused by his active service, to include as result of in-service exposure to asbestos, or caused by his service connected tinnitus. However, the examiner did not opine on whether the Veteran's tinnitus aggravated (made worse) his vertigo. In a VA hearing loss examination in November 2023, the Veteran reported that when he was experiencing ringing in his ears, he had to sit down, because he knew he was going to get dizzy. He also reported that sometimes vertigo and tinnitus occurred simultaneously, but he was not sure if one condition caused the other.

As the March 2024 VA opinion did not opine on whether the Veteran's service connected tinnitus aggravated (made worse) his vertigo, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred. A remand is warranted. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's vertigo. The examiner should answer the following question:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's tinnitus was aggravated (made worse) by his service connected tinnitus?  Why or why not?

Aggravation in the context of secondary service connection means any degree of worsening of the claimed condition.  If aggravation is found, a baseline level of severity of the Veteran's vertigo prior to the aggravation should be estimated.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Wang, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.