Citation Nr: A25031216
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-423962
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

REMANDED

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain and with obesity as an intermediary step, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's GERD has been manifested by persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health but has not been manifested by symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for GERD have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Codes (DC) 7399-7346.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from July 2008 to June 2015.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), wherein the AOJ denied a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and service connection of obstructive sleep apnea.

In March 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) and requesting a "Direct Review" of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge. In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the March 2023 decision cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Rating

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected GERD warrants a higher disability rating than the current 10 percent disability rating. In a February 2023 statement, the Veteran wrote he had multiple symptoms of GERD, including heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation of stomach contents into his throat, difficulty swallowing, chest pain that radiates into his shoulder, frequent coughing, and nighttime choking due to regurgitation at least once a day. He said that he takes Tums and Nexium and he must avoid certain foods. The Veteran said that he noticed he had daytime fatigue, mood changes, low sex drive, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, frequent yawning, hard time staying on task and concentrating, memory trouble, trouble or extra time needed for making complex decisions, self-neglect in personal care, having moments where he did not care about much of anything, and difficulty handling stressful situations. In a March 2024 brief, the Veteran's attorney stated that the Veteran's disability warrants a 60 percent rating with the effective date of May 18, 2022. 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the Veteran's symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran was granted service connection for GERD in September 2022, with an initial disability rating of 10 percent, effective May 18, 2022 under DC 7399-7346. GERD is rated, by analogy under DC 7346 which provides rating criteria for hiatal hernia. 

Under DC 7346, a 30 percent rating is assigned for persistently recurrent epigastric distress, with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. A 60 percent evaluation is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7346.

The terms "considerable," "severe," "material," and "moderate" are adjectives that advise the degree of impairment required to warrant a 30 and 60 percent disability rating, respectively.

"Considerable" means "large in extent or degree." Considerable, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/considerable, Definition 2. "Severe" means "very painful or harmful" and "of a great degree." Severe, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe, Definitions 6.b. and 8. "Material" means "having real importance or great consequences." Material, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/material, Definition 2. "Moderate" means "not violent, severe, or intense." Moderate, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate, Definition 3.

The Board notes there were changes to the rating schedule for digestive system disabilities effective on May 19, 2024. The amended criteria can be applied only for the period from the effective date of the regulatory change. As the effective date for the changes to the rating schedule is after the period on appeal, the Board will not consider the amended criteria for this appeal, particularly when all the evidence in the file is dated prior to this date. 

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence weighs in favor of an initial 30 percent disability rating, but no higher, for GERD. The reasons follow.

The evidence shows that the Veteran's GERD results in persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health to warrant an initial disability rating of 30 percent. The Veteran has consistently described having these persistent symptoms. For example, in a May 2022 statement, the Veteran described experiencing heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation of stomach contents into his throat, a sore throat with painful swallowing, and chest pain that radiates into his shoulder several times a day. He described similar symptoms in a February 2023 statement. At both the August 2022 and March 2023 VA examinations, the examiners both documented the Veteran's symptoms. The March 2023 examiner described the Veteran as experiencing persistently recurrent epigastric symptoms. These symptoms are indicative of what the 30 percent rating contemplates. Thus, a 30 percent rating is granted as of the date service connection was awarded, which is May 18, 2022. 

The Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against an initial evaluation in excess of 30 percent for GERD. For example, the Veteran's GERD symptoms do not result in symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health to warrant a 60 percent during the appeal period. A December 2020 VA treatment record showed that the Veteran's GERD was controlled. In December 2022, the Veteran reported that he would get epigastric and chest discomfort, as well as occasional sweats. The Veteran denied having nausea, vomiting, arm or leg numbness weakness. The Veteran reported that he does not get any symptoms when he eats his normal, smaller portioned meals. 

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion from Kimberly D. O'Brien, M.S.N., A.P.R.N. in February 2023. Ms. O'Brien stated that the Veteran's lay statements confirm that he suffers from physical symptoms of classic GERD symptomatology. Ms. O'Brien cited to the Veteran's statement that he had multiple symptoms of GERD, including pyrosis (heartburn), reflux, dysphagia, epigastric distress, substernal, arm, and shoulder pain, chronic cough, nighttime choking, sleep disturbances, vitamin deficiencies due to eating disturbance related to the avoidance of many foods and food types precluding the intake of specific vitamins, minerals, and macronutrients, which affected overall general nutritional health, as well as emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts on behavioral and social functioning; and loss of normal gastrointestinal function related to GERD. Ms. O'Brien stated that the Veteran's statements described severe GERD symptomology most closely aligning with a 60 percent disability rating based on symptoms combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

The Board finds that the medical opinion of Ms. O'Brien is adequate but finds it less probative. First, the Board notes that Ms. O'Brien's opinion contradicts the medical evidence of record. For instance, Ms. O'Brien relied solely on the Veteran's statements when forming her opinion. Ms. O'Brien noted abnormal physical anatomical defects and loss of normal gastrointestinal function related to GERD. She specifically listed seven defects, including lower esophageal sphincter dysfunction, laryngopharyngeal aspiration, esophageal stricture, Barrett's esophagus, esophagitis, esophageal ulcer, and hiatal hernia. The Board notes that the Veteran was documented to have esophagitis in August 2023, but that was months after Ms. O'Brien's issued her opinion. A review of the Veteran's treatment records and the August 2022 and March 2023 VA examination reports show that the Veteran was not diagnosed with these physical anatomical defects and the Board finds that the opinion of Ms. O'Brien's medical opinion is of diminished probative value. 

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in August 2022, the Veteran reported that his symptoms had gotten progressively worse since the onset. The Veteran reported that he had heartburn; pain in his throat, ears, and shoulder; and he woke up with a very dry throat. The examiner noted that the Veteran's treatment plan included taking continuous medication. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had symptoms which included persistent recurrent epigastric distress; dysphagia; pyrosis; reflux; arm, shoulder, and substernal pain; and sleep disturbances. The Veteran was noted to not have an esophageal stricture or other pertinent physical findings or complications. The examiner said that the Veteran's GERD did not impact his ability to work, and this examiner did not find that the Veteran's symptom combination was productive of either considerable impairment of health or severe impairment of health.

At the time of the February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms had gotten progressively worse. The Veteran reported that he had heartburn, pain in his chest, arms, and shoulder. He said that he felt like something was stuck in his throat. He also said he gets regurgitation, occasionally having some nausea and vomiting. The Veteran said he had that a few times a year, but not regularly like his other symptoms. The Veteran said the burning sensation wakes him up at night and laying down makes him have a rapid heartbeat. The Veteran said that the medication, Nexium, does not fix all his symptoms. The examiner noted that the Veteran had which included persistent recurrent epigastric distress; dysphagia; pyrosis; reflux; regurgitation; arm, shoulder, and substernal pain; sleep disturbances; nausea; and vomiting. The Veteran was noted to not have an esophageal stricture or other pertinent physical findings or complications. The examiner said that the Veteran's GERD impacted his ability to work and relisted the Veteran's symptoms.

The Board finds that the August 2022 and February 2023 VA examination reports are adequate and probative. The VA examiners considered the Veteran's lay statements, reviewed the treatment records, and conducted an in-person examination. Furthermore, the Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements about the severity of his symptoms are outweighed by the clinical findings documented in the August 2022 and February 2023 VA examination reports, as the examiners performed in-person examinations and performed an analysis contrasting the Veteran's clinically supported symptoms against the reported symptoms described in the Veteran's lay statements.

The evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran has been noted to have material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health during the appeal period. VA treatment records show that the Veteran's weight in March 2020 was 242 pounds and in December 2021 the Veteran's weight was 250 pounds. In December 2022, the treating VA physician noted that the Veteran was recommended to lose weight and that the Veteran declined to participate with the MOVE program. Thus, the Board finds that this evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran's GERD is manifested by severe impairment of health.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that entitlement to a higher evaluation for a service-connected disability may not be denied based on ameliorative relief provided by medication when the effects of medication are not specifically contemplated by the rating schedule. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). Here, as the relevant diagnostic code does not consider the ameliorative effects of medication, the Board has not considered any ameliorative relief provided by medication within the context of this analysis.

For the above reasons, the evidence warrants an initial 30 percent disability rating, but no higher, for GERD. The Board also finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a disability rating in excess of 30 percent. To this extent, the benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain and with obesity as an intermediary step

The Veteran contends that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  Specifically, in an April 2022 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran contends that his service-connected lumbosacral strain prevents him from exercising. The Veteran said his musculoskeletal condition prevented him from being able to sleep on his side and the pain from the musculoskeletal disability made it difficult to fall or stay asleep. The Veteran said he experienced pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings, daytime fatigue, difficulty completing tasks, and poor concentration. The Veteran also reported that he weighed 185 pounds at military entrance, 225 pounds upon military separation, and he currently weighed 250 pounds, which weight gain he states is caused by the service-connected lumbosacral strain. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  When service connection is established for a secondary disability, the secondary disability shall be considered a part of the original disability. Id. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability.

In an opinion issued by VA's General Counsel, the General Counsel determined that obesity cannot be service connected on a direct basis and obesity cannot qualify as an in-service event for service-connection purposes. However, the General Counsel determined that obesity may serve as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). VAOGCPREC 1-2017.  In such case, that evidence would need to reflect: (1) a service-connected disability or disabilities that caused the veteran to become obese; (2) the obesity was a substantial factor in causing another disability; and (3) the disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities. Id.

In a decision by the Court, it held that while obesity is not itself recognized as a disability by the Secretary of VA, it may be recognized as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a disability claimed as secondary to that service-connected disability, based on the service-connected disability causing or aggravating the obesity. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-07 (2020).

By way of history, in April 2022, the Veteran filed an original claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain.  

In May 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination and medical opinion in connection with his claim. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with obstructive sleep apnea. Thereafter, a VA examiner determined that there was no nexus between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and service-connected lumbosacral strain, finding that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed condition was proximately due to or the result of the service-connected condition. With respect to lumbosacral strain, the examiner stated that lumbosacral strain and sleep apnea were not medically related, and that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. Citing medical literature, the examiner acknowledged that research found no association between the two conditions. The examiner, however, did not address the theory of obesity as an intermediate step in the development of obstructive sleep apnea. 

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a December 2022 private medical opinion in which Dr. Zeyad Morcos provided a positive nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, service-connected lumbosacral strain, and obesity. Specially, Dr. Morcos opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain was due to and/or related to his service-connected lumbosacral strain. Dr. Morcos stated that due to the Veteran's chronic pain in his back, he had participated in less physical activities and has led a more sedentary lifestyle, which is a contributing factor to his weight gain. Dr. Morcos stated that the Veteran's prescribed medication treatment for his chronic pain, including skeletal muscle relaxant medication that caused CNS depression that places individuals at high risk for drug-induced respiratory depression, which, at the very least, aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea. Dr. Morcos stated that the pertinent medical literature attributed the Veteran's weight gain to his service-connected lumbosacral strain. In rendering these opinions, Dr. Morcos referenced medical literature in support of his conclusions. These medical opinions show that Dr. Morcos specifically raised a theory of entitlement that considered whether obesity was an intermediate step in the development of obstructive sleep apnea and provided relevant evidence to support the opinions.

However, the Board finds that Dr. Morcos' opinion is not adequate. The medical opinion does not show that Dr. Morcos considered any other evidence than the Veteran's lay statements. In review of the Veteran's medical records, the Veteran was encouraged to exercise over multiple medical visits. Furthermore, in December 2021, the Veteran endorsed symptoms of lightheadedness and fatigue with increased exercise, mainly climbing stairs. The Veteran attributed his symptoms to his diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Moreover, a December 2022 VA treatment record showed the Veteran was not exercising due to physical pain and heart issues. Thus, the Board finds that Dr. Morcos did not consider all the relevant evidence of record when formulating his opinion, and his opinion is not adequate.

Relying on the May 2022 VA medical opinion, the AOJ denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, claimed as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral strain.

The Board finds that the AOJ did not properly consider whether obesity was an intermediate step in the Veteran's development of obstructive sleep apnea.  Consequently, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to consider that theory of entitlement by not obtaining adequate medical opinions was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and thus, remand is necessary. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from a medical professional regarding whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service-connected lumbosacral strain, to include as due to obesity as an intermediate step. If the examiner determines that an in-person examination is needed to make an informed decision, schedule an in-person examination. The examiner should have access to the claims file.

The agency of original jurisdiction must provide the examiner a copy of the below facts.

To assist in a review of the claims file, the examiner is informed of the following facts with citations in the record, when applicable:

"	The Veteran served on active duty from July 2008 to June 2015.  

"	The Veteran is service connected for adjustment disorder, lumbosacral strain, cervical spine strain, GERD, seborrhea dermatitis, and hypertension.  

"	The Veteran contends that his service-connected lumbosacral strain prevents him from exercising, which has caused him to become obese. 

"	A May 2015 service treatment record documented that the Veteran weighed 225 pounds. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR," Receipt Date 04/30/2020, with "#6" in the Subject field, p. 49.

"	A March 2020 VA medical treatment record showed that the Veteran weighed 242.2 pounds. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 09/15/2022, p. 86. 

"	In March 2020, the Veteran had a sleep study and was diagnosed with mild obstructive sleep apnea.  See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 06/04/2020, pp. 2-4.

"	In December 2021, in discussing his hypertrophic cardiomyopathy symptoms, the Veteran endorsed stable symptoms of lightheadedness and fatigue with increased exercise, mainly climbing stairs. He reported the symptoms have been stable since his diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and have been attributed to that condition. At that time, the Veteran weighed 250 pounds. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 09/15/2022, pp. 70-71.

"	A May 2022 VA examiner determined that there was no relationship between the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea and service-connected lumbosacral strain, finding that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed condition was proximately due to or the result of the service-connected condition. With respect to lumbosacral strain, the examiner stated that lumbosacral strain and sleep apnea were not medically related, and that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. Citing medical literature, the examiner acknowledged that research found no association between the two conditions. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "C&P Exam," Receipt Date 02/10/2023, with "DBQ Medical Opinion - Sleep Apnea" in the Subject field, p. 2.

"	While the May 2022 examiner cited to literature that addressed obesity and obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner did not address the Veteran's theory of obesity as an intermediate step in the development of obstructive sleep apnea. Thus, the Board is seeking an addendum opinion. 

"	A December 2022 VA medical treatment record showed that the Veteran did not exercise due to physical pain and heart issues. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 02/10/2023, p. 60. 

"	The Veteran submitted a December 2022 private medical opinion in which Dr. Zeyad Morcos provided a positive nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, service-connected lumbosacral strain, and obesity.  Specially, Dr. Morcos opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain was due to and/or related to his service-connected lumbosacral strain. Dr. Morcos stated that due to the Veteran's chronic pain in his back, he has participated in less physical activities and has led a more sedentary lifestyle, which is a contributing factor to his weight gain. Dr. Morcos stated that the Veteran's prescribed medication treatment for his chronic pain, including skeletal muscle relaxant medication that caused central nervous system depression that places individuals at high risk for drug-induced respiratory depression, which, at the very least aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea. Dr. Morcos stated that the pertinent medical literature attributed the Veteran's weight gain to his service-connected lumbosacral strain. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," Receipt Date 12/26/2022, pp. 1-18.

"	The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

The examiner is asked to provide opinions for the following questions:

1.	Did the Veteran's lumbosacral strain cause or aggravate the Veteran's obesity?  Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

2.	If the answer to (1.) is positive, was the Veteran's obesity a substantial factor in causing his obstructive sleep apnea?  Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

3.	If the answer to (2.) is positive, would obstructive sleep apnea have not occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected lumbosacral strain?  Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

All opinions are to be accompanied by a rationale consistent with the evidence of record.  A discussion of the pertinent evidence, relevant medical treatises, and generally accepted medical principles is requested.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why this is so.  The examiner shall then explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for more information and indicate what additional evidence is necessary, or whether he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to the question.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.