Citation Nr: A25031050
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240712-455805
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a headaches disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that his current right knee strain was incurred in or caused by active military service.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against the finding that the Veteran has a headaches disability or had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right knee strain have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a headaches disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 2022 to July 2023.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 RO decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

SERVICE CONNECTION

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

The Veteran's asserts that he has a right knee disability, and it is directly related to his active military service. In the November 2023 claims form, the Veteran stated that he began noticing major knee pain during his service. He also stated that he hit his knees on staircases hurting them making it hard to play a game of basketball or work heavy lifting jobs. In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran asserted that his knee pain began in boot camp during active service.

Thus, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran has the current diagnosis of a right knee condition that began during his active service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

Regarding the current diagnosis of a right knee condition, the Board notes that in the January 2024 VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the examiner noted the diagnosis of right knee strain.

Regarding in-service manifestation or diagnosis of a right knee disability, the Board notes that in two September 2022 service treatment records, the clinicians noted right knee pain. In one of these records, the clinician noted the Veteran had pain in right knee for 5 days attributed to overuse from running and marching. The clinician noted patellar tendonitis.

Regarding a relationship between the Veteran's current right knee condition and active military service, in the January 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner stated that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As a supporting rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran was seen for right knee pain during service on two separate unrelated occasions in September 2022, in one the clinician noted no current pain and normal physical examination, and in the other, the clinician noted the Veteran was safe to train. There is no additional treatment record found in the claims file for diagnosis of right knee although the Veteran was active till July 2023, indicating there is no service treatment record of chronic right knee condition.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion inadequate because the examiner solely relied on the service treatment records and did not address the Veteran's statement that his current knee pain began during active service. Furthermore, the examiner stated that the Veteran's in-service right knee pain on two occasions were separate and unrelated. On the contrary, the Board notes that both of these knee pain incidents are related because in the September 8, 2022, service treatment record, the clinician noted right knee pain for one day, and in the September 12, 2022, service treatment record, the clinician noted right knee pain for five days. Finally, the examiner did not note the complete September 12, 2022, in-service treatment record, in which the clinician noted the Veteran had patellar tendonitis based on examination, and the Veteran was recommended to do light duty, and use ice, medication, knee sleeve, and stretches.

There is no service treatment record besides the above noted September 2022 treatment records that noted right knee pain. However, the Veteran has asserted that his current knee pain began during bootcamp, which is consistent with the September 2022 the service treatment record that noted the Veteran's right knee pain was due to overuse from running and marching. Additionally, within one year of separation from active service, in the January 2024 VA DBQ for knee and lower leg conditions, the examiner noted the diagnosis of right knee strain.  

Thus, upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current right knee condition incurred in or related to his active military service.

Accordingly, after resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Consequently, entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is denied. 

The Veteran claims that he has a headache disability, which is directly related to his active military service. In the November 2023 claims form, the Veteran asserted that in the first 3 to 4 months of active-duty service, he started having migraines, for which he took over-the-counter medication, which sometimes did not work. He stated that he still gets these migraines. However, in the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran asserted that his headaches began on "detachment".

Thus, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability of headaches that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the evidence of record is persuasively against a finding of a current diagnosis of a headaches disorder at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for a chronic headache disorder, although sporadic instances of headaches symptoms secondary to other acute conditions are shown in the service treatment records, which has been confirmed by a medical expert in the January 2024 VA medical opinion. The Board notes that a September 2022 service treatment record noted the diagnosis of diarrhea, and the clinician prescribed Acetaminophen 500mg for headache, fever, and pain. A March 2023 service treatment record noted the Veteran had common cold, fever/chills, rhinorrhea (runny nose), dry cough, diarrhea, and headache for seven days. It was also noted the Veteran tested positive for COVID-19. In an April 2023 service treatment record, the clinician noted diagnosis of viral intestinal infection and gastroenteritis. The clinician also noted the Veteran's reports of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, sore throat, and congestion.

The claims file does not have any post-service treatment record that noted a chronic headaches disability such as migraines.

The Board notes that in a January 2024 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum, VA noted that during active service, the Veteran had minimal exposure to asbestos as an Airman Recruit. He was also exposed to fueling and washing, including aviation fuel, POLs, solvents, adhesives, cleaning chemical, jet exhaust, non-ionizing radiation, and VOCs during flight inspections at the Navy ship.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the claimed headaches disability in January 2024. In the January 2024 VA examination report (VA DBQ) for headaches disability, the examiner noted no diagnosis of a headache disability. The examiner noted the Veteran's reports that he started having slight headaches in 2023. The Veteran stated that he was seen by medics and was given Ibuprofen. However, he reported that he did not have any follow-up, and also no follow-up with primary care physician. He reported to take over-the-counter Tylenol as needed for headaches. The Veteran did not report any functional impairment of the claimed headaches. Also, the examiner did not note any functional impact of the claimed headaches.

In the January 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's claimed headache disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. As a supporting rationale, the examiner stated that he examined the Veteran and reviewed the exposure related information provided and the available records. The examiner stated that the earliest treatment record found in claims file regarding care of headache, but part of constitutional symptoms from URI (upper respiratory infection) not primary headache, is from March 2023 service treatment record at the Navy ship, where it was noted that the Veteran was having fever/chills, rhinorrhea, dry cough, diarrhea and headache for seven days. The Veteran was COVID-19 positive before reporting to the ship. Furthermore, it was noted that two weeks ago, the Veteran was tested positive and he stated that he became symptomatic a few days later. It was noted the Veteran had acute upper respiratory infection, unspecified, which was most likely viral. The clinician also noted the evidence did not strongly suggest PNA (pneumonia), sinusitis, or strep throat.

The examiner noted that in April 2023 at the Navy ship medical department, the Veteran was treated for nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, sore throat, and congestion. It was noted the Veteran had viral intestinal infection, unspecified, and presented with likely viral gastroenteritis. The examiner concluded that no treatment record in the claims file suggests a diagnosis specifically for a primary headaches condition. When the Veteran was seen for headaches in September 2022, March 2023, and April 2023 but as part of constitutional symptoms of infection like URTI (upper respiratory tract infection) or GE (gastrointestinal) diagnosis, which did not include headaches. Furthermore, there is no treatment record even in 2023 that supports the diagnosis of headaches disability. Thus, the examiner concluded that there is no diagnosis of a headaches disability.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion to be highly probative as the examiner reviewed the pertinent evidence, including relevant service treatment records, and provided an adequate rationale in support of the conclusions reached.

The Board notes that in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the Federal Circuit held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Id. at 1367-69. The Veteran has asserted that he has headaches. However, as described above, in the January 2024 VA DBQ, the examiner did not note any functional impact of the claimed headaches. Also, the examiner did not note that the Veteran reported any functional impairment of the claimed headaches. 

Additionally, as noted above, in the November 2023 claims form, the Veteran asserted that in the first 3 to 4 months of active-duty service, he started having migraines, for which he took over-the-counter medication, which sometimes did not work. He stated that he still gets these migraines. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report observable headaches, but he is not competent to provide an opinion as to whether his headaches are migraines or any other primary headaches disorder. The issue is medically complex, and the Veteran has not demonstrated that he has the medical education, training, or expertise to render such an opinion. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). In the January 2024 VA medical opinion, the examiner stated that he examined the Veteran and reviewed the evidence of record, but the examiner adequately explained that the Veteran does not have the diagnosis of a primary headaches disorder.

Thus, the Board concludes that the probative evince of record is persuasively weighs against the finding that the Veteran has a chronic headache disability or had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he has a left knee disability, and it is directly related to his active military service. In the November 2023 claims form, the Veteran stated that his boot camp consisted of lots of walks and weekly workouts putting stress on his knees. He began noticing major pain in his left knee during service. He also stated that he hit his knees on staircases hurting them making it hard to play a game of basketball or work heavy lifting jobs. In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran asserted that his knees pain began in boot camp during active service.

The Board notes that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for knee and leg conditions in January 2024. In the January 2024 VA DBQ, the examiner noted the left knee is the unclaimed joint and it is undamaged. The examiner did not complete the testing of the left knee on repeated use over time and during flare-ups.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA examination for the claimed left knee disability inadequate because the examiner noted the Veteran did not claim service connection for a left knee disability, and did not complete the range of motion testing of the Veteran's left knee. However, the Board notes that the Veteran has claimed service connection for a left knee disability, and specifically in the November 2023 VA claims form, he asserted that he began noticing major pain in his left knee during in-service boot camp.

Furthermore, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran currently has a left knee condition because the Veteran has been asserting that he has left knee pain. In this regard, the Board notes that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356 at 1367-69.

Finally, the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's claimed left knee disability is related to active military service.

Accordingly, the Board finds that failure to provide the Veteran an adequate examination and obtain an opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left knee disability is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand to correct this error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran a new examination for his claimed left knee disability. Thereafter, forward the claims file and copy of this remand to the examiner to obtain a medical opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left knee disability.

2. After reviewing the claims file and copy of this remand, the examiner should address the following:

(a)	Provide all of the diagnoses of the Veteran's claimed left knee disability. Regarding the existence of a current disability for the purposes of a claim for service connection, the examiner is advised that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed left knee disability had its onset during his period of active service, or related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the Veteran's claimed left knee pain during boot camp. See the document associated with the Veteran's claims file with entry dated 11/06/2023, titled "VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation)" page 13 of 14 that contains the Veteran's November 2023 filed claims form, in which he stated that his boot camp consisted of lots of walks and weekly workouts putting stress on his knees. He asserted that he began noticing major pain in his left knee during boot camp. He also stated that he hit his knees on staircases hurting them causing it hard to play a game of basketball or even work heaving lifting jobs.

Clear supporting rationales must be provided for all the opinions rendered. If the examiner determines that it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, then the examiner must provide an explanation of why that is so and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, a deficiency in the record, or a deficiency in the examiner's knowledge.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tariq, Nadeem

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.