Citation Nr: A25031379
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-438869
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder with insomnia is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis is denied.

Service connection for allergic rhinitis is granted. 

REMANDED

Service connection for right elbow olecranon bursitis is remanded.

Service connection for right ankle sprain is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

1. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's major depressive disorder with insomnia symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

2. The Veteran's segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis is manifest by a combined range of motion of no less than 154 degrees, forward flexion to no less than 65 degrees, and localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour.

3. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is presumptively related to his exposure to fine particulate matter during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder with insomnia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

3. The criteria for service connection for allergic rhinitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1120; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.317, 3.320(a)(2)(ii).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2010 to June 2022.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1). 

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the November 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim for service connection for sinusitis and entitlement to an increased rating for major depressive disorder with insomnia based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. In an April 2024 supplemental claim decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim for service connection for a right ankle and right elbow disability and entitlement to an increased rating for segmental dysfunction based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. On the VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated he was appealing 'maxillary sinusitis,' 'olecranon bursitis,' 'right ankle strain/pain,' and segmental dysfunction of thoracic region' but noted only the November 2022 rating decision. Although the Veteran's Form 10182 did not explicitly list the March 2024 and April 2024 supplemental claim decisions as they pertain to these issues, the Veteran did identify an intent to appeal 'maxillary sinusitis,' 'olecranon bursitis,' 'right ankle strain/pain,' and 'segmental dysfunction of thoracic region.' Construing the VA Form 10182 liberally, the Board therefore accepts that the April 2024 VA Form 10182 appealed the March 2024 and April 2024 supplemental claim decisions as they pertain to these issues. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (a) (the Board will construe such arguments in a liberal manner for purposes of determining whether they raise issues on appeal). 

The Board acknowledges that the April 2024 VA Form 10182 includes the issues of entitlement to increased ratings for dermatophytosis tinea corporis and left tibiofibular ligament pain. However, this notice of disagreement was received more than one year after the notification of the February 2023 rating decision denying increased ratings. Therefore, as it pertains to these issues, the April 2024 VA Form 10182 is untimely, and the Board does not have jurisdiction to decide these claims. Additionally, there is no documentation in the file suggesting that an extension for the period of filing a Notice of Disagreement was made by the Veteran or his representative. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203 (c).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decisions on appeal. 38C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Finally, the Veteran submitted the claim on appeal using a signed VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. The complete VA Form 21-526EZ includes 'Notice to Veteran/Service Member of Evidence Necessary to Substantiate a Claim for Veterans Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.' This part of the form contains explicit notice to the claimant that "You are entitled to a hearing at any time in the claims process. If you wish to have a hearing or have other questions, contact VA online through Ask VA: https://ask.va.gov or call us toll-free at 1-800-827-1000 (TTY:711)." By signing the VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran certified they received the notice attached to their application titled, Notice to Veteran/Service Member of Evidence Necessary to Substantiate a Claim for Veterans Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. Therefore, the Board finds that he was provided with notice of his right to a hearing before the AOJ issued its initial decision on appeal.

INCREASED RATINGS

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder with insomnia is denied.

The Veteran contends entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for his major depressive disorder with insomnia. The November 2022 rating decision on appeal granted service connection for major depressive disorder and assigned a 50 percent rating effective June 29, 2022. The current appeal stems from the initial grant of service connection; therefore, the review period begins June 29, 2022. 

The Veteran's major depressive disorder with insomnia is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434, which instructs to apply the general rating formular for mental disorders (General Formula). Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Under the General Formula, a noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning. A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2022. The examiner indicated the Veteran experiences occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent period of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; and suicidal ideation. The examiner indicated the Veteran was neatly groomed and alert and oriented in all spheres. The examiner further indicated that the Veteran's long-term recall and short-term memory appeared intact. Although the Veteran reported concentration problems at home, his concentration was noted as stable during the evaluation. The examiner found the Veteran's thought processes were logical and coherent, mood was down with a congruent and restricted affect, judgment and insight were fair, and speech was normal. The examiner indicated that no behavioral abnormalities were observed, and that auditory and visual hallucinations were denied. Finally, the examiner indicated the Veteran was a low acute risk for suicide. 

During the August 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported living with his wife and five children. He indicated that he is close to his children but frequently gets angry over small incidents. He denied having many friends but reported interacting with a few other men. He indicated that he does not trust other people. He also indicated that he is not employed but is looking for work.

In an October 2022 correspondence, the Veteran indicated that he was embarrassed and ashamed to explain to the VA examiner how bad his alcohol use disorder has become. He reported checking himself into rehab in July 2021 but having since slipped back into 'a state of extremely heavy drinking.' He estimated that he drinks a 24-pack of beer and a large bottle of whiskey on a weekly basis. He stated that he drinks because he feels like it is his only way out of his 'depressed and fatigued reality' and helps his daily suicidal thoughts subside. 

A December 2022 VA treatment record indicates the Veteran reported continued anxiety and depression symptoms but denied suicidal and homicidal ideations. The clinician noted a history of near suicide attempt. A subsequent December 2022 VA treatment record also indicates the Veteran reported anxiety and depression. He reported drinking one day out of the week but consuming seven to eight drinks.

A January 2023 VA treatment record indicates the Veteran denied thoughts of suicide/homicide, intention to harm self or others, means to harm self or others, plan to harm self or others, and hopelessness. The clinician indicated the Veteran is a low acute and low chronic risk of suicide because he denied suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, plan/intent, or past attempts. The clinician also indicated that the Veteran is employed full-time. The Veteran reported poor appetite, over-eating; little interest or pleasure; feeling down, depressed, or hopeless; trouble sleeping; tired, low energy; feelings of failure, guilt; and trouble concentrating. 

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination in November 2023. The examiner indicated the Veteran experiences occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. The examiner described the Veteran as dysphoric with a constricted affect. The examiner also indicated he was alert and oriented and did not display any disturbances in speech, thought, memory, or behavior. Finally, the examiner indicated his insight and judgment were fair. 

During the November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported living with his mother-in-law and three children. He reported being mostly socially isolated and avoidant. The Veteran indicated that he is employed in a contract position.

After a review of the evidentiary record, the Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher. The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating.

VA treatment records, the August 2022 and November 2023 VA examination reports, and the Veteran's lay statements show that his major depressive disorder with insomnia was manifested by symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. His major depressive disorder with insomnia was also manifested by symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating (flattened affect and disturbances of motivation and mood) and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and with a 70 percent rating (suicidal ideation). The Veteran also had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating such as poor appetite or over-eating, fatigability, feelings of failure or guilt, and excessive drinking of alcohol. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 50 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 70 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. The Veteran's poor appetite or over-eating, fatigability, and feelings of failure or guilt are similar to chronic sleep impairment and disturbances of motivation and mood, which are contemplated by the assigned 50 percent rating. 

The Board also finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 50 percent rating. Although the VA examiners found the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, the record indicates the Veteran's major depressive disorder with insomnia was manifested by depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, suicidal ideation, poor appetite or over-eating, low energy, feelings of failure or guilt, and trouble concentrating. 

VA mental health treatment records and the VA examinations indicate that the Veteran was alert and oriented with fair insight and judgment. He did not display obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. In fact, the medical evidence of record indicates he displayed logical and coherent thought processes, intact concentration, appropriate grooming, and normal speech. He was noted to display no behavioral abnormalities, auditory hallucinations, or visual hallucinations. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported excessive use of alcohol to help cope with symptoms.  The Board finds this is similar to impaired judgment, which is contemplated in the 50 percent rating, and not impaired impulse control. The example of impulse control in the 70 percent rating criteria (e.g., unprovoked irritability with periods of violence) suggests a more severe symptomatology such as when a person is unable to control themselves due to anger or frustation and it results in violence. Such symptom severity has not been described here as it relates to the Veteran drinking that he reported in October 2022 and December 2022.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran expressed suicidal ideation, which is contemplated by a 70 percent rating. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 19. The Board also recognizes that, in Bankhead, the Court held that the language of the general rating formula "indicates that the presence of suicidal ideation alone...may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas." Id. However, the Court in Bankhead, also noted that the presence of a single symptom is not dispositive of any particular disability level. Rather, VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms, quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms, and assigns an evaluation that more nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.

Here, the August 2022 VA examiner acknowledged the Veteran's report of suicidal ideation but specifically found that the Veteran did not have peristent danger of hurting self or others and did not have more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks. Moreover, the Veteran has intermittently denied thoughts of suicide/homicide, intent to harm self or others, means to harm self or others, and/or plans to harm self or others. Additionally, the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not been shown to have had a significant negative impact on his occupational and social functioning such that serious impairment of his overall functioning is not found. The examiner's clinical assessment is probative because as a psychologist he has the education, training and expertise to assess the severity of mental health disorders. Further, the 2023 VA examiner who also reviewed the file, was aware of the Veteran's past suicidal ideation, and is competent to render an opinion, also assessed the overall level of his symptoms as not reaching the level of impairment contemplated by a 70 percent rating. 

Consequently, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 70 percent or 100 percent disability rating. Moreover, as discussed above, when considering the Veteran's signs and symptoms overall, his disability level more nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment contemplated by the currently assigned 50 percent rating. 

While the Veteran did experience symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating-suicidal ideation-the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. As noted above, the Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 50 percent rating or less. The Veteran has competently reported maintaining a relationship with his children and, at times, a relationship with his wife, mother-in-law, and a few other men. Further, while the August 2022 VA examination shows the Veteran reported being unemployed, subsequent VA treatment records and the November 2023 VA examination contain reports that the Veteran has remained employed. Therefore, the evidence does not demonstrate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 70 percent rating. The criteria for a 70 percent or higher rating are not met and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis is denied.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his service connected segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis. The November 2022 rating decision on appeal granted service connection for lumbar strain and assigned a 10 percent rating effective June 29, 2022. The April 2024 rating decision on appeal granted service connection for segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and recharacterized the Veteran's back disability as segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis. The current appeal stems from the initial grant of service connection; therefore, the review period begins June 29, 2022.   

The Veteran's segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code. Id. at Note 1.  

For VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right lateral rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion. Id. at Note 2. 

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." The spine has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

In this case, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect a history of low back pain. See, e.g., May 2023 VA treatment record. A December 2022 VA treatment record notes chronic low back pain without significant limitations. The clinician noted occasional radiculopathy and no incontinence.  

During the appeal period, the Veteran underwent a VA back examination in September 2022. The Veteran reported morning stiffness and an inability to lift heavy weights. He denied flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine. However, he endorsed functional loss or impairment including difficulty bending over and lifting the amount of weight he used to be able to lift. Active and passive range of motion testing revealed a combined range of motion of 170 degrees, with forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 20 degrees. The examiner indicated all range of motion exhibited pain. 

The September 2022 VA examiner found no evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing without additional loss of function or range of motion. The examiner found that the procured evidence does not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner further found no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine. 

The September 2022 VA back examination further indicates normal muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, normal deep tendon reflexes, normal sensation to light touch, no signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy, and no ankylosis. 

A May 2023 VA treatment record indicates the Veteran denied using opiates (Heroin, Morphine, Dilaudid, Demerol, Oxycontin, oxy, codeine (Tylenol 2, 3, 4), Percocet, Vicodin, Fentanyl, etc.) in the past 30 days. He also denied use of other drugs including over-the-counter or unknown medications). 

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination in November 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine that occur weekly and last for two to four days. The flare-ups were alleviated by ibuprofen and laying flat. The Veteran indicated that, during his flare-ups, he cannot travel, cannot maintain household chores and yard work, and loses work output and quality. Active and passive range of motion testing revealed a combined range of motion of 170 degrees and/or forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 20 degrees. The examiner found evidence of pain with weight-bearing, active motion, and passive motion that does not result in or cause functional loss. The examiner found no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion. 

The November 2023 VA examiner indicated that the procured evidence does not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time. However, the examiner also indicated that the Veteran was being examined during a flare-up and that the evidence suggests pain significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups. The examiner estimated a combined range of motion of 170 degrees and/or forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 20 degrees.

The November 2023 VA examiner found the Veteran has localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour but does not have muscle spasm or guarding. Physical examination also revealed normal muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, normal sensation to light touch, absent knee and ankle reflexes, no signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy, and no ankylosis. The examiner indicated that the Veteran does not have intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) of the thoracolumbar spine.

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination in February 2024. During the examination, the Veteran indicated that he has intermittent lower back pain with flare-ups. The back pain was without radiation. The Veteran indicated that his flare-ups occur twice a month for three to five days. He indicated that he cannot bend over during a flare-up. He reported use of Tylenol or ibuprofen as needed, and Tylenol or ibuprofen alleviated his flares. Regarding functional loss or impairment, the Veteran indicated that he cannot ride in a vehicle for more than short distances and cannot bend over to do chores. 

Range of motion testing revealed a combined range of motion of 184 degrees or forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 25 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 22 degrees. The examiner indicated that passive range of motion was not tested as it was medically contraindicated. The examiner explained that with the Veteran having segmental dysfunction and spondylosis, passive range of motion testing presents risk of injury to the spine.   However, the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion. Pain was present on weightbearing, non-weightbearing, and active range of motion but did not cause functional loss.

Physical examination revealed no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy, or IVDS. The examiner also indicated that the Veteran does not have localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm. Physical examination demonstrated normal muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, and sensation to light touch. However, the February 2024 VA examiner indicated that pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time and during a flare-up. The examiner noted a resulting combined range of motion of 154 degrees or forward flexion to 65 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 17 degrees.  

Finally, the February 2024 VA examiner indicated his back disabilities impact his ability to perform occupational tasks requiring running, prolonged walking, prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, extended driving, lifting and carrying heavy objects, climbing multiple floors of stairs, and/or repeated bending/twisting/or stooping. 

After a review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's segmental dysfunction of the thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain including pain during flare-ups, and pain during repetitive use over time. However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements that he has difficulty with prolonged sitting, standing, walking, driving, etc. would not result in limitation of motion more nearly approximating forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees. Additionally, the Veteran did not have muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. Indeed, even when considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the competent medical evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's combined range of motion is not less than 154 degrees, and his forward flexion is not limited to less than 65 degrees. 

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes. However, the Veteran does not have IVDS, and the evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  

Regarding neurological impairment, the Board acknowledges that a December 2022 VA treatment record notes occasional radiculopathy. However, the record does not otherwise indicate that the Veteran has radiculopathy. In fact, the August 2022, November 2023, and February 2024 VA examiners clearly indicate the Veteran does not have any signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have radiculopathy related to his service connected spine conditions.

Finally, the Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App March 12, 2025). In Ingram, the Court found that, when evaluating musculoskeletal disability where the relevant diagnostic code does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of each disability. See McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271 (2016) (en banc) (citing Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012)). The rating criteria under Diagnostic Code 5237 fails to contemplate the effects of medication on the Veteran's service connected back disability. Thus, the Board is precluded from considering the relief, if any, afforded by the Veteran's medication in evaluating the severity of his disability.

In this case, the record generally indicates that the Veteran uses Tylenol and Ibuprofen as needed to alleviate flare-ups. See, e.g., February 2024 VA examination. Although the Veteran reports flare-ups as often as weekly, VA treatment records suggest this results in the Veteran using medication intermittently. Indeed, a May 2023 VA treatment record indicates the Veteran did not use medication for at least 30 days.  

The evidence reflects that the Veteran is using medication during flare-ups. He has not otherwise reported daily use of pain medication for his lumbar spine, and his flare-ups are not reported to occur on a daily basis. At the November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported flare-ups occurred weekly and were alleviated by ibuprofen. At the February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that flare-ups occurred twice a month; during flare-ups he cannot bend over; he uses Tylenol or Ibuprofen "as needed;" and use of Tylenol alleviates the flare-up. The evidence thus shows that the Veteran's range of motion, specifically during a flare-up, appears to be improved with medication use. 

In its evaluation of the Veteran's disability, however, the Board has discounted any beneficial medication effects and evaluated the baseline severity of his disability.  The Board finds that the baseline severity or range of motion of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability is forward flexion greater than 60 degrees and a combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees, including considering functional loss during flare-ups.  This is consistent with the current 10 percent rating. While the November 2023 and February 2024 VA examination reports do not indicate whether the Veteran was on medication at the time of the examinations, he has self-reported use of medication only with flare-ups and neither examiner indicated the examination was conducted during a flare-up. At both examinations, the Veteran achieved forward flexion to 70 degrees and his combined range of motion was at 170 and 184, respectively. This range of motion is contemplated by the current 10 percent rating.

Further, while the Veteran has reported that he cannot bend over during flare-ups, this is a vague statement that does not allow the Board to accurately estimate the extent of his lumbar flexion during a flare-up or to find that his forward flexion would be less than 60 degrees.  In contrast, the VA examiners who clinically assessed the Veteran's lumbar spine, reviewed the medical records, and his lay statements - both estimated that he can achieve between 65-70 degrees of flexion during a flare-up. The VA examiners, in rendering their range of motion assessments, noted and considered the Veteran's lay statements describing functional limitations when his pain and functional impairment is at its worst (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to pain, lack of endurance, fatigue, lack of coordination, etc.). The examination reports make clear that the examiners provided their assessments discounting any potential ameliorating effects of medication. The Board finds their assessments are probative.

Moreover, the Board finds that the Veteran's flare-ups occur at such a frequency that any increased functional impairment without medication would not result in a higher rating. Therefore, the Board finds a remand for additional consideration of the ameliorative effects of medication is not necessary. The Board emphasizes that this decision is not based on any finding that the Veteran's medication provided relief. Rather, the denial of a rating in excess of 10 percent is based on the fact that the range of motion (and other symptoms) contemplated in the 20 percent rating criteria are not demonstrated by the evidence of record, regardless of any medication the Veteran takes for his back disability.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 10 percent for segmental dysfunction of thoracic region and lumbar region with lumbar spondylosis. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

SERVICE CONNECTION 

Service connection for allergic rhinitis is granted.

The Veteran contends his sinusitis onset in approximately August 2018. See July 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ. Alternatively, he contends entitlement to service connection because he served in Southwest Asia, where he was exposed to fine particulate matter.

The Veteran had active service in Qatar, United Arab Emirates, and Saudi Arabi from January 2019 through July 2019. Thus, he is considered a Persian Gulf veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (e).

A September 2022 VA sinusitis, rhinitis, and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx indicates that the Veteran was treated for maxillary sinusitis in August 2018 that has resolved. The examiner further indicated that the Veteran does not currently have any findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis. The examiner opined that his sinusitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service as it was acute and resolved with proper treatment. 

A November 2023 VA sinusitis, rhinitis, and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx indicates the Veteran has a current diagnosis of allergic rhinitis. The November 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

The November 2023 VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran was exposed to burn pits. The examiner explained that chronic sinusitis occurs when the sinuses are swollen and inflamed for three months or longer, despite treatment. The examiner indicated that the condition makes breathing through your nose difficult, and the area around your eyes might feel swollen or tender and cause a stuffy nose. The examiner noted that sinusitis can be brought on by an infection, by nasal polyps, or by swelling of the lining of your sinuses. The examiner further explained that acute sinusitis is an infection in your sinuses that typically lasts seven to 10 days, and often goes away with home care. The examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with acute sinusitis in August 2018; however, his service treatment records do not show chronicity during active service or during the presumptive timeline. Finally, the examiner indicated that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition and the toxic exposure risk activity. 

The November 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. The examiner reiterated that chronic sinusitis occurs when the sinuses are swollen and inflamed for three months or longer, despite treatment. The examiner also reiterated that the Veteran's service treatment records show he was diagnosed with acute sinusitis in August 2018 but do not show chronicity during service or thereafter. 

After a review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is not warranted. However, when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). Therefore, the Board will recharacterize the Veteran's sinusitis claim pursuant to Clemons, as one for entitlement to service connection for a condition of the nose, throat, larynx, and/or pharynx. Thus, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is warranted on a presumptive basis. The obtained VA opinions do not sufficiently address the Veteran's currently diagnosed allergic rhinitis. Nevertheless, both 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(2) and the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) allows the Board to grant the Veteran's claim presumptively. 

Granting the Veteran's claim under the PACT Act would limit his effective date to the date the bill became law. See Sergeant First Class Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-168, § 406(b), 136 Stat. 1783 -84 (2022). Therefore, in this case, the Board finds that the record supports a presumptive grant under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 (a)(2) without application of the PACT Act. The Veteran has qualifying service in Southwest Asia. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 (a)(5). The evidence reflects a current diagnosis of allergic rhinitis. See November 2023 VA examination. Accordingly, the Board concludes that a presumptive grant for allergic rhinitis is warranted under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 (a)(2).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for right elbow olecranon bursitis is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for right elbow olecranon bursitis is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained September 2022, November 2023, and February 2024 medical opinions prior to the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. However, these medical opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's right elbow olecranon bursitis had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.

The September 2022, November 2023, and February 2024 VA examinations all reflect a diagnosis of right elbow olecranon bursitis. In providing a negative nexus opinion, the September 2022 VA examiner only noted that the Veteran's elbow disability was treated in September 2019 and resolved. 

The November 2023 VA examiner similarly indicated that the Veteran's service treatment records do not show 'a condition of chronicity for an olecranon bursitis condition during service.' The November 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's right elbow disability was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities. The examiner indicated review of the exposure information, service treatment records, and job aids. The examiner explained that olecranon bursitis is the result of inflammation of the bursa but indicated that the Veteran's service treatment records do not show 'a condition of chronicity for an olecranon bursitis condition during service.' Finally, the examiner noted there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between development of this condition and the toxic exposure risk activity. 

Finally, the February 2024 VA examiner also indicated an inability to establish chronicity of care. 

The Board finds the opinions inadequate as they fail to address the lay statements of record competently reporting in-service right elbow pain with continuity post-service and appear to be based solely on the lack of in-service medical records corroborating or documenting continued elbow pain. See generally Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Additionally, the Board notes that entitlement to service connection does not require a disability be considered chronic in order to be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Furthermore, regarding the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activities, the November 2023 VA opinion does not provide the Board with sufficient detail and reasoning so as to render a fully informed decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). As the examiners did not provide an adequate rationale, but rather appear to have relied on the absence of objective medical evidence in reaching their stated opinions, on remand, an addendum opinion must be obtained.

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

2. Service connection for right ankle sprain is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for right ankle sprain is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained September 2022, November 2023, and February 2024 medical opinions prior to the April 2024 rating decision on appeal.  However, these medical opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's right ankle sprain had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.

The September 2022 VA examiner diagnosed right lateral collateral ligament sprain. The examiner opined that his in-service ankle sprain resolved as there are no other service treatment records for this condition. 

The November 2023 VA examiner also diagnosed right lateral collateral ligament sprain. In providing a negative nexus opinion, the November 2023 VA examiner explained that an ankle sprain occurs when the strong ligaments that support the ankle stretch beyond their limits and tear. The examiner indicated that it is an injury that occurs when ankles are rolled, twisted, or turned in awkward ways. The examiner acknowledged that a May 2018 service treatment record shows the Veteran with a right ankle sprain from playing basketball; however, the examiner noted his service treatment records do not show 'a condition chronicity right ankle condition during active service nor during the presumptive timeline.'

The November 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's right ankle disability was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities. The examiner indicated review of the exposure information, service treatment records, and job aids. The examiner explained that an ankle sprain occurs when the strong ligaments that support the ankle stretch beyond their limits and tear but indicated that the Veteran's service treatment records do not show 'a condition of chronicity right ankle condition during service.' Finally, the examiner noted there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between development of this condition and the toxic exposure risk activity. 

The February 2024 VA examiner diagnosed unspecified right ankle ligament sprain. The February 2024 VA examiner also acknowledged that a May 2018 service treatment record indicates the Veteran sustained an injury playing basketball. The examiner indicated that there is no documentation of chronicity of care, and sprains are acute, episodic, self-limiting, and heal with treatment. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's in-service right ankle sprain resolved in service without chronicity of care. 

The Board finds the opinions inadequate as they fail to address the lay statements of record competently reporting in-service right ankle pain with continuity post-service and appear to be based solely on the lack of in-service medical records corroborating or documenting continued ankle pain. See generally Dalton, 21 Vet. App. at 23; see also Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1336). Additionally, the Board reiterates that entitlement to service connection does not require a disability be considered chronic in order to be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Furthermore, regarding the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activities, the November 2023 VA opinion does not provide the Board with sufficient detail and reasoning so as to render a fully informed decision. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295. As the examiners did not provide an adequate rationale, but rather appear to have relied on the absence of objective medical evidence in reaching their stated opinions, on remand, an addendum opinion must be obtained.

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's right elbow olecranon bursitis is at least as likely as not related to service including his September 2019 treatment for right elbow olecranon bursitis and/or his toxic exposure risk activities.

A fully articulated medical rationale for any opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report. In doing so, the examiner(s) must consider the Veteran's lay report regarding the onset and recurrence of his right elbow symptoms. 

If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's right elbow injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of his current right elbow disability, this should be noted. In formation of the applicable opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's right ankle disability is at least as likely as not related to service including his May 2018 treatment for a right ankle injury and/or his toxic exposure risk activities.

A fully articulated medical rationale for any opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report. In doing so, the examiner(s) must consider the Veteran's lay report regarding the onset and recurrence of his right ankle symptoms. 

If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's right ankle injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of his current right ankle disability, this should be noted. In formation of the applicable opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Aoughsten, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.