Citation Nr: A25031255
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240315-424404
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition (also claimed as musculoskeletal condition in back) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder, also claimed as anxiety and fatigue is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a diagnosis of a thyroid condition.

2. The Veteran does not have a diagnosis of sinusitis. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a thyroid condition have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1992 to May 1997.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2023 decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior June 2023 decision. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of for service connection for a low back condition, bilateral foot pain, plantar fasciitis, and a sleep disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that it has recategorized the Veteran's claim for service connection for fatigue as a claim for a sleep disorder also claimed as anxiety and fatigue. The Veteran filed a separate appeal under another AMA appeal stream for somatic sleep disorder, also claimed as anxiety.  Both fatigue and a sleep disorder also claimed as anxiety were addressed in the same rating decision on appeal here.  As the issues are consolidated in this appeal stream, the other appeal stream at Docket 240830-470356 will be dismissed as a concurrent appeal.  As these appeals stem from the same rating decision, and will be addressed in this decision, there is no prejudice to the Veteran when making this decision. 

Service Connection

In order to establish service connection for a present disability the claimant must show the existence of a present disability, an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and a causal relationship or "nexus" between the present disability and the in-service injury or disease. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.

The Veteran contends she has a thyroid condition and sinusitis that are related to service. On the February 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, the Veteran stated her sinusitis and thyroid condition were caused by military exposures while stationed in Kuwait. Sinusitis was also claimed to be caused by exposure to extreme weather conditions during active duty. 

Evidence of record includes private treatment records, VA examinations, and VA treatment records from September 1997 to April 2021. The Board notes the VA was unable to obtain the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs). 

The evidence of record is devoid of any symptoms or diagnoses that are related to the above disabilities.

During the May 2023 VA sinusitis/rhinitis examination, the Veteran was not diagnosed with sinusitis. 

During private treatment, the Veteran was always found to have a clinically normal neck without apparent thyromegaly or masses. The evidence of record does not document the Veteran was ever diagnosed with a thyroid condition. 

While treatment is not required to support diagnoses or lay assertions of symptoms, the lack of such treatment can be significant as the Veteran is incentivized to report problems during appointments to receive proper treatment. In the present case, the Veteran has been seen for her rhinitis, heartburn, and other illnesses, but she has never been diagnosed with sinusitis or any thyroid condition.

With any claim for service connection (under any theory of entitlement), it is necessary for a current disability to be present. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (service connection may be warranted if there was a disability present at any point during the claim period, even if it is not currently present); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013) (when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability immediately prior to a veteran filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency). As the weight of the evidence shows no current disability of sinusitis and a thyroid condition, the claims must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot pain is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for plantar fasciitis is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a sleep disorder, also claimed as anxiety and fatigue is remanded.

The Veteran's treatment records show she is diagnosed with back pain, bilateral foot pain, plantar fasciitis, and insomnia disorder. The Veteran contends her back pain was caused by rigorous physical training. She also contends her bilateral foot pain and plantar fasciitis were caused by constant running, road marches, and wearing military boots during her five years of service. These statements suggest the back pain, bilateral foot pain, plantar fasciitis, may be associated with service.

The Veteran has not received a VA examination or medical opinion regarding these conditions.

VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

The Board finds that all the prongs of McLendon are met.  The failure to provide VA examinations or medical opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be corrected by remand. As such, a remand is necessary to acquire VA examinations and medical opinions.

During the May 2023 VA mental disorders examination, the examiner stated back pain may have contributed to mood and sleep disorder. This statement suggests a relationship between back pain and a sleep disorder; therefore, these conditions are inextricably intertwined.

In addition, the examiner providing an opinion regarding the Veteran's sleep disorder based her opinion on there being no evidence in her military treatment records.  However, the RO had already indicated that the service treatment records were not found.  The examiner's opinion is inadequate as it is impermissibly based on the lack of contemporaneous service treatment records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her diagnosed insomnia and anxiety.  The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran has a diagnosis related to fatigue.  The examiner should then provide an opinion whether the Veteran's diagnosed insomnia, anxiety, or any fatigue condition is at least as likely as not related to service.

Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations regarding the nature and etiology of her low back pain, bilateral foot pain, and plantar fasciitis.

After records review and examination, the examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran has low back pain, bilateral foot pain, and/or plantar fasciitis that is related to service, to include rigorous physical training and marching, running, and wearing military boots during active duty? The examiner is reminded that STRs are primarily unavailable for this Veteran; therefore, no opinion should rely on the lack of treatment during service, as there is no way to know if she received treatment during service. 

b)	If back pain (or another back disability) is related to service, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's insomnia disorder is caused or aggravated by service-connected back pain/back disability?

A full rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. McDaniels, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.