Citation Nr: A25031454
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240721-458359
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from December 2013 to December 2017. 

In the present case, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decided the issue on appeal on April 25, 2024. The Veteran filed a timely appeal of that decision using VA Form 10182 in July 2024 and requested the Direct Review Lane with the Board. Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence of record up to the April 25, 2024, AOJ decision. Evidence submitted outside of this time frame cannot be considered. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. Therefore, the Board may not consider this evidence, and it will not be discussed. 

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

The Board finds that the failure of the VA to afford the Veteran a VA examination and opinion amounts to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, as discussed in further detail below.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition is remanded.

A medical opinion has not been obtained in connection with the Veteran's claim for service connection for an anxiety disorder. The Veteran contends that his anxiety disorder had its onset in service due to strenuous training and mental fatigue. The Veteran competently and credibly reported that he began experiencing symptoms of stress and anxiety during service that have continued since. However, there is insufficient evidence to grant the claim. Because the evidence indicates that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with an established in-service event, injury, or disease, a medical examiner must comment on any etiological relationship between the in-service injury or disease and his current anxiety disorder. McClendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159 (c)(4). 

2. Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his service connection claim for depression. The Veteran has competently and credibly reported he suffers persistent symptoms of depression. An October 2023 patient health questionnaire supports the Veteran has reported his mild depression symptoms to a physician for treatment purposes. The Veteran claims these symptoms are related to in-service incidents including his divorce, lack of familial support, and a friend's death. The Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms and the events that occurred during service. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). As the record indicates that the above conditions may be associated with an in-service event, and the Board lacks sufficient medical evidence to render a decision on the question of nexus, a VA examination is warranted. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be provided with a VA examination in connection with his service connection claims for mental health disorders to include anxiety and depression. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner, and it should be confirmed that such records were available for review. Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished, and all clinical findings must be reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis. 

For each mental health diagnosis, the examiner should state whether it is as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability began in or is related to the Veteran's military service. Explain why or why not.

The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination as to whether a nexus exists between his active service and the claimed conditions. Specifically, the examiner must address the Veteran's statements that in-service incidents including his divorce, lack of familial support, strenuous training, and a friend's death caused him depression and anxiety. 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sherman, C

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.