Citation Nr: A25031575
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240425-435428
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability as secondary to service-connected disabilities of the right shoulder and/or left knee is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability as secondary to service-connected disabilities of the right shoulder and/or left knee is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Although the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, he has not asserted or otherwise provided or identified evidence to show that he has been diagnosed with an acquired psychiatric disability, or that he suffered from persistent or recurrent symptoms of a psychiatric disability, at any time during the pendency or proximate to the filing of his claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an award of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 4.125.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1985 to November 1992, to include service in Korea. His decorations include the Army Achievement Medal and the Overseas Service Ribbon.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in April 2024, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

As set out below, the Board is entering a decision denying the Veteran's claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As to the claims of entitlement to service connection for disabilities of the low back and left hip, the Board is remanding those claims to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors. The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when those claims are readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is denied.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for an "[a]cquired psychological disorder to include PTSD." See September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits). In October 2023, he identified an in-service stressor of frequent alerts that occurred in the field while he was stationed in Korea.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).

The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when the claimant is shown to have the disability either at the time he files his claim for service connection, or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to final adjudication. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). When the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the filing of a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that must be addressed in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013).

The term "disability" as used for VA purposes generally contemplates functional impairment resulting in loss of earning capacity. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). However, specific to claims for service connection for mental disorders, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that a diagnosis conforming to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) is required. Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020); see 38 C.F.R. § 4.125. Further, in addition to the general laws and regulations pertaining to service connection, service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997). In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

A layperson is generally incapable of opining on matters requiring medical knowledge. Routen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 183, 186 (1997), aff'd sub nom., Routen v. West, 142 F.3d 1434 (Fed. Cir. 1998). However, lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when: (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition (e.g., a broken leg, separated shoulder, pes planus (flat feet), varicose veins, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), etc.), (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In essence, lay testimony is competent when it pertains to the readily observable features or symptoms of injury or illness and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection." Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2). A determination as to whether medical evidence is needed to demonstrate that a Veteran presently has the same condition he or she had in service or during a presumptive period, or whether lay evidence will suffice, depends on the nature of the Veteran's present condition (e.g., whether the Veteran's present condition is of a type that requires medical expertise to identify it as the same condition as that in service or during a presumption period, or whether it can be so identified by lay observation). See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 310 (2007).

Thus, medical evidence is not always or categorically required when the determinative issue involves either medical diagnosis or etiology, but rather such issue may, depending on the facts of the particular case, be established by competent and credible lay evidence under 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). See Davidson, supra.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. Id.

Here, the Board must find that the evidence does not establish that the Veteran had a DSM diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, at any time during the pendency or proximate to the filing of his claim. Although he filed a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, his mere assertion that he has, or has had, an acquired psychiatric disability, on its own, is insufficient to support a finding of a current diagnosis, inasmuch as rendering such a diagnosis is a medically complex matter that requires specialized training. Because the Veteran is not shown to have such training, he is not competent to render a diagnosis. In addition, although he is competent to report a contemporaneous diagnosis by a medical professional, he has not asserted that a medical professional has rendered such a diagnosis. Nor does the record contain any medical evidence of such a diagnosis.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim. However, he has not asserted or otherwise provided or identified evidence to show that he has been diagnosed with an acquired psychiatric disability, or that he suffered from persistent or recurrent symptoms of a psychiatric disability at any time during the pendency or proximate to the filing of his claim. In the absence of such evidence or assertions, the Board cannot find that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it declined to have him examined. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim. As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not for application, and the appeal of this issue must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

2. Service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for disabilities of the low back and left hip. He contends, in essence, that the claimed disabilities are secondary to service-connected disabilities of his right shoulder and/or left knee. See April 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Under applicable law, a disability which is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall also be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Aggravation for purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of a non-service-connected disability. Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for "any incremental increase in disability-any additional impairment of earning capacity-in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase-regardless of its permanence." Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" (rather than proximate) causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. In that regard, the Federal Circuit held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) is unlawful because it requires proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation. The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. The Federal Circuit explained that secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but-for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. Stated another way, but-for causation is broad and undisputedly broader than proximate cause. Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

In the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of both his left hip and lumbar spine. Those favorable findings are binding on the Board and are not in dispute. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The record also establishes that he is service connected for disabilities of the right shoulder and left knee. The issue before the Board is whether the diagnosed disabilities of the low back and left hip were caused or have been aggravated by the service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in connection with his claims in December 2023. He reported multiple falls due to his left knee buckling, with twisting and straining to the back and hip. After examining the Veteran and reviewing the claims file, the examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's low back and/or left knee disabilities were proximately due to or the result of the service-connected disabilities of the right shoulder and/or left knee. As to the left hip, the examiner noted that a thorough review of the literature failed to show that arthritis in one joint causes arthritis in another joint. In that regard, the examiner explained that it is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but that one joint's disease does not "spread" to another or cause damage to it. As to the low back, the examiner noted that the low back, shoulder, and knee disabilities were separate entities and not medically related, and that the medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.

The Board finds that the December 2023 VA medical opinions are not fully adequate for purposes of adjudication. First, the examiner did not address the Veteran's primary contention that multiple falls due to his left knee buckling caused twisting and straining of the low back and left hip. Second, the examiner did not explicitly address the question of secondary aggravation. See, e.g., El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Finally, as noted in Spicer, proximate causation is not required in order to establish secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b). The AOJ's failure to obtain a fully adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.  

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange to have an appropriately qualified clinician review the claims file for purposes of providing a medical opinion with respect to the etiology of the Veteran's low back and left hip disabilities.

After reviewing the record, the clinician should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the identified disabilities of the Veteran's low back and left hip, diagnosed as degenerative arthritis, (a) were caused or (b) have been aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder and/or left knee disabilities.

In so doing, the examiner should be careful to address both causation and aggravation as to each diagnosed disability, specifically and separately. The examiner should also address the Veteran's primary contention that multiple falls due to buckling of his left knee has caused twisting and straining of the low back and left hip.

The examiner should consider that secondary service connection does not require permanent worsening of the secondary condition; rather, any incremental increase in disability is sufficient, regardless of its permanence. See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019). Finally, the examiner should consider that proximate cause is not required. Rather, the examiner's opinion should address whether the non-service-connected disabilities would have been less severe but-for the service-connected disabilities, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  

The need for another examination and/or telephonic or video interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner selected to offer the requested opinions.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	King, Laura E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.