Citation Nr: A25031663
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240623-451625
DATE: April 7, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2015 to November 2018.  The Veteran had additional service in the United States Army Reserve and Army National Guard.

The Rating Decision on appeal was issued in July 2023; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim for service connection, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of his claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the claimant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran maintains that he has a current musculoskeletal disability of the neck or upper back that is related to a traumatic fall during training as well as multiple falls down hills, off trucks, and whiplash events during training events and deployments.  See January 2021 VA Physical Medical Rehabilitation Consultation Note; see also June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination or medical opinion to determine the cause of his claimed current neck disability.  VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when necessary to make a decision on a claim, as defined by law.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  In determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided or medical opinion obtained, there are four factors that must be met: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

The Veteran's service treatment records from September 2015 that show he has a history of shoulder pain for six weeks and that his symptoms appear to be "referred from neck."  Service treatment records indicate that the Veteran underwent physical therapy, and he was assessed with right shoulder pain and cervical derangement.  

An October 2020 VA treatment record demonstrates that the Veteran has a proposed diagnoses of "rt shoulder going up neck with numbness".  Post-service diagnostic testing of the Veteran's cervical spine revealed abnormalities, and his VA treatment records also show that he has diagnoses of cervicalgia, chronic degenerative changes, and cervical myofascial pain.  See February 2021 MRI. Thus, the Board finds that the low threshold required to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion was met prior to the July 2023 Rating Decision.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.  VA committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to schedule the Veteran for an examination and obtain a medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As such, an examination and medical opinion must be obtained on remand. 

The Veteran is service-connected for right shoulder strain with rotator cuff tendonitis.  While the Veteran maintains that his neck disability was caused by or incurred during his active service, the Board also finds the record reasonably raises the theory that his neck disability, alternatively, is secondary to his service-connected right shoulder strain with rotator cuff tendonitis.  Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-56 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (recognizing VA's duty to consider all issues raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record).  As noted above, the Veteran's service treatment records show that his right shoulder and neck disabilities may be related, and his in-service physical therapy included treatment for his cervical spine.  Further, his VA treatment records indicate that he complains of right shoulder pain that is radiating to his neck with numbness.  As this evidence was before the AOJ prior to the July 2023 Rating Decision on appeal, VA committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not properly developing this aspect of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  On remand, a medical opinion addressing secondary service connection must be obtained.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical examination from an appropriately qualified examiner regarding the etiology of the Veteran's neck disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

After review of the claims file, the examiner must provide opinions on the following:

(a.) Identify, by diagnosis, all neck disability(ies) found to be present, i.e., cervicalgia, chronic degenerative changes, and cervical myofascial pain, etc.  See February 2021 MRI.

(b.) For each identified neck disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any incident of service.

In providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the service treatment records noting "cervical derangement", as well as the post-service findings of chronic degenerative changes of the cervical spine on a February 2021 MRI, just a little over two years following the Veteran's separation from service.  

The examiner must also clearly consider the Veteran's lay statements about the onset and history of his neck symptoms.  Specifically, the Veteran has stated that his neck disability is related to an in-service fall in basic training as well as multiple falls down hills, off trucks, and whiplash events during training events and deployments.  Further, a January 2021 VA Physical Medical Rehabilitation Consultation Note demonstrates that the Veteran advised that his current neck pain is related to a traumatic fall while training five to six years ago. 

(c.) For each identified neck disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by (in whole or in part) his service-connected right shoulder strain with rotator cuff tendonitis.

(d.) For each identified neck disability, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by (any incremental increase in disability or any additional impairment of earning capacity regardless of its permanence) his service-connected right shoulder strain with rotator cuff tendonitis.

In providing this opinion, the examiner should consider:

"	A September 2016 service treatment record that indicates the Veteran has had right shoulder pain for six weeks and that his "symptoms appear to be referred from his neck."

"	The Veteran's in-service physical therapy records note "cervical derangement."

Separate opinions and rationales should be provided for secondary causation and secondary aggravation.  

In providing any opinion concerning aggravation, the examiner is advised that a "permanent worsening" is not required to establish secondary service connection on the basis of aggravation; rather, aggravation may include temporary worsening, or flare-ups, of a disability.

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mussey, Sean

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.