Citation Nr: A25031426
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240528-444488
DATE: April 4, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 2016 to May 2023.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2024 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).  The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision by submitting a VA Form 10182 and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  Under direct review, the Board cannot hold a hearing or accept additional evidence into the record.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301 (2019).  Therefore, the Board will consider the evidence of record as of March 4, 2024, for the issues of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, erectile dysfunction, and a right ankle condition, and as of March 27, 2024, for the issues of entitlement to service connection for back and right knee conditions, the dates of the notification letters for the rating decisions on appeal.  Id.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the claims must be remanded to allow the AOJ to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the issuance of the March 2024 rating decisions.  The Board sincerely regrets the additional delay caused by this remand but wishes to assure the Veteran that it is necessary for a full and fair adjudication of his claims.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle condition is remanded.

A remand is necessary as the evidence indicates that there may be relevant service treatment records (STRs) not associated with the Veteran's claims file.  Specifically, the Veteran's STRs include medical records, but his separation report of medical examination is missing despite noting that he would complete a VA examination prior to his separation.  See September 2023 JLV/MTF.  As pertinent STRs are extant and not associated with the file, a remand is necessary to afford the AOJ another opportunity to obtain and associate these records with the claims file. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is remanded.

First, as discussed above, pertinent STRs may be missing from the Veteran's claims file. 

Second, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023.  The Veteran reported onset of back pain to be 2021, which occurred after lifting or field operations.  The November 2023 examiner did not provide an opinion.  A different VA clinician provided a medical opinion from a review of the records in March 2024.  The March 2024 clinician opined that the Veteran's back condition was less likely than not related to service because current available medical evidence of record was silent for back pain/issues during service.  Additionally, she found that any back pain/issues during service would most likely have been acute only as the first time that any back pain/issues/conditions were noted was two to three years after the Veteran's reported onset.  

The Board finds the March 2024 opinion to be inadequate for adjudication purposes.  The March 2024 clinician did not have the Veteran's complete medical history prior to rendering an opinion as STRs may be missing as noted above.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  The clinician also failed to opine whether the Veteran's back condition is related to wear and tear of his duties during service, to include physical training, lifting, and field operations.   Given that the AOJ found the March 2024 opinion adequate, and this was prior to the decision on the claim, the Board finds that this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand under the AMA and implementing regulations.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Accordingly, remand for a new VA examination and etiological opinion is warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

The Veteran appeared for a VA examination in November 2023 and reported that he had persistent right knee pain with running and squats.  The November 2023 examiner did not provide an etiological opinion.  A different VA clinician provided a medical opinion from a review of the records in March 2024.  The March 2024 clinician noted that the Veteran had bipartite patella, which was shown on the Veteran's STRs, and found that such condition was a congenital defect/abnormality, not a disease process.  She opined that the Veteran's right knee congenital superolateral bipartite patella was less likely than not related to the superolateral bipartite patella during service.  

To this end, the Board recognizes that a congenital "defect" is not a "disease or injury" within the meaning of applicable legislation and thus is not capable of being service connected for VA compensation purposes.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 4.9.  Service connection is permissible, however, for "diseases" (but not "defects") of congenital, developmental, or familial origin if the evidence, as a whole, shows that the manifestation of the disease in service constituted "aggravation" of the disease within the meaning of applicable VA regulations. VAOPGCPREC 82-92 (July 18, 1990); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 3.306.  Although service connection cannot be granted for a congenital or developmental "defect," such a defect can be subject to a superimposed disease or injury, and if that disease or injury occurred during military service, service connection may be warranted for the resultant disability.  VAOPGCPREC 82-92 (July 18, 1990).  However, though the March 2024 clinician determined the Veteran's right knee condition was a congenital defect, she did not provide an opinion as to whether there was any superimposed injury or disease in service that resulted in additional disability. 

Thus, on remand, a new VA examination is warranted.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991) (the Board is prohibited from exercising its own independent judgment to resolve medical questions); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) (2019) (a medical examination or opinion is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. With the Veteran's assistance as appropriate, obtain and associate with the Veteran's electronic claims file the entirety of the Veteran's service treatment records and post-service treatment records, including private medical records, particularly records from her period of active duty service in the U.S. Army and periods of service in the U.S. Navy and Army Reserves. 

All attempts to obtain these records pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c) must be documented.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his back condition.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination. 

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following: 

(a.) Obtain a detailed history of the Veteran's back condition, to include all symptomology. 

(b.) For each diagnosed condition, determine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's back condition had its onset in or is related to service, to include a CONCEDED in-service incurrence, as well as wear and tear, to include physical training, lifting, and field operations.  See March 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative. 

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his right knee condition.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination. 

Based on review of the record and an examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following: 

(a.) Obtain a detailed history of the Veteran's right knee condition, to include all symptomology, and all diagnosis associated with the Veteran's right knee. 

(b.) For any congenital defects, determine whether there was any superimposed injury or disease in service that resulted in additional disability. 

(c.) For any right knee condition that is not a congenital defect, determine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right knee condition had its onset in or is related to service. 

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed. 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. L. Park, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.