Citation Nr: A25031822
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 210506-158361
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 100 percent for Meniere's disease, with paroxysmal positional vertigo and chronic non suppurative otitis media, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

The issue of entitlement to Special Monthly Compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) is dismissed.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum 100 percent schedular rating for Meniere's disease for the entire appeal period.

2. The Veteran's residuals of TBI reflect at most a level 3 facet evaluation.

3. The issue of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) has been adjudicated favorably in a separate Board decision.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Because the Veteran had a 100 percent schedular rating for Meniere's disease for the entire period on appeal, there is no legal basis for a higher schedular rating.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6205; Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for TBI have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8045.

3. There is no current case or controversy as to the issue of entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.201.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1987 to April 1991.  He was awarded a Combat Action Ribbon, Southwest Asia Service Medal, and Kuwait Liberation Medal, among others.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2021 rating decision of an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the May 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  Due to the special circumstances of this case, to include the issuance of separate Board decisions and a hearing held in May 2024 with respect to one of the other docketed appeals, the Veteran withdrew his hearing request on December 5, 2024.  Therefore, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2021 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Concerning the Veteran's recent arguments received by VA in March 2025, they are not relevant to the issues adjudicated herein.  The Board does not have the authority to reevaluate the Veteran's TBI or residuals thereof dating back decades.  However, the Veteran may file a claim for clear and unmistakable error, if applicable, and/or a claim for service connection for any other disabilities claimed due to his service-connected TBI.  

Increased Rating - Meniere's Disease.

This appeal arises from the Veteran's disagreement with the February 2021 rating decision that continued a 100 percent rating for Meniere's disease.  The Veteran has been in receipt of the maximum schedular rating of 100 percent for Meniere's disease under Diagnostic Code 6205 during the entire appeal period.  Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted as a matter of law.

Accordingly, the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 100 percent for Meniere's disease is denied as matter of law.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

Increased Rating - TBI.

Disability ratings are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  Id.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where the veteran is appealing the rating for an already established service-connected condition, his present level of disability is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively weighs against a claim, the claim is denied.

Diagnostic Code 8045 provides that there are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from TBIs and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive, emotional/behavioral, and physical.  Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.  Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.  Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.  In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.  Evaluate cognitive impairment under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.  Evaluate subjective symptoms that are residuals of TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified."  However, separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Evaluate emotional/behavioral dysfunction under § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings-mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.  When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Evaluate physical (including neurological) dysfunction based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: Motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of TBI.  For residuals not listed here that are reported on an examination, evaluate under the most appropriate diagnostic code.  Evaluate each condition separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation and combine under § 4.25 the evaluations for each separately rated condition.  The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" contains 10 important facets of a TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms.  It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total."  However, not every facet has every level of severity.  The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.  Assign a 100 percent evaluation if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets.  If no facet is evaluated as "total," assign the overall percentage evaluation based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent.  For example, assign a 70 percent evaluation if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Accordingly, for the Veteran to be entitled to a rating in excess of 70 percent under Diagnostic Code 8045, he would have to have "total" impairment in one of the applicable facets.

Total impairment in memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions is demonstrated with objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional impairment.

Total impairment in judgment is demonstrated with evidence of severely impaired judgment for even routine and familiar decisions, usually unable to identify, understand, and weigh the alternatives, understand the consequences of choices, and make a reasonable decision.  For example, unable to determine appropriate clothing for current weather conditions or judge when to avoid dangerous situations or activities.

Total impairment in orientation is demonstrated with evidence of the veteran being consistently disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation.

Total impairment in motor activity is demonstrated with evidence of severely decreased motor activity due to apraxia.

Total impairment in visual spatial orientation is demonstrated with evidence of severe impairment, such as being unable to touch or name own body parts when asked by the examiner, identify the relative position in space of two different objects, or find the way from one room to another in a familiar environment.

Total impairment in communication is demonstrated with evidence of complete inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both.  Unable to communicate basic needs.

Total impairment in consciousness is demonstrated with evidence of persistently altered state of consciousness, such as vegetative state, minimally responsive state, coma.

The facets of social interaction, subjective symptoms, and neurobehavioral effects do not provide for total impairment.

Here, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent for TBI under Diagnostic Code 8045 is not warranted.  

The Veteran has reported TBI symptoms to include loss of balance, dizziness, memory loss, and cognitive impairment such as impaired concentration and attention.  

VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran has been assessed as oriented to all spheres.  See February 2020 VA treatment record.  A January 2020 VA treatment record indicated good use of cognitive skills.  Mental status assessment showed that the Veteran was oriented and had fair judgment and insight.  Another January 2020 VA treatment record indicated poor judgment and insight during a mental status evaluation.

In a June 2020 opinion, Dr. P.B. stated that the Veteran had memory issues, and associated symptoms of vertigo, nausea, headaches, blurry vision, and headaches.  On tele-health examination, Dr. P.B. found that the Veteran had a normal affect, was able to converse normally, and was not in obvious distress.  Dr. P.B. noted the Veteran's statement that he had poor short-term memory and could not recall what he ate or did the day prior.

In June 2020, the Veteran submitted a statement noting that he had headaches; sleep impairment; tinnitus; chronic fatigue; and severe short term memory loss.  He stated that he had severe dizziness that caused near-constant nausea.  He noted that that he had difficulty with concentration and getting his thoughts out.  He could not prepare meals due to dizziness and worried about showering due to his dizziness and loss of balance.  The Veteran also reported that his medications were managed by his caregiver.  He had to be reminded when his rent was due.  The Veteran stated that he needed help writing his statement because he could not get his thoughts out and could not sit at a computer for more than a few minutes without feeling dizzy.  

In a June 2020 opinion, Dr. C.B. referenced the diagnostic criteria under Diagnostic Code 8045.  Dr. C.B. indicated that the Veteran should be rated as 100 percent under the neurocognitive facet.  Dr. C.B also stated that Meniere's disease should not be separately evaluated and instead evaluated under Diagnostic Code 8045.

A July 2020 VA examination report for TBI shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with TBI and Meniere's disease as a residual of his TBI.  There was objective evidence on testing of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions  resulting in mild functional impairment; the Veteran had normal judgment; frequently inappropriate social interaction; always oriented to person, time, place, and situation; normal motor activity; mildly impaired visual spatial orientation; and three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work; family or other close relationships.  The Veteran had multiple symptoms including fatigue, dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea, blurry vision, headaches, insomnia, tinnitus, all occurred intermittently and commonly on a daily basis.  The examiner also found that the Veteran had one or more neurobehavioral effects, described as mistrustful of others, easily frustrated, easily irritable, lack of motivation due to fatigue, intermittent lack of empathy, moodiness associated with the frustration and instability.  He was found to be able to communicate by spoken and written language.  He had normal consciousness.  The examiner indicated TBI residuals of hearing loss and/or tinnitus, visual impairment, gait, coordination and balance, headaches, dizziness or vertigo, and mental disorder.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had additional confirmed/documented mental health disorder of PTSD with associated depression and that the Veteran had nightmares likely secondary to PTSD and short-term memory loss, tinnitus, nausea, blurry vision, and headaches associated with TBI.  

A July 2020 VA examination report shows a diagnosis of migraine headaches.  The Veteran reported associated dizziness, nausea, lightheadedness, blurry vision, seeing stars, light and sound sensitivity, and fatigue.  He had issues with inability to focus.  He often woke up with inability to focus.  The Veteran had pulsating or throbbing head pain, and pain on both sides of the head.  He had nausea, sensitivity to light, and changes in vision.  He had characteristic prostrating attacks once every month.

An August 2020 VA examination report for ear conditions shows a diagnosis of Meniere's disease with paroxysmal positional vertigo and chronic nonsuppurative otitis media.  The Veteran had ringing in the ears, dizziness, difficulty maintaining balance, and nausea.  The report identified symptoms attributed to Meniere's disease as tinnitus, vertigo, and staggering.  Romberg test was abnormal or positive for unsteadiness and the Dix Hallpike test was abnormal, noting dizziness with maneuver.  The examiner found that the Veteran was unable to complete work related tasks requiring a keen sense of balance such as walking/standing on elevated surfaces or climbing ladders due to imbalance and dizziness.

An August 2020 VA examination report for PTSD noted that the Veteran had depression, anxiety, and insomnia due to PTSD.  The examiner opined that the Veteran had a diagnosed TBI and that the Veteran had symptoms of having meals prepared and neglecting activities of daily living and memory loss as a result of TBI.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had memory loss as a result of TBI and that his TBI caused disorientation, forgetfulness, memory issues, and medical issues such as nausea and migraines.  The report noted a finding of mild memory loss and impairment of short and long-term memory and an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.

An August 2020 VA examination report for hearing loss and tinnitus shows a diagnosis of tinnitus.

A September 2020 VA examination report for eye conditions shows no diagnosis of an eye condition.

In a January 2021 opinion, the Veteran's private physician, Dr. C.B., noted that the Veteran had TBI symptoms of memory loss, headaches, imbalance, nausea, dizziness, vertigo, and blurry vision that are totally disabling.  He indicated that the Veteran met the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating for PTSD and opined that the Veteran's cognitive impairment should be rated as 100 percent disabling.  The crux of the opinion is focused on entitlement to SMC and that the symptoms of the Veteran's Meniere's disease should instead be evaluated under the criteria of TBI to allow for SMC at the (t) rate.  

A February 2021 VA examination for TBI indicated a diagnosis of TBI and vertigo.  The examiner noted that although the Veteran had been diagnosed with PTSD, the examiner did not believe his dizziness with nausea and imbalance was related to PTSD.  His PTSD was more associated with his startle response to loud noises, flashbacks, overall hypervigilance, and other mood/affect and behavioral symptoms.  The report shows that the Veteran had no complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or memory function.  He had normal judgment, normal social interaction, routinely appropriate social interaction, and was always oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  His motor activity was normal and visual spatial orientation was normal.  The Veteran had three or more subjective symptoms that moderately interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work; family or other close relationships.  In this respect, he had marked vertigo impacting two to three hours of his waking day, associated with nausea and imbalance.  The examiner found that the Veteran did not have any neurobehavioral effects.  He was found to be able to communicate by spoken and written language.  He had normal consciousness.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had residuals of dizziness and vertigo.  

A February 2021 VA examination report for ear conditions show an assessment of vestibular disorder.  The examiner noted symptoms of tinnitus and vertigo.  Romberg test was abnormal.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's TBI symptoms do not result in "total" impairment in any of the facets under Diagnostic Code 8045.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board finds that the most probative evidence does not reflect severe impairment in any of the applicable facets under Diagnostic Code 8045.  The Board again emphasizes that the facets of social interaction, subjective symptoms, and neurobehavioral effects do not provide for total impairment.  

The Board recognizes that the Veteran is separately evaluated at 100 percent for Meniere's disease and 100 percent for PTSD.  He is also rated at 50 percent for migraine headaches.  To the extent that the Veteran has argued that, in order to maximize his benefits, i.e., qualify for SMC at the (t) level, some symptoms of Meniere's disease should be evaluated under Diagnostic Code 8045.  However, SMC at the (t) rate has already been granted by a separate Board decision as a result of his 100-percent rated TBI residuals with Meniere's disease.  Moreover, Diagnostic Code 8045 specifically requires that Meniere's disease be rated under its applicable diagnostic code.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8045.  The Veteran's dizziness, loss of balance, and tinnitus have been related to this diagnosis.  See August 2020, February 2021 VA examination reports.  Moreover, without the diagnosis of Meniere's disease, these symptoms would be rated under the subjective symptoms facet, which does not provide for a total disability rating.  

As to the Veteran's migraine headaches, he has been assigned the maximum 50 percent schedular rating.  Because this is a distinct diagnosis, the rating criteria under Diagnostic Code 8045 direct that the migraine headaches be separately evaluated under Diagnostic Code 8100.  Again, even if the Veteran's headaches were subjective and rated under Diagnostic Code 8045, these reports would be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet, which does not allow for a total rating.  

As to the PTSD, the Veteran is assigned a 100 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 9411.  The rating criteria for TBI direct that emotional/behavioral dysfunction be evaluated under § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings-mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.  Here, the Veteran's subjective and/or neurobehavioral symptoms have warranted the assignment of a 70 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8045.  The Board again emphasizes that the facets of social interaction, subjective symptoms, and neurobehavioral effects do not provide for total impairment.  Further, the August 2020 VA examination report for PTSD noted that the Veteran's memory loss, disorientation, forgetfulness, memory issues, nausea, and migraines are related to his TBI.  There is no indication that any overlapping symptoms between the two have been rated under Code 9411 as opposed to TBI to maximize his benefits.  Again, the evidence does not show objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional impairment, severely impaired judgment, consistently disoriented to two or more of the four aspects (person, time, place, situation) of orientation; motor activity severely decreased due to apraxia); severely impaired visual spatial orientation; or complete inability to communicate either by spoken language, written language, or both, or to comprehend spoken language, written language, or both, or unable to communicate basic needs; or persistently altered state of consciousness, such as vegetative state, minimally responsive state, coma, to allow for a rating of 100 percent under Diagnostic Code 8045.  

The Board recognizes the arguments requesting that a 100 percent rating be awarded under Diagnostic Code 8045 to allow for the receipt of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t).  As noted in the Introduction, a separate Board decision has granted that benefit effective September 7, 2018, due to the 100 percent rated residuals of TBI, including Meniere's disease.  

Moreover, the Board acknowledges and has considered Dr. C.B.'s opinion that the Veteran's cognitive functioning should be evaluated at 100 percent under Diagnostic Code 8045.  However, the Board assigns greater probative value to the two TBI VA examination reports that involved examination of the Veteran, review of the evidence, and do not support a finding of objective evidence on testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in severe functional impairment to warrant a rating in excess of 70 percent.  To the extent that Dr. C.B. challenged the medical credentials of the VA examiners, the Board notes there is no requirement that a doctor in a specific specialty perform the VA examination to assess the current severity of TBI.   

In deciding the above, the Board has considered the lay reports, including that of his caretaker, regarding the Veteran's severe short-term memory loss and cognitive issues including difficulty with concentration and attention, and executive functions.  However, the Board assigns greater probative value to the VA examination reports specific to TBI noting that the objective evidence did not reflect severe functional impairment.  

The Board also recognizes the medical literature submitted by the Veteran.  However, the literature does not support a finding that the Veteran warrants a 100 percent disability rating for TBI.  These articles are of a general nature including the effects of TBI and PTSD, and do not relate to the specific circumstances of the Veteran's case.  Accordingly, they are of no probative value as to whether the Veteran's TBI should be rated at 100 percent rating under Code 8045.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against a rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's TBI.  The claim for a higher rating is denied.  

SMC(t) Dismissal.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105. 

Here, the issue as to entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) is on appeal from a February 2021 rating decision.  The rating decision noted that the Veteran had filed a January 2021 supplemental claim.  As explained in the Introduction, the issue of entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) has already been granted in a separate Board decision (under Docket Number 201222-139291).  The Veteran has requested SMC at the (t) level and has not requested any other SMC.  See May 2024 hearing testimony; August 2024 arguments; March 2025 arguments.  Accordingly, the Board will dismiss the issue of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(t) as there is no longer a justiciable case or controversy concerning the issue.   

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seay, Jessica M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.