Citation Nr: A25031229
Decision Date: 04/04/25	Archive Date: 04/04/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-443170
DATE: April 4, 2025

ORDER

An effective date of January 7, 2020, but no earlier for the grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) is granted.

REMANDED

An initial 20 percent rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is remanded.

An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for nasal polyps is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.The Veteran's claim seeking service connection for IVDS was denied by the AOJ in April 2017.

2. The Veteran filed a new claim seeking service connection for IVDS in January 2020.

3. The AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's IVDS in March 2022.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an effective date of January 7, 2020, but no earlier for the grant of service connection for IVDS have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active-duty service from January 2014 to May 2014, and in June 2016.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the increased rating and service connection claims, any evidence the Board could not consider in regard to those claims will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Effective Date

In general, the effective date for the grant of service connection based upon an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance is either the day following separation from active service, or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, it will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b).

For effective date purposes, a claim is a formal or informal written communication identifying and requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1 (p). Any communication or action, indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, from a claimant, his or her duly authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of a claimant who is not sui juris, may be considered an informal claim. Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution. If received within one year after the date it was sent to the claimant, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (2017); Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1999).

Generally, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110 ; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The effective date of an award of disability compensation shall be the day following separation from service or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year of separation, otherwise the date of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2).

1. An effective date of January 7, 2020, but no earlier for the grant of service connection for IVDS

The Veteran seeks an effective date prior to October 6, 2021, for the grant of service connection for his service-connected lumbosacral strain with Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS). After a review of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the correct effective date is January 7, 2020, but no earlier. 

By way of history, the Veteran's claim was first denied by the AOJ in September 2017. The Veteran did not appeal the decision within a year and the decision became final. However, he filed a new claim seeking service connection for the disability on January 7, 2020. He also filed a supplemental claim in regard to his bilateral lower extremity radicular disabilities on October 6, 2021 (the effective date for his IVDS assigned by the AOJ). In March 2022, the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for IVDS was granted and the effective date assigned was October 6, 2021. The AOJ indicated that this was the date on which a supplemental claim was submitted by the Veteran and that it was more than a year removed from the last final denial of his IVDS claim. 

The October 2021 supplemental claim does not mention his IVDS. Additionally, it does not appear that the AOJ adjudicated his January 2020 claim until March 2022.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400 provides that the effective date for the grant of service connection is the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later. The Board finds that January 7, 2020, is the date on which the Veteran submitted his claim and therefore should be the effective date assigned to his IVDS disability. However, an earlier date is not available as there was no appeal of the 2017 denial of service connection. The Veteran's claim is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. An initial 20 percent rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is remanded.

2. An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

3. An initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for nasal polyps is remanded.

The Veteran seeks higher ratings for his service connected IVDS and associated bilateral lower extremity radicular disabilities, he also seeks service connection for nasal polyps. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board determines that the claims must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 

The Veteran's low back and bilateral lower extremity radicular disabilities were last examined by a VA examiner in February 2022. The VA is required to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code. In so doing, an examiner must discount any ameliorating effects of medication and indicate that such effects were not considered and were, in fact, discounted in formulating opinions pertaining to range of motion and functional impairment. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012); see also Ingram v. Collins, 23 Vet. App. 1798. (2025) (holding that the Board is to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted in assessing musculoskeletal ratings as such effects are not contemplated therein and, therefore, taking medication may make a veteran appear less disabled than in reality). In this case, the VA examiner(s), in rendering findings, did not note or indicate consideration and discount of any ameliorative effects of the Veteran's documented daily use of NSAIDS when describing functional limitations in all worst-case scenarios (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.). Therefore, the Board finds the examination and opinion inadequate. The AOJ's reliance on that inadequate opinion is pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring remand to correct.

For the Veteran's nasal polyps, he has submitted statements noting that they pre-dated active-duty service but believes that they were aggravated during training. The February 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's nasal polyps could not be linked to service and relied on silence in the service treatment records and the gap in time between service and diagnosis. This is an inadequate basis for such a finding and does not reference the Veteran's theory of entitlement. The examination and opinion are inadequate. The failure of the AOJ to obtain a proper examination and opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error to be corrected upon remand. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for new VA examinations to determine the current severity of his IVDS and bilateral lower extremity radicular disabilities. The claims folder must be made available to and be reviewed by any examiner(s).  All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

The full range of motion testing must be performed in both active and passive motion, in weightbearing and non-weightbearing with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.

If the examiner(s) is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, they should clearly explain why that is so.

The examiner(s) should address in detail the additional functional impairment and range of motion loss due to factors such as pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and flare-ups for each disability. The examiner(s) should estimate any additional loss of motion to the best of their ability. 

The examiner(s) must specifically evaluate the severity of the Veteran's IVDS and bilateral lower extremity radicular disabilities, including during flare-ups and speak to the severity of his symptoms absent the ameliorative effects of any medication that would alleviate his symptoms, including both prescriptions and over-the-counter medications.

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner(s) should state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. Any provided opinion must include a discussion of the Veteran's lay statements.

If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

2. Schedule the Veteran for new examinations, with an appropriate clinician, to determine the nature, extent, onset, and etiology of his nasal polyps. 

The complete claims file should be made available to the examiner(s).  The examiner(s) should provide opinions as to whether it is at least as likely as not that his nasal polyps are etiologically related to the Veteran's period of service, or to another diagnosed disorder.  

The examiner(s) is reminded that the secondary service connection opinions must discuss both causation and aggravation (beyond a natural course) separately.

The examiner is also asked to determine if the Veteran's nasal polyps pre-date his active-duty service and if so, were they aggravated (beyond a natural course) due to his service.

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. Any provided opinion must include a discussion of the Veteran's lay statements. 

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Hernan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.