Citation Nr: A25031979
Decision Date: 04/07/25	Archive Date: 04/07/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-457571
DATE: April 7, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for bilateral eye strain headache prior to May 8, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral eye strain headache from May 8, 2023, and continuing, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to May 8, 2023, the Veteran's headaches did not cause characteristic prostrating attacks.

2. From May 8, 2023 and continuing, the Veteran's completely prostrating and prolonged attacks were not very frequent or productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable disability rating for bilateral eye strain headache prior to May 8, 2023 are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral eye strain headache from May 8, 2023, and continuing, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from February 2001 to July 2022.  This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board recognizes the contentions of record in which the Veteran and his representative have characterized the appeal as one for an increased rating and an earlier effective date.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182.  However, the arguments in support clarify that the Veteran is not seeking an earlier effective date.  The Veteran is seeking a disability rating of at least 50 percent for the entire appeal period.  The Veteran has continuously pursued his claim since service connection was granted in the August 2022 rating decision, which awarded service connection from August 1, 2022, the day following discharge.  

The Veteran is not seeking an effective date earlier than August 1, 2022.  Rather, he is seeking a maximum schedular rating for the entire review period, which starts on August 1, 2022.  As the AOJ's decision has awarded a staged rating, the Board has characterized the issues on appeal as entitlement to a compensable rating prior to May 8, 2023 and a rating in excess of 30 percent thereafter.

Controlling Law

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

Importantly, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  However, when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected disability from a nonservice-connected condition, such signs and symptoms must be attributed to the service-connected disability.  Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The Veteran's headaches are currently rated by analogy under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100 for migraines.  The Veteran is rated as noncompensable from August 1, 2022 to May 7, 2023, and as 30 percent disabling thereafter.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.  Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent maximum rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Use of the conjunctive "and" means that all the conditions listed in a provision must be met.  See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334, 337 (1991).

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks," which describes the nature and severity of headaches, is left undefined by governing regulation.  For reference, the Board notes that "prostration" is "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012).  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe headaches that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating also contains several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 253 (2018).  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the Veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Last, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).  As a point of reference, "severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree.  See Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 999 (11th Ed. 2007).  

In general, where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, a higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  However, this rule does not apply to ratings for certain disabilities, including migraines or analogous headaches evaluated under DC 8100.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.  The rating criteria in DC 8100 are successive, meaning that criteria for the lower rating must be met before a higher disability rating may be awarded.  See id. at 247, 251-54.  Because the criteria are successive, 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 is inapplicable, meaning that a higher rating cannot be granted based on a finding that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating.  See id. at 253-54.  However, any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of the disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  See id. at 254; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

1. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for bilateral eye strain headache prior to May 8, 2023

The Veteran is seeking at least a 50 percent rating for his headaches throughout the appeal period.  See March 2024 Higher Level Review Informal Conference; July 2024 VA Form 10182.  For the reasons that follow, the evidence persuasively weighs against a compensable rating prior to May 8, 2023.

During a May 2022 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral eye strain headache.  The Veteran described a 2022 onset of ocular strain.  He stated that he had been having discomfort behind his eyes with prolonged periods of screen time.  He treated the condition with computer-specific glasses and glare reducing computer screen devices.  Since onset, the Veteran's condition was stable.  According to the examination report, the Veteran's treatment plan did not include taking medication for the diagnosed condition.

The May 2022 examiner indicated that the Veteran experienced headache pain on both sides of his head.  He also experienced sensitivity to light.  Head pain typically lasted for 1 day.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain.  The Veteran also did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine pain that were productive of severe economic inadaptability.  According to the examination report, the Veteran's headache condition did not impact his ability to work.  The remarks of the examination report reiterated that the Veteran's headache was "bilateral optical tightness episodic pain accompanied by photophobia and aggravated with prolonged screen time."

Treatment records showed that the Veteran would occasionally wake up with a headache, in the context of treatment for obstructive sleep apnea, for which the Veteran is also service connected.  See February 2022 Service Treatment Record.  The Veteran also reported frequent or severe headaches at separation, and the Veteran clarified in a comment that his indication meant that he had 3 to 4 headaches per month.  See March 2022 Report of Medical History at Separation.  

Based on this evidence, a rating of 10 percent prior to May 8, 2023, is not warranted because the Veteran's headaches did not cause characteristic prostrating attacks during this period.  Although the Veteran's headaches met the frequency required for a ten percent rating, his headaches were not sufficiently severe.  In making this determination, the Board considers the Veteran's lay statements during service in conjunction with the May 2022 VA examination report.

Specifically, at separation, the Veteran indicated that he experienced frequent or severe headaches.  However, the Veteran's clarifying description of this indication was that he experienced headaches 3 to 4 times per month.  Thus, the Board finds as a matter of fact that the Veteran was representing that he experienced frequent headaches rather than severe headaches.  

This interpretation is compelled by the evidence in its totality.  During the May 2022 VA examination, the Veteran described "discomfort behind the eyes," rather than severe pain.  Although he experienced "[p]ain on both sides of the head," he did not experience "constant" head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, or pain that worsened with physical activity.  Although the Veteran experienced sensitivity to light, he did not experience nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to sound, changes in vision, or sensory changes.  His headache pain typically lasted less than a day in duration.  Accordingly, as the examination report indicated stable symptomatology since onset, it is most compelling to view the Veteran's March 2022 statement as an indication that he had frequent headaches rather than severe headaches when he filed his claim during service.

The Board finds the Veteran's statement about the frequency of his headaches to be competent and credible.  However, the rating criteria for 10 percent require more than frequent headaches.  While experiencing 3 to 4 headaches per month meets the criteria of an average of one headache in two months over the last several months, the Veteran did not have "characteristic prostrating attacks" because his headaches did not produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.  

The Board finds that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks, as his level of pain and other symptomatology was relatively mild.  See May 2022 VA Examination Report.  Indeed, the May 2022 VA examiner acknowledged the Veteran's pain and sensitivity to light, but nonetheless found that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks even considering the Veteran's symptoms.  The Veteran's headache pain was short in duration and had no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.  Thus, the Veteran was able to proceed with normal activities relatively unimpeded during a headache.  None of the Veteran's statements suggest that his symptoms prevented him from engaging in normal daily activities.

The Veteran's lack of other symptoms further supports the VA examiner's determination that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks.  The Veteran did not have nausea, vomiting, changes in vision, sensory changes, or sensitivity to sound due to his headaches.  See May 2022 VA Examination Report.  The Veteran has not asserted, nor is there evidence of, any need to lie down or remain still during a headache, which are some examples of symptoms which might indicate extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.  As will be addressed below, the Veteran later reported the need to lie down in a dark room and rest, but this statement was made during a different portion of the appeal period and does not reflect the Veteran's symptomatology prior to May 8, 2023.  See May 2023 VA Examination Report.  As not every requirement for a 10 percent rating is met, a higher 10 percent rating is not warranted.  Since the rating criteria are successive, the Veteran has not met the criteria for any rating in excess of 10 percent, either.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 251 54.  No other diagnostic codes are applicable such that a higher rating is warranted.  

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8100.  Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral eye strain headaches prior to May 8, 2023, is denied. 

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral eye strain headache from May 8, 2023, and continuing

The Veteran is seeking at least a 50 percent rating for his headaches throughout the appeal period.  See March 2024 Higher Level Review Informal Conference; July 2024 VA Form 10182.  For the reasons that follow, the evidence persuasively weighs against a disability rating in excess of 30 percent from May 8, 2023, and continuing.

During a May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with tension headaches.  The Veteran reported a 2008 onset of headaches.  He also reported a history of tension headaches that occurred on a weekly basis with worsening pain on both sides of his head.  The Veteran reported taking over-the-counter medication and the need to "lie down in [a] dark room and rest to alleviate the pain."  The examination report listed the Veteran's military history of working in a submarine atmosphere.  

The Veteran reported that his symptoms had progressed or worsened since their onset.  He described his symptoms at the time of the examination as 1 to 2 "bad" headaches per month, sensitivity to light, the need to wear sunglasses when outside, and the need to stay home.  The examination report clarified that the Veteran's treatment plan did not include taking medication for the diagnosed condition.

The May 2023 examiner listed the Veteran's symptoms as headache pain on both sides of the head and pulsating or throbbing head pain.  The Veteran also experienced non-headache symptoms of sensitivity to light and sound.  His head pain lasted less than a day.  The Veteran experienced characteristic prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain greater than once per month.  He also experienced completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine pain once a month.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's headache condition impacted his ability to work in conditions with exposure to bright lights and loud noises because those working conditions might exacerbate the headache condition.  The Veteran stated he predominantly worked in IT, and even though he had at least one "bad" headache per month, he did not report missing any work in the past 2 months related to headaches.

Preliminarily, the Board notes that the Veteran's statement that he needed to lie down in a dark room and rest to alleviate headache pain reflects his symptomatology from May 8, 2023, and continuing, rather than during the first portion of the appeal period.  Although the statement is listed in the examination report under the section entitled "Details of onset," the statement is listed in present tense, rather than past tense, demonstrating that the Veteran was representing his symptoms at the time of the examination.  Furthermore, the statement is consistent with the rest of the May 2023 VA examination report and inconsistent with the May 2022 VA examination report, to include the lay statements made in each respective report.  Thus, the Board finds as a matter of fact that the Veteran's description reflects symptomatology in May 2023 and continuing.

The Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran has used medication, including Tylenol, to treat his headache pain.  The Board acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use," unless such effects are otherwise contemplated by a particular diagnostic code.  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025); see also Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  The Board notes, however, that Ingram does not address how the Board is to discount the beneficial effects of medication.  On the particular facts of this case, the Board finds that remand for an additional VA examination or opinion is not necessary, as the evidence of record does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.

Specifically, the May 2023 VA examination report indicated that the Veteran's treatment plan did not include taking medication for the diagnosed condition.  In light of this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's medication use was infrequent and remand for an addendum opinion would not impact the Veteran's disability rating.  Thus, the Board finds that the VA examiner, in listing the Veteran's symptoms and the functional impact of his headaches, did not consider the ameliorative effects of medication and listed the Veteran's symptomatology at its worst.  As such, the Board finds the report and the remainder of the evidentiary record adequate to base a decision, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor.

The Board finds that the lay and medical evidence of record does not support a disability rating in excess of 30 percent from May 8, 2023, and continuing.  While the Veteran had completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain, they were not "very frequent," or "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  According to the May 2023 VA examination report, the Veteran had both completely prostrating and prolonged attacks; and characteristic prostrating attacks that were not completely prostrating and prolonged.  Although the latter occurred greater than once a month, the former only occurred once per month.  Similarly, the Veteran described having 1 to 2 "bad" headaches per month, which is consistent with the May 2023 VA examiner's representation regarding the frequency of completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain.  Thus, the Veteran's completely prostrating and prolonged attacks, which occur once per month, do not occur with sufficient frequency to warrant a higher rating.  See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  

Even resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, equating "bad" headaches with completely prostrating and prolonged attacks, the Veteran's statement would only indicate one such attack per month and sometimes two per month.  This frequency is not "very frequent."  On the other hand, the Veteran's prostrating attacks that are not completely prostrating do occur with sufficient frequency, as the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks that are not completely prostrating greater than once a month (and perhaps even weekly in light of the Veteran's medical history), those headaches are not severe enough to warrant a higher rating.  See generally March 2022 Report of Medical History at Separation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Additionally, the Veteran's completely prostrating and prolonged attacks were productive of some economic inadaptability, but that economic inadaptability was not severe in degree.  As noted, severe means very painful, very harmful, or of a great degree.  The May 2023 VA examination report showed that the Veteran would be limited in working conditions with exposure to bright lights and loud noises.  However, the Veteran would remain unimpeded in many other working conditions.  In his employment working in IT, the Veteran did not miss any work in the two months prior to the examination because of his headache condition.  Thus, while his headaches caused some economic inadaptability, the amount was not of great degree.

Because the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8100.  Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for bilateral eye strain headaches from May 8, 2023, and continuing, is denied.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Garcia, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.