Citation Nr: A25030165
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-453321
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 70 percent for an unspecified anxiety disorder with recurrent depressive disorder (psychiatric disability) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) solely due to unspecified anxiety disorder with recurrent depressive disorder is denied.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the entire appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and total social impairment.

2. The Veteran's service-connected unspecified anxiety disorder with recurrent depressive disorder alone did not preclude gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational experience.

3. The Veteran does not have a single disability rated as total along with additional disabilities that total 60 percent.

4. The evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran was substantially confined to his dwelling and immediate premises.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating higher than 70 percent for a psychiatric disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

The criteria for the grant of TDIU solely due to unspecified anxiety disorder with recurrent depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.341, 3.655, 4.16.

The criteria for SMC at the housebound rate are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1989 to August 1995.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2023 rating decision.  Prior to this decision, the claim was denied in a March 2023 rating decision, and the Veteran selected higher level review of that decision in April 2023.  The July 2023 rating decision followed. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 rating decision.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the March 2023 decision on appeal.  Id. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claims of service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

With regard to the claim for a TDIU, the Board notes that, in his July 2024 IHP, the Veteran's representative indicated that the Veteran's psychiatric disability alone caused a TDIU. Therefore, the Board has broadened its consideration accordingly. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Increased Rating

A disability rating is determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings to apply, VA will assign the higher rating if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Otherwise, it will assign the lower rating.  Id. 

The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings," regardless of whether a case involves an initial rating.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-27 (1999).

1. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 70 percent for a psychiatric disability is denied.  

The Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability has been rated 70 percent disabling throughout the period on appeal pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.

Under these criteria, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

Turning to the evidence of record, in January 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA Mental Disorders examination.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified anxiety disorder and depressive disorder.  The Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was summarized as impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, and thinking and/or mood.  His current psychiatric medications included buspirone, sertraline, and trazadone.  The examiner noted the Veterans symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events, impairment of short and long term memory, such as retention of only highly learned material while forgetting complete tasks, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, and obsessional ritual which interfere with routine activities.  The examiner's behavioral observations documented that the Veteran was alert, pleasant, and cooperative, that he maintained adequate eye contact during the examination, and he was casually dressed and appropriately groomed.  The Veteran's symptoms also included irritability and concentration difficulties.  He was capable of managing his financial affairs. Further, the Veteran reported minimal social relationships and that he had one daughter.  See January 2023 C&P Examination.  

In a February 2023 VA psychiatry note, the VA physician documented that the Veteran denied any legal history and any use of alcohol or street drugs.  The VA physician further documented that the Veteran lived alone.  He had a daughter in college, but he had no contact with her.  On mental health examination, the VA physician noted that the Veteran had no gross motor abnormality, he was a reliable historian, was appropriately groomed, was in no apparent distress, he was oriented to person, place, time, and situation, he maintained good eye contact, was pleasant, and had appropriate behavior for current situation, his attitude was friendly, cooperative, and he answered questions, speech was normal in pattern and inflection, he was coherent and not pressured, affect was mood congruent and in full range, his reality was intact with no auditory or visual hallucinations or delusions, thought process was focused, logical, and goal directed, there was no flight of ideas or loosening of association, there was no suicidal or homicidal ideation, he denied feeling hopeless or helpless, his insight and judgment were intact, recent or remote memory was intact in conversation, and his attention span and concentration were adequate.  See March 2023 CAPRI.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial rating higher than 70 percent for a psychiatric disability is not warranted.  

In this case, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran experienced gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; disorientation to time or place; or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Importantly, total social and occupational impairment was not shown. Indeed, while the Veteran has minimal social relationships, the record does not show total social impairment.

As such, the Board finds that the weight of the competent and credible evidence weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disability and the claim is denied.  The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine and finds it inapplicable because the weight of the evidence is against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability solely due to a psychiatric disability is denied.

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or as a result of two or more service-connected disabilities, provided that one of those disabilities is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, attention must be given to:

The Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy, or very heavy) required by the occupation at issue. Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, and reaching, as well as auditory and visual limitations; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. Factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that his psychiatric disability alone caused a TDIU. The Board notes that in an August 2023 rating decision, entitlement to a TDIU was already awarded due to the Veteran's headache disorder and IBS, effective May 26, 2015. As such, the Board has limited its analysis to whether the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU solely due to the psychiatric disability. 

As to TDIU based solely on a psychiatric disability, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. 

The Board notes that the Veteran previously completed a VA Form 21-8940, where he indicated that he last worked full time as a car salesman. Further, the Veteran reported that he completed four years of high school. At that time, the Veteran reported that he was unable to work due to his irritable bowel syndrome and migraines.

The Board concludes that there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable solely because of a psychiatric disability. The Board notes that the VA treatment record and the January 2023 VA examination discussed above weigh against so concluding. In that regard, while the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting and that the Veteran had difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner found the Veteran to be alert, pleasant and cooperative. That the Veteran maintained adequate eye contact, and was appropriately groomed. Further, that the Veteran could manage his own financial affairs. Additionally, as noted above, a February 2023 VA physician noted that the Veteran had no gross motor abnormality, he was a reliable historian, was appropriately groomed, was in no apparent distress, he was oriented to person, place, time, and situation, he maintained good eye contact, was pleasant, and had appropriate behavior for current situation, his attitude was friendly, cooperative, and he answered questions, speech was normal in pattern and inflection, he was coherent and not pressured, affect was mood congruent and in full range, his reality was intact with no auditory or visual hallucinations or delusions, thought process was focused, logical, and goal directed, there was no flight of ideas or loosening of association, there was no suicidal or homicidal ideation, he denied feeling hopeless or helpless, his insight and judgment were intact, recent or remote memory was intact in conversation, and his attention span and concentration were adequate.

The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms related to a psychiatric disability alone do not render the Veteran unemployable considering his education, skill, and training. As such, the Board finds that entitlement to a TDIU solely due to a psychiatric disability with recurrent depressive disorder is not warranted.

3. Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound is denied.

Finally, the Board has also considered whether SMC at the housebound rate is warranted.  See Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991); see Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242 (2010). Notably, in the July 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative asserts that the Veteran is entitled to individual unemployability based on his service-connected psychiatric disability alone, as well as the accompanying SMC based on housebound criteria.  The Board notes that the Veteran is currently in receipt of TDIU, to include during an eight-year period when the Veteran's psychiatric disability was not service-connected.  As discussed above, the Veteran's TDIU is not based on his service-connected psychiatric disability alone.  As a result, SMC benefits are also not warranted in this case as the Veteran does not have a single disability rated as total along with additional disabilities that total 60 percent.  See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 293 (2008) (holding that a TDIU rating could qualify for compensation at the 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) rate, but only if the TDIU was based on a single disability).  In the present case, the Veteran's TDIU was awarded based on the Veteran's service-connected headaches and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).  See August 2023 Rating Decision - Narrative.   

Additionally, there is no indication that the Veteran is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disabilities. Indeed, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran has not asserted, that he is substantially confined as a direct result of service-connected disabilities to his dwelling and the immediate premises or, that he is institutionalized, and that it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his lifetime.

Finally, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

I. Cannaday

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rasul, H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.