Citation Nr: A25030918
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250211-516066
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right knee osteoarthritis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee osteoarthritis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle degenerative arthritis, status post ankle surgery, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle degenerative arthritis is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right knee osteoarthritis is related to an in-service injury.

2. The evidence of record is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis is related to an in-service injury.

3. The evidence of record is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right ankle degenerative arthritis, status post ankle surgery, is related to an in-service injury.

4. The evidence of record is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left ankle degenerative arthritis is related to an in-service injury.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for right knee osteoarthritis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for left knee osteoarthritis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for right ankle degenerative arthritis, status post ankle surgery, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for left ankle degenerative arthritis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1968 to April 1970. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In that decision, the RO denied service connection for disabilities related to the Veteran's left and right knees and left and right ankles.

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), "a claimant [has] the later of one year from the date that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement (NOD) to change the NOD and select a different lane, [and] the Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up."  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305, 307 (2024).  However, the right to a particular time period for submission of evidence is allowed to be waived if there is "a voluntary, knowing, and intentional waiver of that right."  Here, while the rating decision on appeal was mailed to the Veteran more than one year from the date of this instant favorable decision, the NOD was filed within the 60-day period identified in 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  However, the benefit sought are being granted in full, and there is no prejudice to the Veteran in issuing a decision at this time.  Moreover, considering the Veteran's advanced docketing status due to age, and his statements and representative's statements reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, the Board finds that he has indicated a desire to forego waiting for the 60-day Williams period to expire.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service disease or injury; and (3) a relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee joint osteoarthritis and left knee joint osteoarthritis (bilateral knee condition). 

In its March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has current diagnoses of left knee joint osteoarthritis and right knee joint osteoarthritis.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings, 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c), and the current disability requirement for both knees has thus been met.

With respect to the in-service injury element, the Veteran honorably served in the Republic of Vietnam, and among other awards and commendations, received the Parachutist Badge, the Air Medal, the Combat Infantryman Badge, the Good Conduct Medal, and the Purple Heart Vietnam Gallantry Cross for a combat injury sustained to his leg.  In his August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim, Form VA 21-4138, the Veteran stated that the extreme daily rigors of infantrymen were exponentially worse during combat operations and subjected his body to massive wear and tear.  The Veteran reported performing numerous parachute jumps while in service that further stressed his body, and that he has experienced knee pain since service.  The Veteran is competent to report that bilateral knee pain began during his active-duty service that involved combat operations, air missions, and parachute jumps, as shown by his military specialty of infantryman and his commendations and medals.  In lay statements, the Veteran has conveyed that these symptoms have been ongoing in nature, beginning in service and continuing through the present.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a veteran is competent to testify regarding observable symptoms); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  As the Veteran has competently and credibly testified to his in-service injury to his left and right knees, the in-service injury element has been met.

The remaining issue is whether there is a relationship between the current right and left knee disabilities and the in-service injury.    

During his December 2023 VA knee and lower leg examination, the Veteran reported that he did not recall the precise date of the onset but that his knee X-ray has shown that the joints have been reduced to "bone on bone."  The Board notes that given the limited information in the examination report, it is unclear whether the Veteran was recalling the date of his osteoarthritis diagnoses or the onset of bilateral knee pain.  In the accompanying VA opinion, the examiner explained that osteoarthritis of the knee occurs when the joint cartilage wears out or is damaged, and that this process can be accelerated due to different factors, including frequent occupational stress on the knee.  Despite this analysis, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral knee disability is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury because his service treatment records are silent for any knee condition, no chronic issues have been noted since service, and the osteoarthritis is likely caused by aging and wear and tear. 

Given the Veteran's multiple awards and commendations for his service in combat, and his statements that his bilateral knee disability was incurred in service, the RO requested a new medical opinion.  In a March 2024 opinion, the VA physician noted that VA treatment record showed severe bilateral knee osteoarthritis since approximately December 2014.  The physician acknowledged the Veteran's statements that his knee pain began in service, and explained that although the physical demands of the Veteran's combat likely attributed to soreness and joint stiffness during service, that there were no service treatment records or VA treatment records supporting the Veteran's contention that his condition was incurred in service or persisted and progressed following separation from service.  For this reason, the physician opined that the knee condition is less likely than not consistent with the circumstances, conditions or hardships of the Veteran's military service and that his degenerative arthritis in both knees was likely the result of age-related wear and tear. 

Even though the March 2024 examiner reported the Veteran's competent, consistent, and credible accounts of his in-service injury and the ongoing nature of his bilateral knee pain, as the Veteran's representative argued in his February 2025 submission, the VA physician appears to have discounted this credible lay evidence based on the absence of in-service medical records documenting a complaint or knee-related symptoms during service.  The physician further relied on what she determined to be the earliest medical evidence of the Veteran's knee disability, a 2014 diagnosis of osteoarthritis; in doing so, she failed to account that the earliest VA medical records available for the Veteran are from September 2007, at which time he was diagnosed by x-ray with osteoarthritis in both knees following complaints of knee pain.  The examiner's negative etiological opinion is therefore inadequate, especially in light of the fact that she "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability" and relied on inaccurate evidence of record to dispute the Veteran's contentions of continued pain since service.  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331 (a VA's examiner's opinion, which relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence").  

The reliance of the VA clinicians on the absence of STRs is particularly noteworthy in light of the fact that the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy, as demonstrated by his Purple Heart and Combat Infantryman Badge in particular.  The finding that the Veteran engaged in combat is significant because it allows a combat veteran to use "satisfactory lay or other evidence" to establish that he was injured or incurred a disability while on active duty, even in cases where "there is no official record" that such injury or disability occurred.  Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2012) (quoting 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b)).  Moreover, the fact that the claimed cause of the Veteran's disabilities is therefore established by his testimony, does not prevent him from also invoking the section 1154(b) rules in order to show that he incurred the disability itself while in service.  Reeves, 682 F.3d at 999.  Moreover, Congress enacted the combat statute because of its concern that combat veterans faced "major obstacle[s]" when seeking to assemble the medical records necessary to establish that they suffered an injury or disease while in service. Id (citing H.R. Rep. No. 1157, at 3 (1941)). In many instances, medical records do not survive combat conditions. Id. Furthermore, due to the exigencies of battle, soldiers may not immediately seek medical treatment for combat-related injuries. Id.  The reliance on the absence of evidence in the STRs to find a lack of in-service incurrence is precisely what the combat statute was designed to prevent and further warrants the discounting of the negative opinions in this case.

While the Board could remand the claim for a third medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee disability, such request as to this disability could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is unallowable.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

For the reasons above, the evidence is sufficient to decide the Veteran's service connection claim, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disability is related to in-service injury.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's bilateral knee disability is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102

2. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle degenerative arthritis, status post ankle surgery, and left ankle degenerative arthritis (bilateral ankle condition).

In its March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnoses of left ankle osteoarthritis and right ankle osteoarthritis, status post ankle surgery.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings, 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c), and the current disability requirement for both ankles has thus been met.

With respect to the in-service injury element, in his August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim, Form VA 21-4138, the Veteran stated, for the reasons discussed above related to combat operations, that he has experienced pain in both ankles since service.  The Veteran is competent to report that these observable symptoms have been ongoing in nature, beginning in service and continuing through the present.  Jandreau, 492 F. 3d at 1377.  As the Veteran has competently and credibly testified to his in-service injury to his left and right ankles, the in-service injury element has been met.

The remaining issue is whether there is a relationship between the current right and left ankle disabilities and the in-service injury.    

During his December 2023 VA ankle conditions examination, the Veteran reported that he could not recall the precise onset of his ankle disability.  Again, given the lack of detail in the examination report, it is unclear to the Board whether the Veteran considered the disability related to ankle pain or his diagnosis of bilateral osteoarthritis.  In the December 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner stated the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, but likely related to aging, and wear and tear, as the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for an ankle condition and no chronic issues have been noted since service.      

For the reasons stated above related to the Veteran's lay statements and service records, the RO requested a new VA opinion.  In the March 2024 opinion, the VA physician provided a similar opinion as to the Veteran's bilateral knee disability.  Specifically, the VA physician noted that VA treatment record showed severe bilateral ankle osteoarthritis since approximately 2016.  The physician acknowledged the Veteran's statements that his ankle pain began in service, and explained that although the physical demands of the Veteran's combat likely attributed to soreness and joint stiffness during service, that there were no service treatment records or VA treatment records supporting the Veteran's contention that his ankle condition was incurred in service or persisted and progressed following separation from service.  For this reason, the physician opined that the Veteran's bilateral ankle condition is less likely than not consistent with the circumstances, conditions or hardships of the Veteran's military service and that his degenerative arthritis in both ankles was likely the result of age-related wear and tear. 

For reasons similar to the VA knee opinion, this March 2024 VA ankle opinion is also inadequate.  As the Veteran's representative argued, while the examiner acknowledged the Veteran's competent, consistent, and credible accounts of his in-service injury and the ongoing nature of his bilateral ankle pain, the VA physician appears to have discounted evidence based on the absence of in-service medical records documenting an ankle condition.  The physician further relied on what she determined to be the earliest medical evidence of the Veteran's ankle disability, a 2016 diagnosis of osteoarthritis.  However, in May 2008, eight months after the earliest VA treatment records available, the Veteran complained of right ankle weakness.  In June 2009, after going to a private podiatrist, the Veteran reported a diagnosis of arthritis in that ankle to VA physicians.  VA treatment records from August 2010 show that bilateral ankle joints were enlarged medially and laterally, and that osteoarthritis was seen in the ankle joints, with the right ankle being more symptomatic than the left.  The examiner's negative etiological opinion is therefore inadequate because she failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements as providing sufficient evidence of the etiology of his disability and relied on inaccurate evidence of record to dispute the Veteran's contentions of continued ankle pain since service.  See Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331.  As noted above, the fact that the Veteran engaged in combat further warrants the discounting of the medical opinions that did not consider his credible lay statements about what occurred in service even in the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence.

While the Board could remand the claim for another medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral ankle disability or private medical records, such requests as to this disability could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is unallowable.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c); Andrews, 34 Vet. App. at 225.

(continued on next page)

For the reasons above, the evidence is sufficient to decide the Veteran's service connection claim, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bilateral ankle disability is related to in-service injury.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's bilateral ankle disability is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. T. Mowell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.