Citation Nr: A25030965
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240615-448025
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of October 16, 2020, for the grant of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 50 percent for PTSD is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has continuously perused his service connection claim for his PTSD since October 16, 2020.

2. Throughout the appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date of October 16, 2020, for the grant of service connection for PTSD, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.20, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1987 to September 1991.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review (HLR). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 1, 2021, for the grant of service connection for PTSD

The Veteran contends that the effective date for the grant of PTSD should be earlier than December 1, 2021; specifically, October 16, 2020.

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of pension, compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400, 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).

Effective March 24, 2015, a change in regulation requires claims to be filed on standard forms, eliminating constructive receipt of claims and informal claims. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (p), 3.150, 3.155, 3.160(a). Instead of informal claims, the new regulation provides that a claimant may request an application for benefits, upon receipt of which, the Secretary shall notify the claimant of the information necessary to complete the application form or form prescribed by the Secretary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (a). Non-standard narrative communications/submissions - previously construed as informal claims will be considered a request for an application for benefits. Standard Claims and Appeals Forms, 79 Fed. Reg. 57660, 57661 (Sept. 25, 2014).

The regulation also allows a claimant to submit an intent to file a claim, and VA may recognize the receipt date of the intent to file a claim as the date of claim so long as VA receives the successfully completed claim form within a year. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

The competent and probative evidence shows that the Veteran is entitled to an effective date of October 16, 2020.

Where a claim is subject to modernized review system under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) based on date of initial claim or by election of the veteran, provisions exist that permit an effective date based on date of claim to be "preserved" following issuance of a decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 3.2500. In particular, a veteran "may continuously pursue a claim or an issue by timely and properly filing [an enumerated] administrative review [option]" following issuance of a decision by the AOJ, the Board, or the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. See § 3.2500(c), (h). An effective date will be preserved if a veteran files for administrative review within one year of any decision. § 3.2500(h). However, while the date of claim is preserved when a claim is continuously pursued, the proper effective date is still subject to a finding regarding when entitlement to the benefit sought arose.

The Veteran submitted an intent to file on October 16, 2020, which was acknowledged by the AOJ. The Veteran next submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ, Claim for Compensation, including for PTSD, date-stamped as received at the AOJ on September 21, 2021. 

The claim of service connection for PTSD was adjudicated and denied in a November 2021 rating decision. The Veteran submitted a supplemental claim in in December 2021. See VA Form 20-0995, received December 28, 2021. A March 2022 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 50 percent rating, effective December 1, 2021. See Notification letter dated March 18, 2022. In response to that decision, the Veteran submitted a Request for Higher-Level review in March 2023. See VA Form 20-0996, received March 16, 2023. The AOJ adjudicated the HLR request in the June 2023 rating decision. 

The Veteran has continuously pursued the claim of service connection for PTSD since he submitted the intent to file a claim on October 16, 2020. The December 2021 supplemental claim and March 2023 request for HLR were timely.  Thus, the Veteran has continuously pursued his effective date of October 16, 2020, as the earliest possible effective date.

The reference above to "the date entitlement arose" is not defined in the current statute or regulation. The Court has interpreted it as the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought; this is determined on a "facts found" basis. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); see also McGrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).

In summary, the Veteran is entitled to an effective date of October 16, 2020, for the grant of service connection for PTSD. The earlier effective date of October 16, 2020, for service connection for PTSD is granted.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD

In the March 2022 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 50 percent rating. The Veteran contends that that his PTSD is more severe than currently evaluated.

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be borne in mind. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

The Veteran's PTSD is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411. When assessing psychiatric disorders under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provides assigning a 50 percent rating when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name cause total occupational and social impairment.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a holistic analysis that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran was given a VA examination in November 2021. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with moderate alcohol use disorder and unspecified caffeine related disorder. The examiner did not make a PTSD diagnosis. The Veteran reported to the examiner that since leaving active service, he has very few friends and no hobbies. The Veteran also reported several failed marriages and relationships. The Veteran further reported that his mental health issues, specifically anxiety, interfere with his employment. The examiner characterized the  occupational and social impairment as resulting in deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The symptoms identified by the examiner were depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, persistent danger of hurting self or others. During the examination, the examiner noted the Veteran to clean, casually groomed and dressed. The Veteran was Oriented in all spheres and made good eye contact. His speech was spontaneous, clear, coherent. The examiner did not note any unusual behaviors or mannerisms. The Veteran's affect was euthymic, and he described his mood as "I was feeling very nervous ..." The examiner noted that the Veteran did not meet the DSM-5 criteria for PTSD

In December 2021, the Veteran submitted private treatment records, which included mental health counseling. A December 1, 2021, record stated that the Veteran had passive suicidal ideation, but no plan. The same record later stated that the Veteran had no suicidal or homicidal ideation. A December 14, 2021, record documented that the Veteran had neat hygiene and appearance. His behavior was anxious with restless speech that had normal rate and rhythm. The Veteran's mood was anxious and depressed. His affect was depressed, and his thought process was logical coherent, and goal directed. The Veteran did not demonstrate obsessions preoccupations or phobias. There was no suicidal or homicidal ideation, delusions or ideas of reference noted. The Veteran's memory and concentration was intact: with fair impulse control and fair judgment.

The Veteran was given a VA examination in February 2022. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and commented that depression and anxiety are subsumed under the PTSD diagnosis. The examiner noted the Veteran had complaints of feeling depressed. He had been experiencing hopelessness and crying spells. The Veteran reported that his depression is generally an 8 of 10 with 10 being the most severe depression and 1 being feeling okay. The examiner characterized the resulting occupational and social impairment as "due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication." The Veteran was currently working and had been in the job for the last 6 years. The symptoms identified by the examiner were depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.

The Board finds that the criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent are not met or more closely approximated during the rating period on review.

During the rating period on review, the Veteran reported symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as, forgetting names, directions or recent events; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; including work or a work like setting; disturbances in motivation and mood.

Thus, the Board finds that for the rating period on review, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms did not result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. The evidence overall does not show that the symptoms experienced have impacted the Veteran's social and occupational functioning to the extent the disability picture more closely approximates deficiencies in most areas. 

The records, including the December 2021 private treatment records, the November 2021 and February 2022 VA examinations, show the Veteran's affect was depressed or flat but his mood was stable. He was alert and oriented, with normal behavior; attention, concentration, and memory were all intact. The Veteran has not reported obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); suicidal ideation; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.

The VA examinations included the examiners' conclusions, following examination and review of the record, that the Veteran's disability caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. Evidence of a history past suicidal thoughts and ideation were of record at the time of each examination; however, none of the examiners characterized the related impairment as resulting in deficiencies in "most areas." The November 2021 examiner characterized the Veteran's psychiatric disorder as having occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. However, the examiner based this finding on the Veteran's years of polysubstance abuse.

While the Veteran did experience symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating of passive suicidal ideation, the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. As noted above, the Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 50 percent rating.

Thus, the persuasive evidence of record is against finding that the Veteran's PTSD has resulted in approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but rather reflects a lesser degree of impairment. The presence or absence of any one symptom listed in the criteria is not necessarily dispositive of any particular disability level. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 115.

The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability of this disorder according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disabilities has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him or his medical records during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated. As such, the Board finds these records to be more probative than the Veteran's subjective observations.

Overall, during the appeal period, the Board finds that the weight of the most competent and credible evidence is against finding that the Veteran's PTSD symptomatology more closely approximates the schedular criteria for a higher, 70 percent rating. The claim for an increased rating in excess of 50 percent is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

M.E. Larkin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. G. Perkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.