Citation Nr: A25030603
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-438547
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Marine Corps from June 1954 to October 1957.  He passed away in March 2010 at the age of 73; the Appellant is his surviving spouse.  The claim on appeal stems from a February 2024 in which the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  The Appellant timely appealed to the Board via a May 2024 Form 10182 in accordance with the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In her May 2024 Form 10182, the Appellant requested a hearing on her claim before a Veterans Law Judge; as such, in connection with her appeal, she testified before the Board at a December 2024 hearing.  A copy of the transcript has been associated with the claims file.  Ultimately, the Board has considered the Appellant's claim on the basis of the evidence at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as that evidence submitted alongside and within 90 days of the Veteran's December 2024 hearing.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.302.

The Appellant's claim is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.  To this end, the Appellant asserted in an August 2022 statement, as well as December 2024 testimony before the Board, that the Veteran's gallbladder cancer stemmed from exposure to contaminated water while serving at Camp Lejeune.  In a February 2024 statement, a representative reinforced the appellant's argument, explaining that gallbladder cancer was attached to the same duct as other cancers that were considered presumptive to Camp Lejeune toxic exposure.  Finally, the VA found in May 2023 and February 2024 memoranda that the Veteran had participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), conceding that he was exposed to Camp Lejeune water contamination during his time in service.

In June 2023, a VA examiner observed that the Veteran incurred daily exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  The examiner noted that he was exposed to chemicals, pollutants, and toxins, and that the record did not document any usage of personal protective equipment. The examiner additionally found that his level of exposure was not above a normal acceptable level.  The examiner ultimately opined that the Veteran's gallbladder cancer was at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA.  However, the examiner failed to provide a rationale for the opinion, instead offering a generic recitation of medical literature and provisions of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  Therefore, while the June 2023 examination weighs in favor of the Appellant's claim, it is assigned lesser probative weight and is inadequate for rating purposes.  

In January 2024, the June 2023 examiner provided an addendum to the June 2023 opinion.  The examiner offered that the Veteran's gallbladder cancer was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA after considering the impact of his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  However, the examiner's rationale did not discuss the appellant's lay statements and testimony regarding the Veteran's history of exposure to contaminated water while serving at Camp Lejeune and subsequent development of gallbladder cancer.  Instead, the June 2023 rationale was primarily based on a generic recitation of medical literature regarding the etiology of the disorder.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) ("a medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data but also a reasoned explanation connecting the two"); see also McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 30-31 (2016).  As such, the January 2024 addendum opinion is also assigned lesser probative weight and is inadequate for rating purposes.

In sum, the June 2023 medical opinion and January 2024 addendum are inadequate for rating purposes and further development is required to obtain a new examination addressing the relationship between the cause of the Veteran's death (gallbladder cancer) and his conceded TERA (exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune).  See generally Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (where VA undertakes to obtain an examination or medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or medical opinion is adequate).

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the cause of the Veteran's death, to include gallbladder cancer.  The claims file and a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the clinician.  All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.

2. Applying general medical principles, the clinician's experience, the clinician records, and the appellant's lay statements and testimony, the clinician is instructed to provide an opinion responsive to the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely that the cause of the Veteran's death, to include gallbladder cancer, was incurred in service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to specifically include conceded exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune?

(b.) Is the cause of the Veteran's death, to include gallbladder cancer, due to the combined synergistic effect of his total potential exposure in service?

3. In rendering these opinions, the clinician should consider and discuss the Veteran's in-service exposures to burn pits and other toxins, to include fine particulate matter, as well as burning oil fields, flames from tent heaters, paint fumes, and diesel fuel fumes.  The clinician is also instructed to address both toxic exposures during deployment and any relevant non -related toxic exposure events.

4. In addition, the clinician must address the appellant's August 2022 statement and December 2024 testimony, as well as the representative's April 2024 statement, asserting a relationship between the cause of the Veteran's death and his conceded in-service exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.

5. It would be helpful to the Board if the clinician could explain why the evidence is either consistent with or inconsistent with a finding that the cause of the Veteran's death, to include gallbladder cancer, was: (1) incurred in or otherwise related to service, to include conceded exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune; and (2) due to the combined synergistic effect of his total potential toxic exposure in service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

6. Thorough rationales for all opinions must be provided.  However, rationales that consist solely of generic discussions of medical literature and do not address the Veteran's specific case will be returned as inadequate.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Spigelman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.