Citation Nr: A25030609
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-430244
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected back disability is denied.

For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability is denied.

For the initial rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the symptomatology and all functional impairment of the service-connected back disability most nearly approximated forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; it did not more nearly approximate forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

2. For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the symptomatology and functional impairment of the service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability, even after consideration of painful flare-ups and repetitive use over time, most nearly approximated limitation of the motion of the arm at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees); it did not more nearly approximate favorable ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, limitation of motion of the arm midway between the side and shoulder level, recurrent dislocation at the scapulohumeral joint with frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements, or malunion of the shoulder with marked deformity.  

3. For the initial rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the symptomatology and functional impairment of the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, manifested as mild incomplete paralysis and mild neuralgia; it did not more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis or moderate neuralgia. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the criteria for an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected back disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

2. For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the criteria for an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5203.

3. For the initial rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the criteria for a higher initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.21, 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant, had active service from August 1986 to September 2009. 

The instant case is on appeal from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  The modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

A November 2022 VA RO rating decision granted service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy, effective August 27, 2022, and established a 10 percent initial disability rating.  A December 2022 VA RO rating decision increased the disability rating for the service-connected back disability to 20 percent and the service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability to 20 percent.  Both increased disability ratings were effective August 27, 2022.

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted two VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the November 2022 and December 2022 VA RO rating decisions, seeking an increased disability rating for all disabilities.  

In April 2024, the VA RO issued the HLR rating decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2022 and December 2022 VA RO rating decisions.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 and December 2022 VA RO rating decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the VA RO issued the decisions, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim or claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Disability Ratings Legal Authority

The Veteran appeals for increased disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected back disability and service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability, and a higher initial rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.  See April 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  The Veteran has not advanced any specific contentions as to why an increased disability rating may be warranted.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  Pyramiding, the rating of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury that would permit rating under several diagnostic codes; however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. prohibits compensating a veteran twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding a degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  An appeal from the initial assignment of a disability rating requires consideration of the entire time period involved and contemplates staged ratings where warranted.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

1. From August 27, 2022, an Increased Disability Rating in Excess of 20 Percent for the Back Disability is Denied.

For the rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, a 20 percent disability rating is in effect for the service-connected back disability.  The Veteran appeals for an increased disability rating. 

For disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, the Board considers whether a higher disability rating is warranted on the basis of functional loss due to pain or due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-07 (1995).  Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.  Functional loss contemplates the inability of the body to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance, and must be manifested by adequate evidence of disabling pathology, especially when it is due to pain.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  The factors of disability affecting joints are reduction of normal excursion of movements in different planes, weakened movement, excess fatigability, swelling, and pain on movement.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45.

With any form of arthritis, painful motion is an important factor of disability, the facial expression, wincing, etc., on pressure or manipulation, should be carefully noted and definitely related to affected joints.  Muscle spasm will greatly assist the identification.  Sciatic neuritis is not uncommonly caused by arthritis of the spine.  The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability.  It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  Crepitation either in the soft tissues such as the tendons or ligaments, or crepitation within the joint structures should be noted carefully as points of contact which are diseased.  Flexion elicits such manifestations.  The joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

The criteria for a disability rating based on ankylosis may be met by evidence demonstrating the "functional equivalent" or ankylosis, i.e., functional loss consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis, in keeping with the considerations of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45.  Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).  Ankylosis is the immobility and consolidation of a joint.  Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992).

Disabilities of the spine are rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula) for Diagnostic Codes 5235 to 5243, unless Diagnostic Code 5243 is rated under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes (IVDS Rating Formula).  Ratings under the General Rating Formula are made with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease.

The Veteran has not alleged, and the evidence does not support, a finding that the Veteran has IVDS.  Accordingly, the Board will only discuss rating the back disability under the General Rating Formula.  The General Rating Formula provides that a 10 percent disability rating is given when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The General Rating Formula provides that a 20 percent disability rating is given when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  Id.

The General Rating Formula provides that a 40 percent disability rating, which is the next higher disability rating, is given when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  Id.

The General Rating Formula provides that a 50 percent disability rating is given for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  Id.

A total (100 percent) disability rating is given for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  Id.

Note (1) to the General Rating Formula specifies that any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, should be separately rated under an appropriate diagnostic code.

Note (2) (See also Plate V) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the lumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees.  The combined range-of-motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation.  The normal combined range-of-motion of the lumbar spine is 240 degrees.  The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range-of-motion.

After a review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the symptomatology and functional impairment of the service-connected back disability, even with consideration of painful flare-ups and repetitive use over time, most nearly approximated forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, as contemplated by a 20 percent disability rating.  The lay and medical evidence does not show that the symptomatology and functional impairment of the service-connected back disability did more nearly approximated forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, to include the functional equivalent of ankylosis.  

At a September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease, lumbar spine scoliotic deformity, and lumbar radiculopathy.  The lumbar spine radiculopathy is discussed further below.  The Veteran reported that the pain from the back depends on activity level, is usually daily and ongoing, can last hours to days, and can be sharp, achy, or dull.  The pain was described to be moderate to severe.  

The back flare-ups were the same symptoms as those discussed above, lasting the same duration, with the elaboration that they were precipitated by bending, squatting, sitting in certain positions, standing for prolonged periods, and walking significant distances or on an uneven surface.  The September 2022 VA examiner opined that pain and loss of range of motion contributes to functional loss with an inability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.  This included painful flexion, extension, lateral flexion, and rotation.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, the back measured at 60 degrees forward flexion, with a combined range of motion of 155 degrees.  Passive range-of-motion testing was not tested because it was medically contraindicated.  There was pain in weight-bearing, non-weight-bearing, and active motion, but the pain did not cause additional functional loss.  The Veteran was able to do three repetitions with no additional limitation of motion.  

Because the Veteran was being examined immediately after repeated use over time, the measurements for repeated use over time were found to be the same as the initial range-of-motion measurements of 60 degrees forward flexion and a combined range of motion of 155 degrees.  The VA examiner estimated that flare-ups would cause the same reduction in range of motion due to pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner found that there was no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasms, although there was interference with sitting, interference with standing, disturbance of locomotion, and less movement than normal.  There was no ankylosis, whether favorable or unfavorable.  

The claims file includes documentation that, shortly prior to the period on appeal, the Veteran went to physical therapy to address the back symptoms and functional impairments.  See, e.g., April 2021 VA Treatment Record; May 2021 VA Treatment Record.  The physical therapy records do not provide range-of-motion measurements.

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence is against a finding of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, as contemplated by a 40 percent disability rating.  

First, at the September 2022 VA examination, the back measured at 60 degrees forward flexion, as contemplated by a 20 percent disability rating.  Second, the back does not show actual ankylosis, whether favorable or unfavorable.  The Board finds that, even after consideration of painful flare-ups and repetitive use over time, the symptomatology and functional impairment of the back did not more nearly approximate the "functional equivalent" of ankylosis of the back.  See Chavis, 34 Vet. App. at 20.  The reports of limitations and clinical measures do not more nearly approximate an inability to move the back during a flare-up or at other times, and do not reflect or approximate immobility of the spine.  

In this case, the Board finds that the degree of range of motion that has been lost is significant, as noted by the clinical measurements, but does not amount to near immobility of the spine.  Although the Veteran exhibits functional impairments, to include an inability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance, the Veteran is not precluded from these movements.  He is restricted in his ability to do so, but still manages to have a significant degree of movement, as reflected by the 60 degrees of forward flexion and combined range of motion of 155 degrees.    

The Board finds that, even after consideration of painful flare-ups and repeated use over time, with consideration of additional limitations of motion and function due to the orthopedic factors of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 and applying the major joint rating principles of Sharp and DeLuca to account for such additional limitations, the symptoms and functional impairment of the service-connected back disability most nearly approximate forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, as contemplated by the assigned 20 percent disability rating.  For these reasons, the Board must deny the appeal for an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected back disability for the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022.

2. From August 27, 2022, an Increased Disability Rating in Excess of 20 Percent for the Major (Dominant) Right Shoulder Disability is Denied.

For the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the Veteran is in receipt of a 20 percent disability rating for the service-connected major (dominant) right shoulder disability.  The Veteran appeals for an increased disability rating. 

Disabilities of the shoulders are rated under Diagnostic Code 5200 through Diagnostic Code 5203 of 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  These Diagnostic Codes provide for different ratings in certain instances depending on whether the shoulder involved is the major or minor joint.  A September 2022 VA examination report reflects that the Veteran is right hand dominant; thus, the right shoulder is the major joint.

Normal ranges of shoulder flexion and abduction are from 0 to 180 degrees, and external and internal rotations are from 0 to 90 degrees.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I.  In determining whether a veteran has limitation of motion to shoulder level, it is necessary to consider forward flexion and abduction.  See Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 314-316 (2003).

Under Diagnostic Code 5200, the major joint merits a 50 percent rating for unfavorable ankylosis, abduction limited to 25 degrees from side, a 40 percent rating for intermediate between favorable and unfavorable ankylosis, and a 30 percent rating for favorable ankylosis, abduction to 60 degrees, can reach mouth and head.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under Diagnostic Code 5201, limitation of motion of an arm at the shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for the major joint.  When motion is limited to midway between the side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees), a 30 percent rating is warranted for the major joint.  When motion is limited to 25 degrees from the side, a 40 percent rating is warranted for the major joint.  Id.

Under Diagnostic Code 5202, loss of head of the humerus (flail shoulder) warrants a 80 percent rating for the major joint, nonunion of the humerus (false flail joint) receives a 60 percent rating for the major joint, fibrous union of the humerus warrants a 50 percent rating, recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint with frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements warrants a 30 percent rating, and recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint with infrequent episodes and guarding of movement only at shoulder level warrants a 20 percent disability rating for the major joint.  Malunion of the humerus causing marked deformity merits a 30 percent rating and causing moderate deformity merits a 20 percent rating for the major joint.  Id.

Under Diagnostic Code 5203, dislocation of the clavicle or scapula warrants a 20 percent rating for the major joint, nonunion of the clavicle or scapula with loose movement warrants a 20 percent rating for the major joint, nonunion of the clavicle or scapula without loose movement warrants a 10 percent rating for the major joint, and malunion of the clavicle or scapula warrants a 10 percent rating for the major joint.  Id.

After a review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that, for the increased rating period on appeal from August 27, 2022, the symptoma-tology and functional impairment of the right shoulder disability, even after consideration of painful flare-ups and repetitive use over time, most nearly approximated limitation of the motion of the arm at shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees), as contemplated by a 20 percent disability rating. It did not more nearly approximate favorable ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, limitation of motion of the arm midway between the side and shoulder level, recurrent dislocation at the scapulohumeral joint with frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements, or malunion of the shoulder with marked deformity, as required for higher ratings under various diagnostic codes for rating the shoulder.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed a right shoulder strain and right shoulder rotator cuff tear.  The VA examiner recorded the history that pain and impairment depended on activity level and was usually dull and ongoing, although it could last hours to days and be sharp, achy, or dull.  The pain was reported to be moderate to severe.  Pain, including painful flare-ups, were precipitated by flexion, extension, adduction, abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation, which included overhead activities, lifting objects greater than 20 pounds, and backward reaching.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, the right shoulder measured at 120 flexion, 110 degrees abduction, 90 degrees internal rotation, and 50 degrees external rotation.  Pain was noted on all range-of-motion measurements, to include pain with weight-bearing, non-weight-bearing, and active motion, but did not result in functional loss.  There was no change in range of motion after three repetitions.  

Because the Veteran was being seen immediately after repeated use over time, the measurements for repeated use over time was the same as the initial range-of-motion measurements.  The September 2022 VA examiner also estimated that range of motion during flare-ups would be the same.  

The September 2022 VA examiner documented disturbance of locomotion and less movement than normal.  There were findings of no ankylosis and no muscle atrophy.  Some of the rotator cuff tests-Hawkins' impingement and empty can test-were positive, but there was a negative external rotation/infraspinatus strength test.  The crank apprehension and relocation test was negative and there was no evidence of shoulder instability, dislocation, or labral pathology.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, there were no current residuals of recurrent dislocation of the glenohumeral joint, the cross-body adduction test was negative, and there was no clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint, or sternoclavicular joint condition or other impairment.  There was no loss of head, nonunion, or fibrous union of the humerus. 

The VA treatment records for the period on appeal do not document additional treatment for the shoulder.  The right shoulder was deemed to be unremarkable at a March 2021 VA appointment.  

Given the histories reported by the Veteran and the clinical findings of the September 2022 VA examination, to include the reports of the Veteran as to painful flare-ups and functional impairments, the Board finds that the most appropriate disability rating for the major (dominant) right shoulder disability is the assigned 20 percent under Diagnostic Code 5201.  The Board also finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent under any diagnostic code for rating shoulder disabilities.  

The predominant disability picture is that of limitation of motion caused by the right shoulder disability, to include rotator cuff related limitations.  The Board has considered additional limitations of motion and function due to the orthopedic rating factors of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, and has applied the principles of DeLuca and Sharp to help assess such additional limitations, to find that the range-of-motion measurements of the Veteran (120 flexion and 110 degrees abduction) most nearly approximate those of a 20 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5201.  Although the rating criteria under Diagnostic Code 5201 strictly require flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees, the Board finds that the strict requirements need not be met in this case because, with consideration of additional limitations of motion and function due to orthopedic limiting factors, the 20 percent disability rating based on limitation of movement of the arm at shoulder level best captures the disability picture for the right shoulder.  

An increased 30 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5201 requires limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees), which is not met nor more nearly approximated in this case, either my clinical measures or by the Veteran's descriptions of limitations of motion and function.  It is only with application of the orthopedic limiting principles, and recognizing the additional joint limitations caused, that the Board is finding that the criteria for a 20 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5201 have been met.  

Throughout the VA examination, the VA examiner documented problems with range of motion and functional impairments caused by the right shoulder disability.  At no point was actual ankylosis documented, and the existing range of motion measurements of 120 flexion, 110 degrees abduction, 90 degrees internal rotation, and 50 degrees external rotation, do not document the "functional equivalent" of ankylosis.  Although the Veteran is limited in functioning and range of motion, there is in fact a significant degree of motion permitted.  As such, Diagnostic Code 5200 does not apply. 

The September 2022 VA examiner explicitly found that there was not an impairment of the humerus, to include either a flail shoulder, false flail joint, fibrous union of the humerus, recurrent dislocation of the humerus at the scapulohumeral joint, or marked deformity caused by malunion of the humerus.  Accordingly, a rating under Diagnostic Code 5202 would not be appropriate.

The September 2022 VA examiner also explicitly round that there was no evidence of a clavicle or scapula impairment.  As such, a rating under Diagnostic Code 5203 would not be appropriate. 

As the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence is against a finding that a disability rating in excess of 20 percent is warranted under any applicable shoulder diagnostic code, even after consideration of repetitive use over time, painful flare-ups, and the orthopedic factors of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the appeal for an increased disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the major (dominant) right shoulder disability from August 27, 2022 must be denied.

3. From August 27, 2022, an Initial Disability Rating in Excess of 10 Percent for the Left Lower Extremity Radiculopathy of the Sciatic Nerve is Denied.

At the September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner found the presence of bilateral lumbar radiculopathy, as noted above.  Right lower extremity radiculo-pathy was already service connected and is not addressed in this appeal.  The November 2022 VA RO rating decision granted service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve and assigned an initial 10 percent disability rating, effective August 27, 2022.  The Veteran appeals generally for a higher initial disability rating. 

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.  Mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy, is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, where the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost, is rated as 80 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

The regulations specifically provide that when rating peripheral nerve injuries and residuals related thereto, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment in motor function, trophic changes, and/or sensory disturbances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given to loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and pain.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124. 

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  As with any regulatory interpretation where the terms are not defined in the regulation, we presume those terms carry their ordinary dictionary meaning.  See Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018); see also Kisor v. Wilkie, 139 S. Ct. 2400, 2415 (2019) (holding that when a regulation is ambiguous, the plain meaning dictionary definition is appropriate). 

According to Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "mild" means not very severe.  "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect.  "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree.  Although a medical examiner's use of descriptive terminology such as "mild" is an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, it is not dispositive of an issue.  The Board must evaluate all evidence in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

With regard to neurological conditions, moreover, aside from the underlying nerve-root impairment, consideration should also be made as to whether a separate rating is warranted for "neuritis" (defined as "loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating") and/or "neuralgia" (defined as "dull and intermittent pain").  See Banschbach v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 422 (2024); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a.

After a review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy manifests as mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with mild neuralgia, but that, for the reasons discussed further below, a separate rating for mild neuralgia would constitute impermissible pyramiding.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.14, 4.124a; Diagnostic Codes 8520, 8720.  The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding of moderate incomplete paralysis or moderate neuralgia.  

At a September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed bilateral lumbar radiculopathy.  Testing showed normal left leg muscle strength at all locations (hip flexion, knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension), no left leg muscle atrophy, a bilateral normal reflex examination, and a bilateral normal sensory examination.  The straight-leg raising test was positive, suggestive of left lower extremity radiculopathy.  

At the September 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner documented no constant pain (may be excruciating at times), mild intermittent pain (usually dull), mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in the left lower extremity.  The Veteran reported no additional symptoms of radiculopathy, and the VA examiner wrote that the sciatic nerve was causing the radiculopathy.  

Upon review, the Board finds that the left lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, most nearly approximates mild incomplete paralysis, as warrants a 10 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 8520.  The findings of the VA examiner are wholly sensory.  The VA examiner documented mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness, and at no point suggested that the symptoms more nearly approximated moderate incomplete paralysis.  There were no non-sensory symptoms noted, as the VA examiner found all other test measures to be within normal limits.  

As mild is defined to mean "not very severe," the Board finds that this classification most nearly approximates the disability picture of the left lower extremity radiculopathy.  The wholly sensory symptoms are mild in nature, as they are not very severe in nature.  They cause the Veteran to experience some symptoms of radiculopathy, but do not cause any other impairments, such as with deep tendon reflexes or reduced muscle strength or atrophy.  

The evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of "moderate" incomplete paralysis of the left sciatic nerve.  The symptoms were described to be no more than mild in all facets, and the disability picture is wholly sensory in nature.  Wholly sensory disabilities are described by the pertinent regulation to be mild, or, at most, moderate.  See Miller, 28 Vet. App. at 376.

The Board finds that the evidence supports a finding of neuralgia, such that a separate rating under Diagnostic Code 8720 must be considered.  See Banschbach, 37 Vet. App. at 422.  Neuralgia is defined by regulation as a disability that is "characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain."  38 C.F.R. § 4.124.  The September 2022 VA examiner documented the presence of mild intermittent pain.  

After a review of the factual circumstances particular to this case, the Board finds that compensating for mild incomplete paralysis under Diagnostic Code 8520 and for mild neuralgia under Diagnostic Code 8720 would constitute impermissible pyramiding in this case.  The critical question in making a pyramiding of compensation determination is whether the symptoms of one disability are duplicative or overlap with the symptoms of the other disability such that the veteran would be compensated twice for the same overlapping symptoms or overlapping functional impairment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban, 6 Vet. App. at 261-62; Lyles, 29 Vet. App. at 107.  

In this case, the mild intermittent pain that the Veteran experiences pursuant to neuralgia is already being taken into consideration when deciding to grant a disability rating (compensation) based on mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  In this case, the current disability rating (compensation) awarded for incomplete paralysis does not just encompass the loss of function of the actual extremity, but, as outlined above, includes the fact that the VA examiner documented mild intermittent pain.  The only findings in support of any rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy are the mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness.  

In this case, the pain pertaining to the left sciatic nerve root causes the functional impairment that is experienced with both incomplete paralysis and neuralgia.  The September 2022 VA examiner assessed that the Veteran would have difficulty due to the back disability with performing the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance, as caused by flexion, extension, lateral flexion, lateral rotation, bending, squatting, standing prolonged periods of time, and walking significant distances or uneven surfaces.  

The September 2022 VA examiner did not document separate functional impairment due to the left lower extremity radiculopathy, but the Board finds that at least some of the functional impairment caused by the back disability is related to that of the sciatic nerve impairment.  The mild incomplete paralysis and the mild neuralgia both impact the sciatic nerve root, causing intermittent pain that leads to these restrictions, and cause a negative functional impact on the Veteran. 

Thus, in this case, the disability rating assigned (10 percent) already compensates for the manifestations listed for neuralgia, and a separate rating here would constitute impermissible pyramiding of compensation by compensating for the same overlapping symptoms and functional impairment.  Cf. Banschbach, 37 Vet. App. at 422.  The symptomatology considered to support the 10 percent rating award is duplicative and overlapping with neuralgia; therefore, separate ratings are precluded in this case.

For these reasons, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of moderate incomplete paralysis and moderate neuralgia, such that a single 10 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 8520 is warranted; therefore, the Board will deny the appeal for an increased disability rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy in excess of 10 percent from August 27, 2022.   

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.