Citation Nr: A25030616
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-411852
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy claimed as secondary to a low back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy claimed as secondary to a low back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neurogenic bladder dysfunction (claimed as frequent urination) claimed as secondary to a low back disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty for training (ACDUTRA) in the Reserve from March 2007 to June 2008, from September 2008 to April 2009, from January 2013 to September 2013, from September 2014 to February 2015, and from August 2018 to March 2023.  In addition, he had periods of inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).

The case is on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision.

In the January 2024 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August and November 2023 rating decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the decisions were issued, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Regional Office (RO) in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The January 2024 higher-level review rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received with respect to service connection for a right and left knee disorders, and a back disorder, and denied the claims on the merits.  This is a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was received and, therefore, the Board will proceed to the merits of those claims.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board notes that in January 2024, the Veteran submitted a duplicate copy of his NOD.

In addition, the Board notes that the summary of the remanded claims and remand directives below do not make any implicit findings regarding the competency or credibility of any of the evidence of record. 

1. Service connection for a right knee disorder.

2. Service connection for a left knee disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for right and left knee disorders.  He maintains that both a right knee and left knee condition had its onset during service.  See e.g. July 2008 VA 21-526EZ (Fully Developed Claim (Compensation)) (noting knee pain had its onset in June 2007 while stationed in Cuba).

As noted above, the Veteran had multiple periods of ACDUTRA.  There is a conflict in the evidence with respect to the dates of his periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA.  For example, January 2024 records from the VA/DoD Identity Repository (VADIR) reflect three separate periods of ACUDTRA in 2018/2019, two separate periods of ACDUTRA in 2020, one period of ACDUTRA in 2021, and so forth.  However, the Veteran's March 2025 DD FORM 214 reflects a continuous period of ACDUTRA from August 2018 to March 2025, that is, 4 years, 4 months, and 7 days.  Although the March 2025 DD Form 214 was not of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision, the Board may remand to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claims.  38 C.R.F. § 20.802.  Thus, the Board finds that remand for verification of the dates of the periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA, to include during service in combat zones in 2007, 2008, and 2014 to include in Jordan and Afghanistan, see also July 2023 other (ILER), is warranted.  

Further, the January 2024 rating decision on appeal states that the Veteran was not afforded a VA knee examination with respect to the etiology of his right and left knee strain and meniscal tears because there was no competent evidence of an association between those conditions and his participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) during service.  However, an opinion was not obtained as to whether the Veteran's right or left knee disorder was otherwise related to service.  Moreover, the decision does not sufficiently address a May 2023 opinion from a non-VA physician stating that the Veteran's right and left knee disorders are related to service, to include as a result of injuries resulting from jumps in and out of vehicles while wearing a ruck sack in association with duties as a combat journalist during service.  See June 2023 DBQ.  Although the opinion does not specify the period or periods of ACDUTRA or INACDTURA during which the referenced right and left knee injuries were sustained, the opinion states that the micro tears in the structure of the knees was the source of acute and chronic knee pain/strain.  The Board finds the evidence currently meets the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  The Board finds that the RO's failure to obtain a VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that also requires a remand.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Thus, remand for a VA examination is warranted.

The Board notes that because the May 2023 opinion does not identify the period or periods of ACDUTRA or INACDTURA during which a right and left knee injury occurred, the opinion is not adequate for a grant of service connection for the right or left knee disorders.

3. Service connection for a low back disorder.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a low back disorder.  He maintains that a low back disorder had its onset during service, to include as a result of an injury while carrying heavy items and a fall.  See February 2022 VA 21-4138 (Statement in Support of Claim).

The January 2024 rating decision on appeal states that the Veteran was not afforded a back examination because there was no competent evidence of an association between his low back condition and his participation in a TERA during service.  However, an opinion was not obtained as to whether the Veteran's low back disorder is otherwise related to service.  Moreover, the decision does not sufficiently address a May 2023 opinion from a non-VA physician stating that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder, to include strain, degenerative disc disease, and arthritis, is related to service, to include as a result of injuries due to jumps in and out of vehicles while wearing a ruck sack in association with duties as a combat journalist during service.  See June 2023 DBQ.  Although the opinion does not specify the period or periods of ACDUTRA or INACDTURA during which the referenced back injuries were sustained, the opinion states that the injuries resulted in micro tears in the structures of the back.  The Board finds the evidence currently meets the low threshold for obtaining a VA examination.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81.  The Board finds that the RO's failure to obtain a VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires a remand.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Thus, remand for a VA examination is warranted.

As noted above, the May 2023 opinion does not identify the period or periods of ACDUTRA or INACDTURA during which a low back injury was sustained.  Thus, the opinion is not adequate for a grant of service connection for a low back disorder.

4. Service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, claimed as secondary to a low back disorder.

5. Service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy, claimed as secondary to a low back disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his radiculopathy of the lower extremities is secondary to his low back condition.  See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ (Fully Developed Claim (Compensation)).  

A May 2023 opinion from a non-VA physician stating states that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is at least as likely as not due to his low back disorder.  See June 2023 DBQ.  The opinion notes that degenerative discs can bulge and hit the nerve, that arthritis can impinge upon nerves, and that an awkward gait causes micro tears in the structures of the back resulting in nerve compression.  

Because the Board has found that there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the primary claim of service connection a low back disorder under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), it has judicial discretion to remand the secondary claim which is intertwined with the remanded issue.  The Board finds that a decision cannot be entered on this claim until the remaining claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder has been decided, and a decision on this issue is therefore, deferred.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

6. Service connection for neurogenic bladder dysfunction (claimed as frequent urination), claimed as secondary to a low back disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his bladder condition is secondary to his low back condition.  See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ (Fully Developed Claim (Compensation)).  

A May 2023 opinion from a non-VA physician states that the Veteran's neurogenic bladder dysfunction is at least as likely as not due to his service-connected low back disorder.  The opinion notes that the compression of a nerve due to the back can cause irritation, inflammation, and even nerve death with resulting dysfunction of the organ supplied by that nerve.  

Because the Board has found that there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the primary claim of service connection a low back disorder under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), it has judicial discretion to remand the secondary claim which is intertwined with the remanded issue.  The Board finds that a decision cannot be entered on this claim until the remaining claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder has been decided, and a decision on this issue is therefore, deferred.  See Harris, 1 Vet. App. at 183.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Verify in the record the date of all periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA for the Veteran's entire period of National Guard and Reserve service throughout the entirety of his career.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination(s) by a qualified medical profession to determine the nature and etiology of right and left knee conditions and a low back disorder.  The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed, and all findings should be reported in detail. 

The examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that a right or left knee condition or a low back disorder is related to a period of ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA.  

Rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.  If the examiner is unable to provide the requested opinions without resort to speculation, it must be so stated, and he or she must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.

3. After completing all indicated development, readjudicate the claims based on the entirety of the evidence.

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Taylor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.