Citation Nr: A25030322
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-428269
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to right knee strain, right shin splints, and right foot hallux valgus, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from March 1996 to February 1998, with subsequent National Guard service that included active service from April 2006 to August 2007.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2023 decision. In December 2023, the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior June 2023 decision.  

Thereafter, in March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for OSA, to include as secondary to right knee strain, right shin splints, and right foot hallux valgus is remanded.

While the Board regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, remand is necessary to allow VA to: (1) associate the Veteran's VA-authorized treatment records with her claims file; and (2) obtain a secondary service connection opinion for the Veteran's claimed OSA that adequately considers obesity as an intermediate step.

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records reveals that the Veteran has received VA-authorized care. See August 2024 VA treatment records. Though it appears that some of the VA-authorized treatment records, including a May 2023 record for a sleep study, have been scanned into a VA system, the records have not been associated with the Veteran's claims file. As such, upon remand, VA should associate the Veteran's outstanding VA-authorized treatment records, including reports held in other VA databases (e.g., VistA), with her claims file. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(1)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3); Sullivan v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 786, 793 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

In addition, the Veteran has asserted that her claimed OSA is secondary to her service-connected right knee strain, right shin splints, and right foot hallux valgus, with obesity as an intermediate step due to decreased activity. See January 2023 Statement In Support of Claim. However, the record does not include an adequate medical opinion for the Veteran's claim. In this regard, while the Veteran submitted an opinion from a private examiner in January 2023 who opined that the Veteran had severe OSA, it is not adequate. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding, in the context of weighing one medical opinion with another, that "[i]t is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion"). The private examiner concluded that "the veteran's obesity is due to their service connected condition of right shin, right knee, right foot, and that obesity condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current Obstructive Sleep Apnea." Upon review of the private examiner's rationale, it appears his diagnosis is based solely on the Veteran's responses to a questionnaire as the Veteran claims file shows the Veteran first underwent a home sleep study in February 2023, one month after the opinion was provided. Moreover, although the private examiner indicated that he had reviewed the Veteran's pertinent medical records, his rationale is equivocal and general, such that the Board cannot not rely upon the opinion to support a finding in the Veteran's claim. In this regard, the examiner reasoned that the Veteran has service-connected disabilities that can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or comfort eating which can lead to diminished activity, which indicates a possibility but does not rely on facts specific to the Veteran to support his opinion.

In addition, although VA obtained an examination and opinions for the Veteran's claimed OSA in April 2023, the opinions did not adequately address the Veteran's assertions as to secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step. In this regard, although an examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion, the opinion was inadequate because it relied on the reasoning that the Veteran's claimed OSA was not related to her right knee strain, right shin splints, and right hallux valgus. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013); see also Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018). Moreover, the examiner did not address the Veteran's assertion that her service-connected right knee strain, right shin splints, and right hallux valgus caused or aggravated the obesity that was a substantial factor that caused her claimed OSA, which would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by her service-connected right knee strain, right shin splints, and right hallux valgus. As such, remand is required to obtain an adequate opinion as to the Veteran's claim that her OSA is secondary to her service-connected right knee strain, right shin splints, and right hallux valgus, with obesity as an intermediate step. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or obtain an opinion in connection with a service connection claim, it must provide or obtain one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made).

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Associate the Veteran's VA-authorized treatment records with her claims file, with attention to scanned records in VA databases (i.e., VistA), to include a May 2023 record related to the Veteran's OSA treatment. Document all searches and associate them with the claims file.

2. Once the above is completed, obtain a new medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed OSA. If the examiner deems it necessary, schedule the Veteran for an examination and/or additional testing. A copy of the Veteran's claims file, to include the above records as well as this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner should then opine as to whether the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher): 

A.	proximately caused by her service-connected right knee sprain, right shin splints, and/or right hallux valgus, or 

B.	aggravated by her service-connected right knee sprain, right shin splints, and/or right hallux valgus.

In providing these opinions, the examiner should also opine as to whether it was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that:

(1)	the Veteran's service-connected right knee sprain, right shin splints, and/or right hallux valgus caused her to become obese or aggravated her obesity;

(2)	the obesity or aggravation of obesity caused by her service-connected right knee sprain, right shin splints, and/or right hallux valgus, was a substantial factor in causing her OSA; and 

(3)	the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected right knee sprain, right shin splints, and/or right hallux valgus.

The examiner must provide separate findings and rationales relating to secondary causation and aggravation. The examiner is advised that general statements about whether the Veteran should have exercised or dieted to prevent weight gain are not relevant.

The examiner is also advised that aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent" worsening of the nonservice connected disability.

The examiner is further advised that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 allows for service connection of conditions that would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability even if the worsening of the condition occurs due to the natural progression of that condition. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (2023).

These opinions must address the Veteran's lay statements, including her reports during her April 2023 VA examination and in her January 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. Each opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resorting to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, including whether it is due to a limitation of general medical knowledge, the examiner's knowledge, or information about the Veteran's medical history.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.