Citation Nr: A25030857
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448685
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1976 to July 1978 and from March 1980 to April 1981.  This matter is before the Board following his appeal of an October 2023 rating decision.  The claim on appeal was filed in March 2023.

On his June 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the direct review docket.  As such, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the October 19, 2023.

As a final matter, the Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Service connection for diabetes mellitus (DM) is remanded.

The Board finds that remand of the Veteran's claim is required in order to ensure all relevant records have been associated with the record, and to obtain an adequate opinion, as the June 2023 opinion of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision on appeal was inadequate.

Initially, the available service treatment and personnel records primarily relate to the Veteran's period of active duty from March 1980 to April 1981 and not to the first, longer period of active service from September 1976 to July 1978.  Additionally, the Veteran reported in a March 2023 statement that she received private medical care since approximately 2001.  Additionally, in a June 2023 statement that she saw a doctor around 1990 at which time DM was diagnosed.  However, it does not appear that records dating back that far have been obtained.  As those records could support in-service treatment, duties, exposures, or treatment since service, they should be obtained. 

Additionally, the Board finds that the June 2023 VA opinion addressing nexus was inadequate because the examiner provided essentially no explanation or rationale for the opinion that DM was not related to service.  The examiner simply stated that there was no medical or scientific evidence of a relationship "between the development of Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 and the TERA," and that the Veteran's personal history of DM was "related to risk factors unrelated to military service." However, the examiner did not identify or offer any discussion of the specific "TERA" or exposure(s) at Fort McClellan considered, nor did the examiner identify any of the "risk factors unrelated to military service."  Even further, the examiner's reliance on the April 2023 TERA memo was misplaced as the memorandum was inconsistent with the service treatment records.  In that regard, the April 2023 TERA memorandum indicates that the Veteran had no toxic exposures in service despite service treatment records documenting that, in March 1980, she sustained a chemical burn to her neck from a "permanent" received at a hair salon.  

As a final matter regarding the VA opinion, the June 2023 examiner failed to discuss evidence submitted by the Veteran and her attorney concerning regarding findings of various herbicide/chemical agents toxins at Fort McClellan, to include during the times the Veteran was stationed there.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the June 2023 VA opinion was inadequate for rating purposes and that remand is required in order to obtain an adequate opinion.  

In so finding, the Board acknowledges the positive evidence and nonprecedential Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) case submitted by the Veteran and her attorney (mentioned above).  However, the Board finds the evidence and argument insufficient for a grant at this time for the following reasons.  Regarding first the opinion of the expert in herbicide drift, Dr. Hannah Mathers, the Board finds the opinion is insufficient to establish that toxins identical or equivalent to herbicides used in Vietnam were present at Fort McClellan (FTMC) such that presumptive service connection for diabetes mellitus is warranted at this time.  

Foremost, it seems by Dr. Mathers' own admission that the herbicide agents used at FTMC were not identical to those used in Vietnam, though they contained the same agents.  Dr. Mathers noted that the herbicides at FTMC "were formulations of the same agent at various amounts of active ingredient..."  She also noted that formulation "is important to maintain and improve biological effectiveness" by, in part, "altering vaporization or liquid mobility in soil [and] resistance to degradation..." Additionally, she explained that secondary drift referred "to off-site movement of the active ingredient through the air" after droplets were deposited on water vapor, the soil surface, or dust.  Such statements suggest that different formulations (with differing amounts of active ingredient(s)) could potentially have different secondary drift impacts, different vaporization patterns, different liquid mobility in the soil, and different resistance to degradation such that the herbicides used at FTMC would spread or degrade in a different manner, pattern, or to a different degree, than herbicides used in Vietnam.  

Additionally, while Dr. Mathers found that the differing formulations of the same agent (with differing amounts of active ingredient) was immaterial, she also wrote that "the active ingredient is the component of an herbicide responsible for its toxicity" and that, for various herbicides, it was the active ingredient 2,4,5-T and its synthesis that caused their dioxin contamination.  It would seem, then, that if different amounts of active ingredients were used in the herbicides at FTMC, and the active ingredient was responsible for toxicity and/or produced or contributed to the production of the TCDD contamination, then there would be different amounts of toxicity or TCDD produced with the different formulations used at FTMC compared to in Vietnam.  Thus, it is unclear to the Board whether the difference in formulation of agents used at FTCM would result in different impacts to health, the ecology, etc. 

That is not to say that the Board questions the finding of Dr. Mathers that certain herbicides were present at FTMC at various times.  However, given the apparent differences in the herbicides used at FTMC compared to Vietnam, the Board finds it is unable to simply apply to herbicide exposure at FTMC, a presumption that was based on studies specific to herbicide use in Vietnam.  It is also unclear whether direct exposure has been established in this instance.  Despite a conclusion that herbicides were used all over the base of FTMC, Dr. Mathers also distinguished the likelihood of exposure from "general service" on the FTMC base from the likelihood of exposure from "training and/or duties requiring more intimacy with the environment."  That distinction of two separate likelihoods seemingly weighs against an assertion of universal exposure at FTMC.  Dr. Mathers also specifically noted that "participating in exercises, such as night-maneuvers in and around creeks at FTMC would have resulted in exposure."  However, if exposure was a given based on general service, or if all exposure was equal, it would seem unnecessary to highlight specific instances in which exposure would have occurred. 

It is also unclear to the Board if the impact of the herbicides found at FTMC on the Veteran's health would be the same as those used in Vietnam given the potentially different makeup, toxicity, pattern(s) of contamination, and exposure.  Dr. Mathers has not been shown to be a medical doctor or to be otherwise competent to opine on a relationship between the toxins and medical conditions such as diabetes mellitus and, significantly, her opinion primarily focused the cancer risk associated with the chemical agents or toxins at issue.  Unlike the myriad references to cancer risks and carcinogens, type-2 diabetes mellitus was only mentioned twice in the 43-page decision and both times occurred in a single paragraph that only indirectly linked diabetes mellitus to a chemical discussed (2,4-D or 2, 4-diclorophenoxy acetic acid).  Specifically, it was noted that studies found "a link between 2,4-D and decreased HDL, increased triglycerides, insulin, C-peptide, and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)," which were "all risk factors that are linked to the pathogenesis of acute myocardial infarction and type-2 diabetes...such as dyslipidemia and impaired glucose metabolism."  The opinion continued that such pathogenesis would cause weight gain, acute myocardial infarction, and type-2 diabetes.  Interestingly, the same paragraph stated that 2,4-D was also found in house dust, in addition to streams and drinking water reservoirs. 

The Board takes issue with other aspects of the Dr. Mathers' opinion.  For example, it appears some evidence relied upon by the expert was, for lack of a better term, cherry-picked for the opinion.  For example, in support of the conclusions offered, Dr. Mathers noted that meeting minutes from a Cancer Committee meeting in August 1988 reflected concern among committee members that the rate of positive readings on breast biopsies performed at the facility at Fort McClellan over a two-year period was excessively high when compared to other large facilities that had a lower average.  However, what Dr. Mathers failed to include is that, at the same time, the Cancer Committee observed that during the two-year period in which the subject biopsies were performed, the facility "had three different Radiologists, and this may have had some bearing on the figures."  Therefore, the committee members "requested only those figures since the present Radiologist has been here."  Thus, the finding referenced by Dr. Mathers in support of her opinion was actually contemporaneously questioned and not relied on by the Cancer Committee at the time.

The Board has also considered the nonprecedential Memorandum Decision issued by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), submitted in support of the current appeal, namely Gust v. McDonough.  No. 21-1317, 2023 U.S. Ap. Vet. Claims LEXIS 115, *10-11 (Jan. 26, 2023) (mem dec) (Toth, J.) (reversing a Board decision denying service connection due to direct exposure to herbicide agents at Fort McLellan based on the Board's failure to consider all of the evidence of herbicide agent exposure including competent lay statements and multiple studies).  However, the Veteran's case is distinguishable from that veteran's case primarily in that, here, there is negative evidence.   For example, a printout in the record from VA's public health website shows an acknowledgement by VA of potential exposures at FTMC, but a finding that there was no evidence of exposures of such a magnitude or at such high levels so as to cause a variety of adverse health effects.  Additionally, the Military Records Research Center (MRRC) determined in September 2023 that a professional researcher was unable to locate evidence to support the Veteran's claimed exposures at FTMC for the period from March 1980 to June 1980.

Also weighing against the claim are the Veteran's family history of DM, as both a grandparent and sibling have the condition, as well as questionable reports by the Veteran, including relating to the disability on appeal.  In that regard, in support of her claim, the Veteran submitted a June 2023 statement reporting that DM was first diagnosed around 1990 after she began experiencing symptoms in her hands in 1983.  She further reported that she was informed at that time that the numbing in her hands was due to diabetes and was put on medication for DM.  However, she was unable to take the medication for financial reasons and her "symptoms got worse over the years."  In contrast, the Veteran reported in May 2021 correspondence, prior to the filing of the diabetes claim, that diabetes was diagnosed in 2010 after a doctor did a blood sugar test that came back positive for diabetes.  Consistent with that report, the record elsewhere shows that diabetes was diagnosed in 2010, though a history of gestational diabetes was noted on one occasion.  See, e.g., August 2011 and December 2013 Private Treatment Notes; February 2023 VA Treatment Note.  The Board also finds it noteworthy that in seeking treatment for upper extremity symptoms including numbness, paresthesias, and/or tingling, in September 2011, February 2012, and June 2016, the Veteran did not report any history of similar symptoms, or symptoms dating back to service or shortly thereafter.  Even at such time that she expressed her own belief that neurological symptoms were due to diabetes in February 2012, she did not report prior symptoms or a history of being told years prior that hand symptoms were due to diabetes in the 1980s or 1990.

Other inconsistencies include the Veteran's denial of a family history of DMII during VA treatment in September 2021, despite ongoing private treatment records dating since 2011 documenting consistent reports of a family history of DMII.  Additionally, in the June 2023 written statement, the Veteran stated that she was diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in 2010.  However, private treatment records do not show a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy and, in fact, reflect that, in September 2011, electromyography (EMG) was normal and a nerve conduction study (NCS) revealed a left ulnar neuropathy but no evidence of generalized peripheral neuropathy.  Similarly, electrodiagnostic studies in June 2016 showed an unremarkable EMG and NCS indicative of left median mononeuropathy at the wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome) and no diagnosis for the right upper extremity.  The Board also observes that during April 2013 private treatment, it was noted that the Veteran's account of a health-related incident at work was at odds with what was reported by her boss.

In any event, the Board finds that the private of opinion of Dr. Mathers is insufficient for a grant at this time, but does warrant additional development (to include an opinion).  Although the Veteran contends that the evidence submitted is sufficient to establish service connection based on the presence of herbicides in the soil at FTMC, there is no indication that the Veteran is competent to express an opinion relating her condition to the alleged continued presence of herbicide chemicals in the soil at FTMC.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The VA opinion of record is inadequate and the Board is not qualified to make its own medical determination.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991).  Accordingly, the Board finds remand is required to conduct additional development, to include obtaining an adequate VA medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theory and the evidence submitted in support of it.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  The development should include a request to the MRRC for verification of the claimed exposures at FTMC during the Veteran's first period of active duty, as it appears that only the second period of service was investigated.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request from official sources the Veteran's complete service personnel and service treatment records, to include from both periods of active duty.

If service records remain outstanding or incomplete after multiple attempts and exhausting all sources, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to obtain the complete service records.  

2. Attempt to verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure at FTMC to chemicals and herbicide agents, to include requesting MRRC to corroborate the Veteran's asserted exposures at FTMC during the first period of active service from approximately September 27, 1976, to December 18, 1976.  If more details are needed, contact the Veteran to request the information.

If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to herbicide agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to verify the in-service herbicide agent exposure.

3.  Obtain all outstanding treatment records, to include records related to neurological hand complaints and a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus made around 1990, and records from Austin Diagnostic Clinic and Saint David's North Austin Hospital dating since service.

4.  After the foregoing development is completed to the extent possible, send the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate clinician for an addendum opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diabetes mellitus.  The claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  If another examination is deemed necessary, one should be scheduled. 

Following review of the claims file, and examination of the Veteran, if necessary, the examiner should address whether it is at least as likely as not (the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's diabetes resulted from exposure to environmental toxins at Fort McClellan.

In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the Mathers Report and the documents attached to the report relied upon, including consideration of the evidence as a whole.  The examiner must also consider the evidence that herbicide agents used at Fort McClellan persisted in the soil after their use.

All findings and conclusions should be supported with a complete rationale based on consideration of the medical and lay evidence of record.  If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the reason that is so should be explained, indicating whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided or whether the inability to provide an opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge in general or of the examiner.  If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts required), the RO should develop the claim to the extent necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the RO should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

S. C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Fagan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.