Citation Nr: A25030809
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240528-444336
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 20 percent for intervertebral disc syndrome, spinal fusion, and spondylolisthesis (hereinafter "lumbar spine disability") is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Navy from September 2017 to July 2023.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket as well as identified the January 2024 rating decision as the decision on appeal. The Board notes that shortly after the AOJ issued the January 2024 rating decision on appeal - and prior to the Board's receipt of the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement - the Veteran requested a Higher-Level Review of the same decision in January 2024. The AOJ completed its Higher-Level Review and subsequently issued its rating decision on May 23, 2024, which affirmed the findings of the January 2024 rating decision. On May 28, 2024, VA received the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement in which he identified the January 2024 rating decision - rather than the May 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision - as the decision on appeal.

Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a), a claimant may file more than one administrative review request within one year of an initial AOJ decision on a claim, provided that such an administrative review request is not pending concurrently with another administrative review request. Terry v. McDonough, No. 20-7251, 2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims (Oct. 19, 2023). Because the Veteran's appeal of the of January 2024 rating decision to the Board was timely and the AOJ's Higher-Level Review of the same rating decision was completed prior to the Board's receipt of the Veteran's May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the current appeal of the initial January 2024 rating decision to the Board is proper.

Nevertheless, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's increased rating claim for his lumbar spine disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spine disability.

The Veteran seeks an increased initial rating for his lumbar spine disability. Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's increased rating claim must be remanded to allow the AOJ to correct duty-to-assist errors that occurred prior to the issuance of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. The Board sincerely regrets the additional delay caused by this remand but wishes to assure the Veteran that it is necessary for a full and fair adjudication of his claim. 

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is currently?rated?as 20 percent disabling under?38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code?5243, for the entire appeal period on review. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated January 9, 2024. In order to obtain the next highest schedular rating of 40 percent under?the same rating criteria, the record must demonstrate that, within the previous year, the Veteran suffered incapacitating episodes lasting between four and six weeks. To achieve a 60 percent rating, the record must show that within the past year, the Veteran suffered incapacitating episodes that lasted at least six weeks. For purposes of evaluations under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243, Note (1).

First, the Board determines that the AOJ committed a duty-to-assist error by failing to ensure adequate development of the record prior to issuing its January 2024 rating decision. Importantly, the Veteran underwent anterior interbody fusion at L4-L5 on April 28, 2023, followed by L4-L5 hardware revision surgery on May 3, 2023. Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received August 16, 2023. The Veteran's treatment notes from May 2023 the reflect significant post-surgical complications as well as the Veteran's reports of "lower back pain at surgical site [that] is worse compared to his recent surgery; currently 10/10 severity." Id. at 6.

The Veteran also participated in acute comprehensive in-patient rehabilitation for 15 days following the afore-mentioned lower back surgeries, during which he was noted as being "an active participant in [...] physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, recreational therapy, rehabilitation nursing, and consultation from neuropsychology." Id. at 12. However, the evidence of record available for review under AMA does not appear to contain complete treatment notes from his acute, post-operative in-patient stay. 

Similarly, the record prior to the January 2024 rating decision does not contain treatment notes after May 2023 despite discussions of, or references to, the Veteran's robust post-surgical treatment plan, which included placement in a formal pain management program, physical therapy, and immediate follow-up care with a urologist due to post-surgical complications. Despite the foregoing, the record does not reflect that attempts were made to obtain the Veteran's complete post-surgical treatment records prior to adjudicating the issue on appeal. Accordingly, the Board finds that the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error in failing to obtain the Veteran's complete medical records for the appeal period on review. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

Next, the Board finds that the AOJ erred in relying on an inadequate VA examination report as well as in providing insufficient reasons or bases for its determination that the record supported a 20 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's lumbar spine condition under?38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code?5243. 

The Veteran attended a VA thoracolumbar Compensation and Pension (C&P) examination in December 2023 that was administered by J.N., APRN. See C&P Exam, received December 20, 2023. Importantly, the Veteran reported that he experienced unpredictable flare-ups that rendered him "unable to fully flex/extend/rotate back." Id. Similarly, the Veteran reported that after repeated use of his lower back over time, "I can't bend, tie my shoes." Id. 

As alluded to above, the Veteran underwent two lumbar spine surgeries, from which he endured severe urological and neurological complications that necessitated enrollment in acute post-operative in-patient rehabilitation for 15 days in May 2023. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received August 16, 2023. The Veteran's acute in-patient physical therapy notes show that he used a walker and required assistance completing many activities of daily living. See id. at 17 (noting, for example, that the Veteran required maximal assistance with toileting as well as "Minimal Assist, of 2 people" for performing gait movements and moving from seated-to-standing positions). 

Despite the serious issues noted above, J.N. did not discuss - or otherwise acknowledge - the Veteran's acute, in-patient stay which, again, lasted 15 days. Similarly, J.N. did not discuss the likelihood - if any - that the Veteran would be incapacitated after discharge from his post-operative in-patient rehabilitation. In fact, in answering the prompt of whether the Veteran received any "treatment, medications, or surgery," J.N. answered "none, lumbar fusion" despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary in the evidence of record available to her for review. C&P Exam, received December 20, 2023. 

Similarly, J.N. also answered "No" to the question of whether the Veteran "had any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 month." However, J.N. did not explain why the Veteran's 15-day in-patient rehabilitation - which occurred approximately seven months prior to the VA examination - would not be considered "bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician." See id.

The Board reiterates that in order to obtain the next highest schedular rating under?38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code?5243, the record must demonstrate that the Veteran suffered incapacitating episodes lasting between four and six weeks within the previous year. On its own, the Veteran's 15-day in-patient rehabilitation period potentially satisfies at least half of the time required for a higher rating under Diagnostic Code?5243. As such, J.N.'s failure to solicit information about, or otherwise discuss, the Veteran's post-surgical medical complications and treatment constitutes a grievous pre-decisional duty-to-assist error that requires remand to rectify. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Assist the Veteran in associating with the claims file any and all relevant private treatment records, particularly those from the Veteran's 15-day acute, in-patient rehabilitation and on treatment encounters occurring after May 2023.

All attempts to obtain these records pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) must be documented.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current nature and severity of his lumbar spine disability. The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluation of the Veteran's back condition under the rating criteria. 

(a.) In particular, the examiner should provide range of motion test results (in degrees) for the Veteran's back on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and non-weightbearing. 

(b.) The examiner is asked to describe whether pain significantly limits functional ability during flare-ups and, if so, the examiner must estimate the range of motion during flares. 

IF THE EXAMINATION DOES NOT TAKE PLACE DURING A FLARE, THE EXAMINER MUST GLEAN INFORMATION REGARDING THE FLARES' SEVERITY, FREQUENCY, DURATION, AND FUNCTIONAL LOSS MANIFESTATIONS FROM THE VETERAN, MEDICAL RECORDS, AND OTHER AVAILABLE SOURCES. EFFORTS TO OBTAIN SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE DOCUMENTED. 

If there is no pain and/or no limitation of function, such facts must be noted in the report. 

(c.) The examiner is asked to address if the Veteran has IVDS and if his symptoms rise to the level of incapacitating episodes with a total duration of six weeks during the last month. In rendering this opinion, the examiner should consider any private treatment records obtained and the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements. 

**The examiner must discuss the Veteran's acute comprehensive in-patient rehabilitation for 15 days following his lower back surgeries in May 2023, during which he was noted as being "an active participant in [...] physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, recreational therapy, rehabilitation nursing, and consultation from neuropsychology." Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, pgs. 12-17, received August 16, 2023.

(d.) State what the severity of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability might be absent the ameliorative effects of any medication (in other words, the ameliorative effects of medication and the level of functional impairment that would be present absent such medication should be discussed). 

**The examiner is requested to make all reasonable efforts to comply with Correia v. McDonald and Sharp v. Shulkin. In particular, the examiner is asked to describe whether pain has significantly limited functional ability during flares and, if so, the examiner must estimate range of motion during flares. 

THE EXAMINER MUST GLEAN INFORMATION REGARDING THE FLARES' SEVERITY, FREQUENCY, DURATION, AND FUNCTIONAL LOSS MANIFESTATIONS FROM THE VETERAN, MEDICAL RECORDS, AND OTHER AVAILABLE SOURCES. EFFORTS TO OBTAIN SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE DOCUMENTED. 

All indicated tests and studies deemed necessary by the examiner should be accomplished. An explanation for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training. 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cross, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.