Citation Nr: A25030512
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-419869
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for compensation under 38 U.S.C. §1151 for a right wrist condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1980 to July 1985.  The Board notes that the service period from December 2, 1983 has been deemed dishonorable for VA purposes.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the right wrist claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The claim for compensation for a right wrist condition under 38 U.S.C. §1151 is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for a right wrist condition.  This matter was recently remanded by the Board in an April 2022 decision for correction of multiple pre-decisional duty to assist errors; however, a careful review of the record indicates that the AOJ failed to comply with the Board's remand directives. 

In the April 2022 remand, the AOJ was directed to "obtain and associate with the claims file any outstanding pertinent medical records, whether VA or private, to include the entirety of records relating to treatment at the Atlanta VAMC, Syracuse VAMC, Albany VAMC, and Bath VAMC, from January 1999 to current." The Board then directed as follows: "After completing the above, and any additional development warranted by the record, schedule the Veteran for an examination..."  Note, the language in bold was shown as such in the Board's April 2022 remand. The Board further directed the examiner to "[o]btain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology and employment."  After obtaining the aforementioned information, the examiner was asked to answer a series of questions in relation to the Veteran's claim. 

In August 2022, the AOJ associated thousands of pages of VA treatment records from multiple VA Medical Centers. The records span dates between June 1999 and December 2021. 

An October 2022 record notes that the Veteran failed to appear for a scheduled VA examination of his right wrist; however, the claims file does not show that the Veteran was notified of said appointment. In a December 2022 rating decision, the AOJ concluded that the evidence of record showed no good cause for his failure to report, and as such, it decided the claim based on the evidence of record and denied the claim. The Veteran sought higher level review. 

In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ identified a duty to assist error. Specifically, the AOJ failed to obtain federal records. The decision notes that the AOJ will "develop for complete federal medical records and a VA exam/opinion." 

In May 2023, the AOJ sent an examination scheduling request to QTC (a third party vendor). The request contained the Board's directives along with a note that states: "The Veteran needs to report for all examinations..." Following this request, the AOJ sent a June 7, 2023 letter to the Veteran notifying him that QTC Medical Services was contracted to conduct a VA medical disability evaluation. Despite the Board's remand directives and its own May 2023 examination request, in bold, the AOJ notified the Veteran as follows: "An in-person evaluation will not be performed by this provider. Instead, the provider will review your VA medical evidence to complete the VA's disability benefits questionnaire." While dated June 7, 2023, this letter was associated with the file on June 21, 2023, the same date the VA examiner issued his report. 

In a November 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that its duty to assist error was harmless and indicated that "[n]o revision is warranted in the decision to deny compensation for right wrist disability status post open reduction internal fixation." That notwithstanding, the AOJ indicated that it would still develop the claim for "complete federal records and a VA exam/opinion."  The Veteran sought higher level review.

In December 2023, several VA treatment records from multiple facilities (labeled as Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility) were associated with the file. Notably, many of the records were from 1999 and were related to the Veteran's right wrist surgery and post-operative infection. 

In a February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ confirmed its previous denial finding that the federal records obtained did not prove or disprove an issue within the claim. To support its finding, the AOJ also referenced the June 2023 VA examiner's medical opinion. The Veteran filed a timely appeal to the Board.

Finally, in an April 2024 letter to the Veteran, the AOJ advised that his November 2023 request for higher level review was premature as the underlying decision was not final. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's attorney submitted a February 2024 brief in response to the AOJ's latest rating decision. The Board has considered her arguments as well as the pertinent information detailed above and finds that a remand is necessary. First, despite the clear directives of the Board, emphasized in bold, the AOJ failed to obtain all outstanding medical records prior to scheduling a VA examination. Second, the AOJ explicitly informed the Veteran not to report for an examination that clearly required his presence. In this regard, the Board notes that the AOJ was directed to "schedule the Veteran for an examination" and the examiner was directed to "[o]btain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology and employment." In light of these deficiencies, the Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to schedule the Veteran for an in-person examination in order to obtain an opinion regarding his right wrist condition. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his right wrist condition. 

The examiner is directed to obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology and employment. 

The examiner should answer the following questions: 

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran has had an additional disability due to his VA treatment for his right wrist facture in 1999? Why or why not?

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that the Veteran's right wrist condition underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated), regardless of performance, due to his VA treatment in 1999?  Why or why not?

If, and only if, the Veteran's right wrist condition underwent an incremental increase or otherwise has an additional disability due to his VA treatment, the examiner should answer the following questions: 

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (approximate balance or nearly equal) that such additional disability was the result of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance on VA's part (i.e. did VA fail to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable healthcare provider, either through action or inaction)? Why or why not?

(b)	Based upon the specific facts and circumstances of this Veteran's case, was such additional disability a reasonably foreseeable outcome of the Veteran's VA treatment? Why or why not?

(c)	Would a reasonable healthcare provider have considered the Veteran's additional disability to be an ordinary risk of the treatment provided? Why or why not? If so, would a reasonable healthcare provider have disclosed such risk related to the treatment, regardless of what risks the treating physician foresaw, and disclosed such in any informed consent forms? Why or why not?

In formulating the requested opinions, the examiner is instructed to consider and specifically address:

(a)	VA treatment records indicating that the Veteran's x-rays were initially interpreted as negative with respect to the Veteran's right wrist.

(b)	The Veteran's contention that the severity of his current right wrist condition is attributable to the delay in treatment for his right wrist fracture.

(c)	The Veteran's contention that his post-surgical infections were attributable to the use of pins that were not sterile.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Graison-McBride, Kimberly F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.