Citation Nr: A25030384
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220112-210942
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for type II diabetes mellitus (DM) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hand neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand neuropathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from August 1967 to June 1970.

In January 2022, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal electing hearing docket to review a December 2021 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

A Board hearing was held in December 2024.  A transcript is of record.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 rating decision as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for type II DM

Entitlement to service connection for right hand neuropathy

Entitlement to service connection for left hand neuropathy

The Veteran contends his DM is a result of his exposure to Agent Orange and his bilateral hand neuropathy was developed secondary to his DM.  See December 2024 Hearing Transcript.

In the December 2021 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable findings that Agent Orange exposure was conceded, and the Veteran served in Vietnam.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801.

A Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP) was completed in October 2021.  The CMP reflected the Veteran's glucose and bilirubin were high.  See October 2021 LabCorp Patient Report.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2021.  Therein, the examiner found there was no official diagnosis of DM, and the Veteran did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of DM.  However, the examiner found the Veteran visited his diabetic care provider for episodes of ketoacidosis and episodes of hypoglycemia less than two times per month.  The examiner stated that the Veteran's recent CMP in October 2021, showed results of high bilirubin.  The examiner explained that bilirubin was due to liver issues.

It is clear from the records that the Veteran was being treated by private physicians.  The CMP was ordered by a Dr. J.M. and in the VA examination, the examiner found the Veteran was seeing a physician to treat his diabetes.  VA's duty to assist requires VA to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim for VA benefits, including obtaining relevant, adequately identified records not in the custody of a Federal department or agency.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A.  The Board thus finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain and associate the Veteran's private treatment records prior to the issuance of the December 2021 rating decision, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In addition, the VA's duty to assist includes conducting a thorough and comprehensive medical examination.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2).  The Board is required to ensure that medical opinions are made on the basis of sufficient facts or data and the application of reliable medical principles.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008).  A medical opinion is adequate if it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and describes the Veteran's condition in sufficient detail so as to allow the Board to make a fully informed evaluation.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007); see also Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994).  This requires the opinion to "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two."  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

The Board finds the December 2021 VA examination inadequate, as it failed to consider all of the evidence in the record.  The examiner mentioned the Veteran's high level of bilirubin, but failed to mention that the CMP also reflected the Veteran's high level of glucose which can be an indicator of DM.  Thus, a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Turning to the Veteran's claim for bilateral hand neuropathy, which he alleges is secondary to his DM.  Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the service-connected disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1988).  As to the third Wallin element, the current disability may be caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); see also Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019) (aggravation may be found when there is any incremental increase in disability or impairment of earning capacity, regardless of permanence).

The determination of secondary service connection is directly related to a finding that the Veteran is diagnosed with DM and if same is then service connected.  Based on the above, the Board must remand entitlement to service connection for bilateral hand neuropathy as it is inexplicably intertwined with the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for DM.

These matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any private (non-VA) providers or facilities who may have additional medical records, including but not limited to Dr. J.M. and Klickitat Valley Health.  

2. After completing the first directive, obtain an addendum opinion to address the nature and etiology of DM.  The examiner should provide a detailed opinion as to: 

(a)	Whether the Veteran merits a diagnosis of DM at any point approximate to the filing of his claim in April 2021 or since then?  

3. After completing the first and second directives, if DM is diagnosed, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to address the nature and etiology of his bilateral hand neuropathy.  The examiner should provide a detailed opinion as to:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's bilateral hand neuropathy was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty service?

(b)	Whether the Veteran's bilateral hand neuropathy is due to his DM?

(c)	Whether the Veteran's bilateral hand neuropathy has been aggravated (i.e., worsened) by his DM?  

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are separate and distinct concepts and require separate rationales.  The examiner should provide specific evidence of record to support any conclusions, such as references from this Veteran's relevant medical history and/or medical literature.  In formulating any opinion, the examiner must address the Veteran's contentions.

The clinician must provide a rationale to support the opinion.  

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, such as the onset of the symptoms.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the reviewing clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Simons

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.