Citation Nr: A25030590
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220419-236444
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from February 1986 to September 1992, and in the United States Army from May 2006 to February 2008.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2020 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Veteran submitted a request for Higher-Level Review in February 2021, and a Higher-Level Review decision was issued in April 2021.

In the April 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2020 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in their readjudication.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran has requested service connection for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy, a right hip disability, and a right knee disability.  He wrote in January 2020 that his service-connected lumbar spine strain with degenerative disc disease has worsened and now has secondary radiculopathy causing pain in both legs and more functional difficulty with activities like walking, chores, sports, and using stairs.  He wrote that because of his service-connected right knee disorder, he had to walk unevenly, and this had caused or aggravated current right hip and knee conditions.

In January 2020, he was scheduled for a VA examinations to be held to assess these disabilities.  The Veteran notified VA prior to the examinations that he was unavailable for these examinations, and in February 2020, he called VA about rescheduling the examinations, stating that he was currently overseas and would attend an examination when he returned.

When a veteran misses a scheduled VA examination, the Board must consider (1) whether the examination was necessary to establish entitlement to the benefit sought and (2) whether the veteran lacked good cause to miss the scheduled examination.? See Turk v. Peake, 21?Vet. App.?565, 569 (2008).  Here, the Board finds that the examinations were necessary in order to establish entitlement to the benefits sought, and the Veteran had good cause to miss the scheduled examinations.  There may have been some miscommunication between the Veteran and the Regional Office regarding whether and when the examinations should be rescheduled, but the record does show that the Veteran has returned to living in the United States, and he has subsequently attended VA examinations for other claims.  The Board therefore finds that the Regional Office had a duty to follow up with the Veteran and to afford him another opportunity to attend these VA examinations.  This failure in the duty to assist is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the Board remands the claims to correct that error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to evaluate the nature and etiology of any current right or left lower extremity radiculopathy or peripheral nerve disorder.  The?examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed.? The examiner should then address:? 

a)	What are the Veteran's current diagnoses related to the right and left lower extremity nerves?? Does the Veteran have a diagnosis of radiculopathy?

b)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder had its onset during or is related to his active military service?

c)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder is a symptom of, or was caused or aggravated by, his service-connected lumbar spine strain with degenerative disc disease?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered.? If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.?? 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to evaluate the nature and etiology of any current right knee disorder.  The?examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed.? The examiner should then address:? 

a)	What are the Veteran's current diagnoses related to the right knee?? 

b)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder had its onset during or is related to his active military service?

c)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder was caused or aggravated by his service-connected lumbar spine strain with degenerative disc disease, bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle strain, or left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered.? If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.?? 

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to evaluate the nature and etiology of any current right hip disorder.  The?examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed.? The examiner should then address:? 

a)	What are the Veteran's current diagnoses related to the right hip?? 

b)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder had its onset during or is related to his active military service?

c)	For all disorders found, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder was caused or aggravated by his service-connected lumbar spine strain with degenerative disc disease, bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis, bilateral ankle strain, or left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered.? If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.?? 

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mary E. Rude, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.