Citation Nr: A25030524
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230202-321709
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1979 to October 1987 and from February 1989 to January 2001.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2022 higher-level review decision following an August 2021 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See February 2023 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the August 2021 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

The Board notes that evidence was associated with the claims file after the August 2021 rating decision on appeal, which was during a period of time that is outside the applicable evidentiary window.  However, as the claim is being remanded, the AOJ will consider the claim in light of the entire claims file upon remand.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  For the following reasons, the Board finds that a remand is needed based on multiple pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

October 2018 VA Examinations

Initially, an October 2018 VA examination found that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not related to service generally because the disability was diagnosed in 2018 and there was no mention of the condition or a sleep disorder in service.  An October 2018 VA Gulf War examination found that the sleep apnea was not related to environmental hazard exposure in Southwest Asia because the Veteran did not have a chronic disability pattern associated with such exposure defined as undiagnosed illness or diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness.  The disability had a clear etiology and diagnosis.  

The Board finds problems with these examinations.  The October 2018 VA examination did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to exposure to oil fire smoke, passive cigarette smoke, tent heater smoke, CARC paint, other paints, solvents, and/or diesel fuel, as shown in the service records.  See July 2018 STR.  As such, the examination did not consider or address all of the relevant evidence of record.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  

The October 2018 VA Gulf War examination apparently did not actually provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to environmental hazard exposure in Southwest Asia, or if it did, it did not provide an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  It merely said that the Veteran did not have a chronic disability pattern associated with such exposure defined as undiagnosed illness or diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness and that the sleep apnea had a clear etiology and diagnosis.  It did not address whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to environmental hazards, such as oil fire smoke.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

March 2020 Private Medical Opinion

Next, a March 2020 private medical opinion found that the Veteran's weight gain/obesity was due to service-connected left and right knee disabilities; that the Veteran's sleep apnea was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain/obesity; and that the sleep apnea would not have occurred without the weight gain/obesity.  The opinion explained that the knees were painful and sleep problems resulted from the pain.  The Veteran had gained a lot of weight since entering service.  The progressive weight gain developed after the knee disabilities.  Research showed that chronic musculoskeletal pain caused sleep disturbances and that chronic partial sleep loss increased the risk of obesity and weight gain.  Sleep issues caused increased hunger and appetite.  Due to knee pain, the Veteran was unable to be as active as he was before and progressively gained weight.  The opinion then explained how weight gain/obesity could cause or aggravate sleep apnea.  See April 2020 Medical Treatment Record. 

The Board finds problems with the private medical opinion.  First, the opinion did not appear to treat causation and aggravation as independent concepts, which they are.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013); Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).

Second, the opinion apparently did not explain how it was known that the Veteran's knee pain caused sleep problems.  The opinion reportedly was based on the evidence in the claims file and without an interview of the Veteran.  A review of the claims file does not appear to show any lay or medical evidence suggesting that knee pain affected the Veteran's sleep.  

Third, the opinion did not appear to address whether other health problems played a role in the Veteran's sleep problems, lower activity level, or weight gain.  Specifically, the evidence of record suggests pain in the shoulders, elbows, and the back.  The opinion even mentioned that back pain could lead to weight gain but did not discuss the Veteran's back pain.  See February 2015 STR - Medical; July 2018 Fully Developed Claim.   

Fourth, the opinion appears to suggest that the Veteran's knee pain could have resulted in increased hunger or appetite.  However, a review of the claims file does not appear to show any lay or medical evidence suggesting an increase in such or that any increase was related to knee pain.  Rather, evidence suggests that eating problems were related to the fact that the Veteran was in a vehicle a lot during the day.  See March 2021 CAPRI; June 2021 Medical Treatment Record.

Fifth, other than weight gain/obesity, the opinion did not appear to address other risk factors for sleep apnea.  Evidence of record shows that other risk factors include being a male, neck circumference, cigarette smoke, alcohol use, and the use of sedatives or tranquilizers.  See October 2018 C&P Exam.  Evidence of record shows the Veteran's neck circumference, shows exposure to cigarette smoke, and shows the use of alcohol.  See October 2018 C&P Exam; July 2018 STR; February 2015 STR - Medical.

As such, the March 2020 private medical opinion also did not provide an adequate rational and did not consider or address all of the relevant evidence of record.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.   

July 2021 VA Examination

Finally, a July 2021 VA examination found that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not related to service generally because it was not diagnosed during service but many years later.  The examination noted that although the Veteran may have had sleep issues in service, given that sleep apnea was not diagnosed until after service, the examiner was unable to attribute the sleep issues in service to sleep apnea.  Sleep issues had a wide variety of considerations with sleep apnea being just one.  The examination also found that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not caused by the Veteran's service-connected left and right knee disabilities because at the time of the sleep study, the Veteran's body mass index was above 25, which was a majority cause of sleep apnea.  As such, any other potential causes of sleep apnea were less likely to have caused the Veteran's sleep apnea.  Additionally, weight could be effectively managed by limiting caloric intake.  There were several cases of association of weight gain and psychiatric and physical conditions; however, they were associative relationships and not causal relationships.  Because limiting caloric intake could effectively manage weight, the Veteran's excess weight was not due to the service-connected left and right knee disabilities causing decreased mobility.

The Board finds problems with this examination.  For the opinion that the sleep apnea was not related to service generally, the examination did not opine as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to exposure to oil fire smoke, passive cigarette smoke, tent heater smoke, CARC paint, other paint, solvents, and/or diesel fuel, as shown in the service records.  As such, the examination did not consider or address all of the relevant evidence of record.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

For the opinion that sleep apnea was not caused by service-connected disability, including with obesity as an intermediate step, the examination did not provide aggravation opinions.  As noted above, causation and aggravation are independent concepts.  See El-Amin, 26 Vet. App. at 136; Atencio, 30 Vet. App. at 74.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Additionally, for the opinion that sleep apnea was not caused by service-connected disability, including with obesity as an intermediate step, the examination did not address research in the claims file suggesting that pain from the Veteran's knees may have affected his sleep, which among other things, may have affected how hungry/how big of an appetite he had, which may have led to excess weight.  This would seem to have possibly affected the Veteran's ability to effectively manage weight by limiting caloric intake.  As such, the examination did not consider or address all of the relevant evidence of record.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Finally, for the opinion that sleep apnea was not caused by service-connected disability, including with obesity as an intermediate step, the examination stated that weight could be effectively managed by limiting caloric intake but did not explain how it was known that excess caloric intake caused the Veteran's weight gain.  The examination did not point to any research or any evidence in the claims file to support its opinion.  As such, the examination did not provide an adequate rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 295.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Therefore, a remand is needed for a VA medical addendum opinion.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule one or more appropriate VA medical addendum opinions for the Veteran's sleep apnea claim.  The need for an in-person examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Inform the examiner that "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Following a review of the claims file and a copy of this remand, the reviewing examiner is requested to furnish an opinion with respect to the following:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service, including but not limited to, exposure to oil fire smoke, passive cigarette smoke, tent heater smoke, CARC paint, other paint, solvents, diesel fuel, and any other environmental hazard exposure during service in Southwest Asia?

(B) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by or was due to the Veteran's service-connected (a) right knee patellar femoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring and/or (b) left knee chronic tibial tendonitis with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring?

(C) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea has been aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected (a) right knee patellar femoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring and/or (b) left knee chronic tibial tendonitis with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring?

(D) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected (a) right knee patellar femoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring and/or (b) left knee chronic tibial tendonitis with degenerative arthritis and patellar spurring caused and/or aggravated the Veteran's obesity/being overweight including whether there has been any incremental increase in disability or aggravation as a result of service?

(E) If the answer to question (D) is yes, is it at least as likely as not that the obesity/being overweight caused and/or aggravated the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea including whether there has been any incremental increase in disability or aggravation as a result of service?

In providing answers to the above secondary service connection questions the examiner is advised that the Federal Circuit established a new "but-for standard" for establishing secondary service connection (i.e., but-for the problems caused by this Veteran's already service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, he would not have developed right and/or left hip disabilities).

In addition, in providing answers to the above aggravation question the examiner is advised that the Court held that a "permanent worsening" of a non-service-connected disability is not required to establish secondary service connection on the basis of aggravation (i.e., aggravation may include temporary worsening of a disability).

For aggravation, state whether there has been a medically ascertainable increase in disability regardless of permanence.  Any increase in disability should be described in terms of diagnosis, severity, and duration.  The permanence of the aggravation is not at issue.

A complete rationale for all opinions offered should be provided.  Address the Veteran's documented history and assertions.  Address the evidence mentioned further up in this remand.  Address the medical research provided in the March 2020 private medical opinion and address how such applies or does not apply to the Veteran.  See April 2020 Medical Treatment Record.

All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation stating why.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is due to the limits of the medical community's knowledge or due to the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

J. Abrams

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dougan, Adam T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.