Citation Nr: A25030309
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220310-229194
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1969 to March 1972.

The present appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) following an October 2021 Higher-Level Review rating decision. The Veteran appealed that decision by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in March 2022. He elected the Evidence docket. Therefore, consideration may only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. 

If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure.

The Veteran seeks service connection for congestive heart failure. Specifically, the Veteran contends his congestive heart failure is due to or related to exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Korea. See May 2013 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). Following a review of the evidence, the Board finds a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error based on the failure to develop relevant evidence. 

There is a presumption of actually being exposed to the herbicide agents for covered service performed in the Korean DMZ. 38 U.S.C. § 1116 ; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(6). A Veteran who, during active military, naval, or air service, served in or near the DMZ, during the period beginning September 1, 1967, and ending on August 31, 1971, shall be presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents, unless there is affirmative evidence that he was not exposed. 38 U.S.C. § 1116B. Once exposure to herbicides has been established by the evidence of record, the presumption of service connection found in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e) for herbicide-related diseases is applicable.

The Veteran's personnel records show that he served in Korea with the 802d Engineer Battalion and the 76th Engineer Battalion in March 1970. See January 2014 Military Personnel Record. From March 1971, the Veteran served in Korea with the 802d Engineer Battalion. 

The Veteran explained his unit was tasked with paving roads in the DMZ of Korea. The Veteran's captain, O.C.M., provided a statement in support of the Veteran's claim. See April 2020 VA 21-4138 Statement In Support of Claim. O.C.M. reported that the battalion's duty was to build paved roads along and into the DMZ. He stated they had to follow units attached to their command such as the A Company, heavy equipment platoons of C and D companies, and an additional dump truck company. While in the DMZ, he remembers see no vegetation in and around the DMZ. They were told the vegetation was killed by a chemical, but they were not told what the chemical was. O.C.M. described the area around their camp, "Tent City", in March 1970 as being treated with an unknown chemical to kill all vegetation. 

Another statement, authored by R.S.C. and received on October 10, 2014, provided corresponding details to the Veteran's service in Korea.  R.S.C. was a fellow service-member in the 76th Engineer Battalion with the Veteran. R.S.C. also identified the battalion's camp as "Tent City", or "Camp Bravo." R.S.C. provided that the battalion went back and forth from their camp to the DMZ to perform roadwork. He even stated that sometimes they would stay at Camp Giant. 

Another fellow service-member, J.H.J., identified the battalion's home camp as "Camp Bravo (AKA Tent City)." See VA 21--4138 Statement in Support of Claim. He stated that Camp Bravo was located next to the Kwonton Village and a river. He recalled delivering rocks to Company A (Camp Brown) who made asphalt. He described Camp Brown as north of the Yongju-gol village. Lastly, he stated that sometimes they would stay with the 2nd Infantry Division. He recalled being given an open mess card for the 2nd Infantry Division. 

The October 2021 higher-level review decision on appeal denied the Veteran's claim concluding that the AOJ was unable to locate any evidence to show that the Veteran's units were exposed to Agent Orange while serving in the Korean DMZ. See Rating Decision - Narrative. Records/reports reflecting the efforts that were taken were not provided. Notably, there is no development or discussion of the Veteran and fellow service-member's statements regarding the battalion's requirements to travel through the DMZ to build roads and their reports of staying in other camps in and around the DMZ.  

?

Thus, the Board finds that there was inadequate development as to the location of the Veteran's unit in relation to the DMZ and potential exposure to herbicide agents while serving in Korea from February 1970 to March 1972 prior to the decision on appeal. Remand is warranted to cure this defect.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Develop and verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure to herbicide agents in Korea. The AOJ must document for the record the dates, locations, and circumstances of the Veteran's service in Korea, to include the Veteran's reported duties while serving with C Co 3rd Bn 1st Bde, CoB, 76th Engineer Battalion, and Co A and CoB, 802d Engineer Battalion from 1970 to 1971.  

Following a review of the record, lay statements, and photographs associated with the record, the AOJ must submit a request to the appropriate agency/resource as deemed necessary, for verification of the Veteran's reported exposure to herbicide agents (Agent Orange) during his service, to specifically include at Camp Bravo (or "Tent City"), Camp Brown, and Camp Giant in Korea.  

To the extent possible, the memorandum should include responses (with explanation) to the following:

(a.) Did the circumstances, to include his duties as a road paver, of the Veteran's service in Korea at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) expose him to herbicide agents (Agent Orange)?

If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to herbicide agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to verify the in-service herbicide agent exposure. 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michelle B., Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.