Citation Nr: A25030533
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231106-391787
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder (MDD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD and major depressive disorder has been manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD and major depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2006 to August 2020. The Veteran's awards and decorations include the Air Medal, Army Commendation Medal (2nd Award), Army Achievement Medal (6th Award), Meritorious Unit Commendation, Army Good Conduct Medal (3rd Award), National Defense Service Medal, and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal. The Board thanks the Veteran for his honorable service to our Nation! 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in January 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denying the Veteran's July 2022 claim for an increase in the Veteran's 70 percent disability rating for his service-connected PTSD and major depressive disorder, under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In November 2023, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Based on the Veteran's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider such evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that prior to filing the November 2023 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran had submitted a July 2023 VA Form 20-995 Supplemental Claim seeking review of the January 2023 rating decision.  Under the AMA, concurrent or duplicate election is prohibited, meaning that once a claimant has filed for review through one option (i.e., higher-level review, supplemental claim, Board review), the Veteran cannot seek review under a different one, or in multiple, while that review is pending final adjudication.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).  In this case, however, following the Veteran's submission of the supplemental claim, VA sent the Veteran a letter, dated August 8, 2023, advising him that VA regulations required the claim be submitted on a VA Form 21-526EZ (i.e., as a new claim).  The Veteran did not submit a new claim, and the RO did not proceed to adjudicate the July 2023 supplemental claim.  Accordingly, because the RO initially rejected the supplemental claim, and has not subsequently accepted it, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the Veteran's November 2023 appeal of the January 2023 rating decision to ensure the Veteran's request for review of that rating decision is addressed.  

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD and major depressive disorder (MDD).

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id.

By way of background, the Veteran filed an initial claim in January 2020, while still in service, for entitlement to service connection for numerous disabilities, including PTSD and other psychiatric disorders.  A September 2020 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD and MDD at a 70 percent disability rating, effective August 28, 2020.  Following an additional VA examination, a May 2021 rating decision continued the 70 percent rating.  The Veteran did not appeal that decision, and it became final.  In July 2022, the Veteran submitted the claim from which the January 2023 rating decision on appeal stems, which was a VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim (i.e., a new claim).  The Veteran maintains a higher rating for his PTSD and MDD is warranted.

Concerning an increased rating for the Veteran's PTSD and MDD disability, the appeal period before the Board stems from his July 20, 2022 claim, plus the one-year look-back period.  Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD and MDD disability is rated as 70 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9411, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In pertinent part, the General Rating Formula provides a 70 percent rating where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as:  suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as:  gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

As the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit explained, evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 11617 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating."  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms[,] but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation ... requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'"  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination."  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

To warrant a higher rating for the period on appeal, the evidence must demonstrate psychiatric symptomatology resulting in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as:  gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Upon review, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD disability is not warranted at any time during the appeal period.

The pertinent evidence during the review period includes a January 2023 in-person VA examination that included a PTSD Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) reflecting diagnoses of PTSD, recurrent, severe major depressive disorder (MDD), unspecified insomnia, and alcohol abuse (in remission).  The DBQ indicated that the symptoms of these disorders and their resulting impairments overlap, with the examiner noting it was not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran's various other medical diagnoses impact his mental health disorder by reducing his ability to complete activities of daily living, generating physical discomfort, and providing a diminished sense of self-efficacy.   

In the DBQ's Section II, item 4, regarding clinical findings of symptoms for rating purposes, the examiner indicated the symptoms related to the Veteran's diagnoses to be depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation.  The examiner indicated the Veteran had no other symptoms than those listed that were attributable to his PTSD and related mental health diagnoses.  

With respect to recent relevant social, marital, and family history (since his prior PTSD examination in May 2021), the Veteran reported he had moved the previous year and continued to live with his wife and son.  He indicated he was not employed and had not had any recent educational advancements.  The Veteran reported that he has been engaged in outpatient mental health treatment, is currently on a psychotropic regimen with Venlafaxine, Adderall, Propranolol, Trazadone, Lunesta, Mirtazapine, and Prazosin, and experiences recurrent passive suicidal ideation but denies any suicidal plans or intents.  The Veteran denied any legal issues, as well as the use of alcohol or illicit substances.

The examiner's behavioral observations indicated the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation, and was cooperative, receptive, and actively participating in the assessment.  His mood was described as somewhat depressed but stable, and he was casually dressed, with good hygiene.  No significant impairment in short-term or long-term memory was noted in the evaluation, and the Veteran's speech was of normal tone and volume.  The examiner indicated the Veteran exhibited fair insight and judgment, with no hallucinations or delusions, and while the Veteran endorsed passive suicidal ideation, he had no plans or attempts, as noted.  He denied any homicidal ideation.  The examiner further indicated the Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs.    

In remarks, the examiner indicated the Veteran's records had been reviewed and considered when completing the DBQ, and noted the increased severity in the Veteran's MDD diagnosis as recurrent and severe, and the additional diagnoses of unspecified insomnia, and alcohol abuse in remission, with no associated symptoms.  With respect to imminent or critical findings, the examiner identified the Veteran as a low acute risk for suicide, due to no current suicidal intent, no specific and current suicidal plan, no recent preparatory behaviors, and a collective high confidence (e.g., patient, care provider, family member) in the ability of the patient to independently maintain safety.  The examiner indicated that these patients are capable of engaging in appropriate coping strategies, and willing and able to utilize a safety plan in a crisis situation.  The Veteran was provided Veterans Crisis Line (VCL) information and was encouraged to address these concerns with his treatment provider, if applicable. 

With respect to a summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment, the examiner checked the box indicating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  The Board notes that this level of symptomatology is consistent with a 70 percent rating under the General Rating Formula.

Moreover, as reported in the VA examination, the Veteran has been engaged in ongoing outpatient mental health treatment, and the Board notes the presence of additional VA medical records during the review period that are pertinent to the Veteran's appeal.  In that regard, the Veteran communicated frequently with his treatment providers and periodically underwent mental health examinations that the Board has considered here.  While these communications and examinations include the Veteran's contemporaneous reports of nightmares, fluctuations in his stress reactions due to health and other concerns, situational social avoidance, effects of his medications, and other symptoms, the overall symptomatology displayed in the reports is consistent with that reflected in the January 2023 VA examination.  A September 2021 outpatient note, for example, reports sleep problems, appetite and energy disturbances, concerns over kidney functioning, nightmares, and diminished social interactions.  In the examination, he reported a great relationship with his son, which he described as warm and affectionate, and indicates he takes his son to school, picks him up, and helps him with his homework.  The mental status examination on that date described a dysphoric mood, reportedly poor concentration and attention, and similar suicidal ideation as described in the September 2023 VA examination, i.e., daily, but never with a plan or intent, which he attributed to having a son.  Grooming and hygiene were good, behavior pleasant and cooperative, speech normal, affect congruent, no presence of hallucinations or delusions, proper orientation, grossly intact memory, and intact and good judgment and insight.  Additional examinations and communications with his providers during the review period reflect similar complaints, symptoms, and status evaluations.  These include, for example, records from October 2021 to December 2021, describing increased stress, isolation, and depression relating to a move to a different city, his other health concerns, some arguments with his wife, and worries about making sure his son gets a good education and does not feel the Veteran's stress.  In a November 2021 telephone discussion with his mental health provider, he indicated he feels more down than usual, but is not suicidal, stating "I'm sure I will figure it out, I always do."  Similarly, treatment notes from January 2022 and May 2022 describe his feeling emotionally and physically drained, and expressions of increased stress relating to his move.  A July 2022 outpatient PTSD clinic evaluation reports his statement of a "zero percent chance that I would hurt myself" indicating his family and son to be protective factors.  He is described as help-seeking and future oriented in an August 2022 treatment note, and in a January 2023 report he indicates he feels he is handling the stress in his life effectively.  The descriptions of his mental status, such as grooming, behavior, affect, judgment, thought processes, speech, and others, in each of these treatment notes and throughout the appeal period are consistent with each other and with those observed by the January 2023 VA examiner.            

Accordingly, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that for the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's symptomatology consistently reflects that a rating in excess of 70 percent for his PTSD and MDD is not warranted.  In this regard, during that time period, the Veteran's PTSD and MDD resulted in, at most, occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as:  suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate total occupational and social impairment.  

The Board notes that throughout the period on appeal, while the Veteran has reported symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation, he has not reported symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, and treatment records during the appeal period do not reflect observation of such symptoms.  Therefore, the Veteran's symptoms are not of the type and severity contemplated by the higher 100 percent rating.

As discussed above, however, while evaluation pursuant to the General Rating Formula is symptom-driven, the symptoms listed in connection with a particular rating are not exhaustive, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify such rating.  Accordingly, the analysis requires not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas.  In this regard, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not reflect the total occupational and social impairment that would support a rating of 100 percent.

With respect to occupational impairment, the Veteran reported that he is not employed, having retired from the military in August 2020.  He does, however, report throughout the appeal period that he takes care of his son, taking him to and from school, helping him with homework, expressing concern that he gets a good education, and caring for his emotional needs, such as making sure he is not affected by the Veteran's stress.  The January 2023 examiner also indicated the Veteran is capable of managing his financial affairs.    

Similarly, regarding social impairment, the Veteran has reported that his family is his support system and has described his relationship with his son as "great" and "warm and affectionate."  In the January 2023 VA examination, he denied any legal issues, or the use of alcohol or illicit substances.  Moreover, the January 2023 examiner's observations indicated the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation, and was cooperative, receptive, and actively participating in the assessment, casually dressed with good hygiene, normal memory and speech, fair insight and judgment, with no hallucinations or delusions.  Furthermore, as noted, these characterizations are consistent with the other evidence in the record throughout the appeal period and there is no contrary evidence that would reflect total impairment of these or other social aspects or relationships.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and MDD disability does not cause the total levels of occupational impairment and social impairment contemplated by the 100 percent rating.  For at least these reasons, the Board finds that, based on the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology and his level of occupational and social impairment during the period on appeal, a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.

In reaching its conclusion in the instant case, the Board acknowledges and is sympathetic to the Veteran's belief that his PTSD and MDD disability is more severe than that contemplated by the currently assigned disability rating.  However, as set forth above, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule.  While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which a professional with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of his disability.

The Board also has considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, and Hart, supra, are appropriate; however, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period.  Thus, assigning staged ratings for the disability is not warranted.  Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD and MDD disability at any time during the appeal period.  The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable, and the Veteran's increased rating claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

Finally, the Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service, and this decision is not meant to detract from that service.  However, given the record before it, an increased rating is not warranted at this time.  

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Skacel, Patrick T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.