Citation Nr: A25030486
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-447893
DATE:  April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a three inch scar of the right leg is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for groin pain and swelling is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the U.S. Navy from July 1982 to July 1985. 

In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2024 Rating Decision. In June 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2024 decision. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

The Veteran contends that his right leg scar was incurred in service. In his June 2023 claim, he noted that he had firefighting and damage control duties during service but did not offer further evidence regarding an injury to the right leg. He also noted that he was exposed to aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF). 

With regard to groin swelling, the Veteran contends that he suffered from swelling above his "private area" due to his various duties during service, as well as exposure to AFFF. In a statement dated October 2016, the Veteran reported swelling in his right leg and above his groin prior to doctors finding the mass in his abdomen and removing his right testicle. He wrote that the swelling continued despite treatment and surgery. 

There were no favorable findings in the January 2024 Rating Decision, but the June 2024 Rating Decision confirmed participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his April 1985 exposure to AFFF. 

His service treatment records are negative for any right leg injury or disease that would have resulted in a scar. The Veteran was seen for right knee pain after a fall in December 1983, but the treatment only included rest and ice. There was no documentation of injury to the skin, which would have resulted in a scar. His June 1985 separation examination was negative for any complaints for the right lower extremity or skin. Review of the Veteran's service treatment records does not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of swelling in groin. His June 1985 separation examination was negative for any related complaints. 

Post-service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right leg condition or evidence of a scar. Private treatment records dated between October 1988 to February 1989 show the Veteran underwent surgical removal of a cancerous mass in the right testicle, with an accompanying symptom of swelling in the right leg.

A private physician completed an opinion in October 2016 finding that the Veteran's testicular cancer was caused by his AFFF exposure during service. The examiner also noted that the Veteran's statement regarding his chronic symptoms of the right leg and pelvic area was credible and consistent with symptomatology of testicular cancer. 

VA's duty to assist includes a duty to provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion where it is deemed necessary to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) (2019); Duenas v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 512 (2004); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). For below noted reasons, the Board finds that a VA examination is necessary in order to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed disorders.

The Veteran submitted lay statements in support of his claims that indicate the Veteran consistently experiences pain and swelling in the right leg scar and groin areas. In addition, the Veteran is competent to report the existence of a scar, pain, and swelling. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). In addition, the Board is cognizant of the holding in Saunders, namely, that pain itself can constitute a disability. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Here, similarly to Saunders, the Veteran has demonstrated that his right leg scar and groin swelling and pain result in an impairment of earning capacity or other functional impairment. As such, Saunders is applicable to the case currently before the Board. 

The Veteran has not yet been afforded a VA examination to determine the etiology of his claimed right leg scar and groin pain and swelling. Therefore, on remand, such examinations with adequate medical opinions should be obtained. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate medical examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right leg scar. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present right leg scar had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate medical examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed groin pain and swelling. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

First, the examiner is asked to diagnose any and all currently diagnosable conditions related to groin pain and swelling, separate and distinct from testicular cancer. 

Thereafter, for any diagnosis relatable to groin pain and swelling, separate and distinct from testicular cancer, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present groin pain and swelling had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Price Umaru, Esq.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.