Citation Nr: A25030642
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434125
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for bipolar disorder with anxious distress and depression, which is currently 70 percent disabling, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for chondromalacia patella (claimed as right leg stress fracture), which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2010 to September 2010.

The matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of an increased rating for bipolar disorder with anxious distress and depression as well as an increased rating for chondromalacia patella, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for bipolar disorder with anxious distress and depression, which is currently 70 percent disabling, is remanded.

The Board finds that there was a pre-decisional error, and a remand is required. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran asserts that his bipolar disorder with anxious distress and depression entitles him to a higher rating evaluation than the 70 percent rating he currently receives. 

In support of a higher disability rating, the Veteran's wife submitted a statement in May 2022 that was entered into the record in February 2024 which detailed the Veteran's bipolar disorder symptoms and suggested the Veteran's overall disability severity. A February 2024 VA examination report and corresponding medical opinion noted the Veteran's psychiatric disability symptoms and determined that the Veteran's disability manifested as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. However, the examiner did not discuss any lay statements made by the Veteran or any previous VA mental health or competency determinations which suggest the Veteran's psychiatric disability was more severe than the February 2024 VA examiner's opinion.

Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptoms, where the determination is not medical in nature and is capable of lay observation. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007). As such, the Board finds the February 2024 VA medical opinion inadequate because it fails to consider the medical and lay evidence of record, to include the statement submitted by the Veteran's wife which presented an ongoing record of his observable symptoms. Additionally, no other additional lay statements were referenced. As the February 2024 VA mental disorders examination failed to adequately consider his submitted lay statements, the opinions provided are inadequate for rating purposes. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258 (2020) (an examination that does not address credible and relevant lay evidence does not include enough detail to inform the Board's decision and thus is inadequate). Consequently, the Board finds that there was a pre-decisional error, and a remand is required. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for chondromalacia patella (claimed as right leg stress fracture), which is currently 10 percent disabling, is remanded.

The Board finds that there was a pre-decisional error, and a remand is required. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran asserts that his chondromalacia patella entitles him to a higher rating evaluation than the 10 percent rating he currently receives. 

The record reflects that the AOJ subsequently scheduled a VA examination for March 11, 2024, but that the Veteran did not report for the examination. Specifically, the record includes a VA Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation document that reads. "Claimant unavailable." See March 2024 Exam Request. Thereafter, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the claim on March 14, 2024. 

It is unclear, however, whether the Veteran received proper notice to attend the examination. Although the record contains a February 2024 Exam Scheduling Request instructing the AOJ to schedule an examination, there is no indication that he received appropriate notice of the examination after the AOJ scheduled it. The Board notes that record reflects the Veteran had experienced instability regarding housing and that several pieces of mail were returned to the AOJ throughout early 2024, including a letter the AOJ had sent the Veteran after he had made his claim, informing him that he would be receiving notice regarding an examination. 

As such, the Board finds that there is good cause to reschedule the VA examination. On remand, the AOJ should provide the Veteran with proper notice of the scheduled examination. His failure to report to the scheduled examination, without good cause, will result in the claim being considered based on the rest of the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Under the AMA framework, the Board may remand where there has been a duty to notify and assist error prior to issuance of the rating decision on appeal. While the Board regrets the additional delay, due to the VA's failure to notify and assist, the Veteran's appeal must be remanded.

The Board reminds the Veteran that the "duty to assist is not always a one-way street." A veteran is expected to cooperate in the efforts to adjudicate the claim, and his failure to do so would subject him to the risk of an adverse adjudication based on an incomplete and underdeveloped record. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). Rather, on remand, the Veteran should coordinate with VA to ensure that he reports for the rescheduled VA examinations and provides any information to assist VA in verifying his claims. If he fails to report for the scheduled examinations, the appeals will be adjudicated based upon the governing law, which may include denial of the appeals pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected bipolar disorder. The need for an in-person or telehealth examination and/or interview is left to the discretion of the examiner. The examiner is asked to review the claims file, including this remand, and note the extent of his or her review in the claims file. The examiner is specifically asked to review the September 2019 VA Psychiatrist Letter and the February 2024 buddy statement from the Veteran's wife. The examiner should provide the following opinions:

2. The examiner must attempt to determine from the record information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms due to the service-connected bipolar disorder.

The examiner is asked to provide a full rationale to support all opinions, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature with application to the Veteran's medical history, as appropriate.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected his chondromalacia patella disability. All scheduling requests and responses should be added to the claims file. The examiner must review the claims file and note the extent of his or her review in the claims file. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability.

(Continued on the next page)

4. Provide a full rationale to support all opinions, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature with application to the Veteran's medical history, as appropriate.

 

 

Neely M. Peden

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Peden, Neely

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.