Citation Nr: A25030978
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-416057
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left ear hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity nerve disorder, claimed as secondary to a cervical spine disorder, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, to include as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, to include as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.   Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran has been assigned the maximum 30 percent schedular rating for irritable bowel syndrome.  

2.   Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's left ear hearing loss has been manifested by auditory acuity no worse than level III, and there is no indication of an exceptional pattern of hearing impairment.  

3.   The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by his service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder.  

4.   The Veteran's right shoulder disorder did not have its onset in active service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and is not otherwise related to service.  

5.   The Veteran's left shoulder disorder did not have its onset in active service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and is not otherwise related to service.  

6.   The Veteran's right foot disorder did not have its onset in active service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service separation and is not otherwise related to service.  

7.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a right elbow disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

8.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a right wrist disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

9.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a left foot disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

10.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a cervical spine disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

11.   At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for a right upper extremity nerve disorder, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.   The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for irritable bowel syndrome (have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.87, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  

2.   The criteria for a compensable rating for left ear hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6100.  

3.   The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.  

4.   The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

5.   The criteria for service connection for a left shoulder disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

6.   The criteria for service connection for a right foot disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

7.   The criteria for service connection for a right elbow disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

8.   The criteria for service connection for a right wrist disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

9.   The criteria for service connection for a left foot disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

10.   The criteria for service connection for a cervical spine disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  

11.   The criteria for service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disorder, claimed as secondary to cervical spine disorder, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1974 to October 1975.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in August 2023, November 2023 and February 2024 by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The rating decisions on appeal constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for right ear hearing loss, diabetes mellitus type II, hypertension, migraine headaches, a lumbar spine disorder, radiculopathy of the right lower extremity and radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

The Board notes that service connection for diabetes mellitus was previously denied in November 2000, and March 2006; service connection was denied for obstructive sleep apnea in July 2003 and March 2006; and service connection was denied for high blood pressure in March 2006.  In the February 2024 AMA decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudicating the claims.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the February 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Increased Rating Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by application of the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. Otherwise, the lower rating applies.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of a veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).  However, the Board must also consider staged ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).  

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).  

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature. Id. see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claims.  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  

The Board is cognizant of the ruling of the Court in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  In Rice, the Court held that a claim for a total rating based on unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU), either expressly raised by the veteran or reasonably raised by the record, involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability and is part of the claim for an increased rating.  The Veteran's current employment status is not clear from the record although he reported working during an October 2023 VA examination for back conditions.  Moreover, he has not asserted that he is unable to obtain and maintain employment due to his service connected left ear hearing loss and/or his irritable bowel syndrome.  As such, Rice is inapplicable in this case.  As such, the Board finds that a claim for a TDIU is not raised in connection with the instant appeals. See Rice v. Shinseki, supra.

1.   Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for irritable bowel syndrome is denied.

The Veteran contends that a higher rating for his service-connected irritable bowel syndrome is warranted as he experienced daily diarrhea, occasional incontinence, constipation, abdominal pain, gas, cramping and bloating. See July 2023 submission.

The Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome is rated as 30 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  

The Board notes that the Schedule for Rating Disabilities of the digestive system was amended effective May 19, 2024.  As the rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2024, the rating period on appeal predates the effective date of the amendment.  Therefore, in this case the Board will only apply the pre-May 2024 version of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities of the digestive system.  See Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  

Under Diagnostic Code 7319, a 30 percent rating is assigned for severe diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.  The Board notes that the Veteran's current rating of 30 percent under Diagnostic Code 7319 is the maximum schedular rating.  The Board will thus analyze other potentially applicable diagnostic codes.  

Disability ratings assigned under Diagnostic Codes 7301 to 7329 (inclusive), 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348 (inclusive) will not be combined with each other.  Instead, a single disability rating will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture with elevation to the next higher rating where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for intestinal conditions in August 2023.  The Veteran indicated that he has had gastrointestinal problems for years, and he is still having problems to this day.  He reported taking Omeprazole for his symptoms.  The Veteran did not have surgical treatment for an intestinal condition.  The Veteran reported symptoms of alternating diarrhea and constipation that is ongoing; it was also noted that the Veteran had visible abdominal distention and bloating on objective assessment, as well as sleep deprivation and constant abdominal discomfort and pain.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had episodes of bowel disturbance with more or less constant abdominal distress; he reported seven or more episodes in the past 12 months.  He did not have weight loss attributable to an intestinal condition (other than surgical or infectious condition).  He did not have malnutrition, serious complications or other general health effects attributable to the intestinal condition.  He did not have a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had lost two to four weeks of work in the past 12 months as a result of his intestinal condition.  The examiner stated that, due to irritable bowel syndrome, the Veteran has difficulty navigating daily responsibilities with the symptoms.  The examiner explained that the Veteran is unable to perform occupational work that would require normal function of facilities to include focusing on tasks due to pain and discomfort; she noted that the constipation and explosive diarrhea have social, mental, and emotional implications at work.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran experiences at least one episode per month and each episode lasts a week, they are debilitating, physically, emotionally, and mentally, and limits function, attendance, and productivity.  

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for intestinal conditions.  The Veteran reported symptoms of intermittent stomach pain, nausea and episodes of diarrhea or loose stools, which are treated with diet management and Pepto-Bismol.  The Veteran did not have surgical treatment for an intestinal condition.  The Veteran reported frequent episodes of diarrhea and/or loose stools; he also reported frequent episodes of epigastric distress and nausea during the episodes.  He reported frequent diarrhea and/or loose stools almost daily with colicky episodes of abdominal pain/distress that quickly resolves after bowel movement.  He did not have weight loss attributable to an intestinal condition (other than surgical or infectious condition).  He did not have malnutrition, serious complications or other general health effects attributable to the intestinal condition.  He did not have a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases.  The examiner stated that, due to the irritable bowel syndrome, the has difficulty navigating daily responsibilities with symptoms; he has difficulty with occupational work that would require normal function to include focusing on tasks due to pain and discomfort.  The examiner noted that the epigastric distress and diarrhea- have social, mental, and emotional implications at work.  It was also further noted that the Veteran reports daily symptoms that limits function, attendance, and productivity; he actually reported six to 12 missed workdays due to stomach condition in the last year.  

Further review of the record shows that the Veteran receives VA treatment and from private treatment providers for various disabilities, to include his irritable bowel syndrome.  However, there is no indication from the treatment notes of record that the Veteran has reported irritable bowel syndrome symptoms that are worse than those noted in the VA examination reports and statements of record.  

Based on the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted. As noted above, 30 percent is the maximum schedular rating available under Diagnostic Code 7319 and reflects the presence of severe symptoms, with alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress.  The Veteran's symptoms, as described above, are consistent with and fully contemplated by these criteria and no other diagnostic codes are applicable.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015); see Butts v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 532, 538 (1993).  

Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.113 provides that there are diseases of the digestive system, particularly within the abdomen, which, while differing in the site of pathology, produce a common disability picture characterized in the main by varying degrees of abdominal distress or pain, anemia and disturbances in nutrition.  Consequently, certain coexisting diseases in this area, as indicated in the instruction under the title "Diseases of the Digestive System," do not lend themselves to distinct and separate disability evaluations without violating the fundamental principle relating to pyramiding as outlined in § 4.14.  Additionally, 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 indicates that ratings under diagnostic codes 7301 to 7329, inclusive, 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348 inclusive, will not be combined with each other.  Rather, a single evaluation will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such evaluation.  The Veteran's symptoms do not indicate that his has a gastrointestinal disorder that is different from or more severe than his irritable bowel syndrome.  See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Codes 7301, 7323.  Therefore, as the Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 7319, he is not entitled to a higher or separate rating under any other potentially applicable diagnostic code.  

The Board has considered whether a staged rating under Hart v. Mansfield, supra, is warranted, however, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology has been stable throughout the period on appeal. Therefore, assigning a staged rating is not warranted.  Further, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent rating for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

2.   Entitlement to a compensable rating for left ear hearing loss is denied.

The Veteran generally contends that his left ear hearing loss is more disabling than reflected by the currently assigned noncompensable rating. See February 2024 VA Form 10182.  

Ratings for hearing loss are determined in accordance with the findings obtained on audiometric examinations. Ratings for hearing impairment range from zero percent to 100 percent based on organic impairment of hearing acuity, as measured by the results of the controlled speech discrimination tests, together with the average hearing threshold level as measured by pure tone audiometry tests in the frequencies 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz.  To rate the degree of disability from hearing impairment, the rating schedule establishes eleven auditory acuity levels designated from Level I for essentially normal acuity through Level XI for profound deafness.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100.  

Hearing tests will be conducted without hearing aids, and the results of testing are charted on Table VI and Table VII.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Tables VI, VII.  Exceptional patterns of hearing impairment are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.86.  When the pure tone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 55 decibels or more, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  Each ear will be evaluated separately.  When the pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral for hearing impairment from Table VI or Table VIa, whichever is higher.  That numeral will then be elevated to the next higher Roman numeral.  Each ear will be evaluated separately.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86.  

An adequate evaluation of impairment of hearing acuity rests upon the results of controlled speech discrimination tests, together with tests of the average hearing threshold levels at certain specified frequencies.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100.  

The assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment are to be derived by the mechanical application of the Ratings Schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometry evaluations are made.  Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345 (1992).  

If, as in the Veteran's case, impaired hearing loss is service-connected in only one ear, in order to determine the percentage evaluation, the nonservice-connected ear will be assigned a Roman Numeral designation for hearing impairment of Level I. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(f).  

A July 2023 VA audiological evaluation noted that pure tone thresholds, measured in decibels, were as follows:

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	30	25	35	35	40

LEFT	30	30	35	40	45

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 86 percent in the right ear and of 82 percent in the left ear.  Applying the values above to Table VI results in a Level III for the service-connected left ear and a Level I for nonservice-connected the right ear.  Application of these Roman numeral designations to Table VII results in a zero percent, or a noncompensable, rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85.  

The Board has also considered whether a compensable rating for left ear hearing loss is warranted by applying the exceptional hearing pattern provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.86 to the above-referenced audiometric results.  The July 2023 VA examination report shows that pure tone thresholds reported on the audiological evaluation were not 55 decibels or more at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz) and were not recorded at 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz.  Thus, the provision of 38 C.F.R. § 4.86 for exceptional patterns of hearing impairment do not apply to these examinations.  

Based on these results, the Board concludes that a compensable rating for the Veteran's left ear hearing loss is not warranted.  Although the VA examination and treatment record show that the Veteran clearly has hearing loss, the audiometric test results do not support entitlement to an increased evaluation for left ear hearing impairment.  The Board has reviewed all the medical records in the claims file and found that there is no evidence related to hearing loss that supports a higher rating.  

In Martinak v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 447, 455 (2007), the Court held that, relevant to VA audiological examinations, and in addition to dictating objective test results, a VA audiologist must fully describe the functional effects caused by a hearing disability in his or her final report.  He reported having difficulty hearing the television despite a significantly loud volume.  The July 2023 VA audiologist noted that the Veteran reported difficulty hearing voices and its impact on his daily life such as the need to focus on voices to make them out clearly.  Therefore, the Board finds that the VA examination of record fully described the functional effects caused by the Veteran's left ear hearing loss in accordance with Martinak v. Nicholson, supra.  As such, the Board finds that the VA examination audiological evaluation of record is adequate to adjudicate the Veteran's increased rating claim and no further examination is necessary.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's assertions that his left ear hearing loss is more disabling than currently reflected by the noncompensable rating, and that he has difficulty hearing voices.  However, in determining the actual degree of disability, the examination findings are more probative of the degree of impairment.  The July 2023 VA examiner considered the Veteran's complaints regarding the effect on daily activities, and he conducted the required tests.  Moreover, as noted above, the Court has noted that the assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment is derived by a mechanical application of the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered.  Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992.  The functional impact that the Veteran describes, is contemplated by the rating criteria.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).  

The Board has considered whether a staged rating under Hart v. Mansfield, supra, is warranted, however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the period on appeal.  Therefore, assigning a staged rating is not warranted.  

The Veteran's main complaint is reduced hearing acuity and clarity, which is what is contemplated in the rating assigned.  See Ross v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 142, 145 (2017).  In Doucette v. Shulkin, supra, the Court held that the rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate the functional effects of decreased hearing and difficulty understanding speech in an everyday environment as these are the effects that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure.  In this regard, the Board finds that other than difficulty hearing or understanding speech, the record on appeal contains no evidence of other symptoms attributable to the service-connected left ear hearing loss.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss is adequately addressed and rated by Diagnostic Code 6100 based upon decreased hearing acuity.  The Veteran has not otherwise described functional effects that are considered exceptional or, that are not otherwise contemplated by the assigned rating. Id.  Thus, his complete disability picture is compensated under the rating schedule.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a compensable rating for left ear hearing loss is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

For a showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "chronic."  Continuity of symptomatology is required where the condition noted during service is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  If the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  

VA has established certain rules and presumptions for chronic diseases, such as arthritis.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  With chronic diseases shown as such in service so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless attributable to intercurrent causes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  In addition, for veterans who have served 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for disability that is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury, or for additional disability resulting from the aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. Id.  The Court went on to state that "[P]ursuant to § 1110 and § 3.310(a), when aggravation of a veteran's non-service-connected condition is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected condition, such veteran shall be compensated for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation." Id.  

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992).  Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability").  

In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the Court held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time he files his claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim. However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a claimant filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature.  Id., see also Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.  

3.   Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder is granted.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from obstructive sleep apnea secondary to his service connected PTSD.   See July 2023 Supplemental Claim Application (VA Form 20-0995).  Specifically, the Veteran maintains that his service connected PTSD has led to the development of symptoms related to obstructive sleep apnea.  

A February 2024 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in October 2001 and recently in a VA examination in August 2023 and that he is service connected for PTSD.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The remaining requirement for service connection is that there be an etiological relationship between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected post operative deviated nasal septum and/or PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder. In that regard, the Board notes that the record contains several etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993).  When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other.  Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998).  The Board will consider the opinions below.  

A July 2023 opinion from K.M., a private advanced practice registered nurse, indicates that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea condition is secondary or related to, and/or aggravated by his service connected PTSD with an associated sleep disturbance. The provider noted that the Veteran has been prescribed Seroquel, that it is well known that some classes of antidepressant drugs may deteriorate sleep quality and that a research study has found that medications that cause over sedation in a patient with obstructive sleep apnea may also exacerbate sleep problems and induce daytime sleepiness. The provider noted that, in the context of obstructive sleep apnea, any sedative agent can precipitate an excessively drowsy state that could inhibit sleep arousals that are critical to the resumption of breathing. The provider also noted that medical literature supports the impact that PTSD causes the inability to consistently adhere to continuous positive airway pressure machine usage for treatment of obstructive sleep apnea, as well as the secondary sleep disturbances caused by PTSD. The provider further noted that PTSD is known to interfere with sleep, leading to sleep deprivation and excessive drowsy states that inhibit sleep arousals, which are critical to resumption of breathing. The provider further noted that a study found that nightmares were indicative of continuous positive airway pressure machine nonadherence and that frequent awakenings with panic or anxiety attacks following nightmares might have contributed to the poor continuous positive airway pressure machine compliance in subjects with PTSD who were not willing to put the mask back on. The provider concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service connected PTSD with associated sleep disturbance. The provider also concluded that the Veteran's mental health medication has contributed to his sleep disturbance and, at the very least, aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea. The Board finds this opinion highly probative as the provider reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, and provided an opinion supported by a clear rationale. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded great probative weight.

A January 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition.  In support of the opinion, the examiner explained that the conditions of obstructive sleep apnea and PTSD are not medically related.  She further explained that obstructive sleep apnea is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it.  The examiner noted that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship; thus, a nexus has not been established.  The examiner explained that obstructive sleep apnea is characterized by episodes of complete collapse of the airway or partial collapse with an associated decrease in oxygen saturation or arousal from sleep and that this disturbance results in fragmented, nonrestorative sleep. The examiner noted that obstructive sleep apnea has significant implications for cardiovascular health, mental illness, quality of life, and driving safety. The examiner noted that pharyngeal narrowing and closure during sleep is a complex phenomenon, that it is likely multiple factors play a role in the pathogenesis and that sleep-related reduced ventilatory drive and neuromuscular combined with anatomic risk factors are likely to play a significant role in upper airway obstruction during sleep. The examiner further explained that the most common cause of obstructive sleep apnea in adults is obesity, male sex, and advancing age; she noted that the severity of obstructive sleep apnea decreases with age when adjusting for body mass index.  

The January 2024 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service connection because the service-connected condition of PTSD and obstructive sleep apnea are not medically related. The examiner stated that the medications used to treat PTSD have not caused or aggravated the diagnosed condition of obstructive sleep apnea. She noted that documentation within the claims file indicates that Veteran has not been using a continuous positive airway pressure machine (reason unknown) and referenced a June 2023 letter from the Veteran to his primary care physician indicating that he was unable to use his sleep apnea machine and requesting a new machine. The examiner concluded that there is no indication within the claims file that medications used to treat PTSD have aggravated sleep apnea; she stated that the lack of use of continuous positive airway pressure machine alone would cause the sleep apnea condition to deteriorate. The Board finds this opinion highly probative as the provider reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, and provided an opinion supported by a clear rationale. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded great probative weight.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence is at least in equipoise bas to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by his service connected PTSD.  The July 2023 private physician and January 2024 VA examiner are medical professionals competent to render an opinion on this matter.  The opinions were supported by adequate rationales and consideration of the record, although they reach opposing conclusions.  Thus, the Board finds that the opinions of record are probative.  

The Board finds no adequate reason to favor the negative opinion over the positive opinion that is favorable to the Veteran's claim.  The Board also notes that it is prohibited from developing additional evidence for the purpose of obtaining evidence against a claimant's case.  Cf. Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (noting that, because it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against an appellant's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases for its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder is warranted.  The appeal is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

4.   Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder is denied.

5.   Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder is denied.

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed right shoulder disorder and left shoulder disorder are related to active military service. See July 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ. The Veteran maintains that he injured his shoulders while on active duty lifting heavy supplies and moving things all day while working in the warehouse; he stated that he has had issues with his shoulders ever since his period of active duty.  An August 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had been diagnosed with pain involving the right and left shoulder joints; the Board is bound by such favorable findings.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right and/or left shoulder disorder.  A September 1975 separation examination was negative for any complaints or findings relating to the right and/or left shoulder; clinical evaluation of the upper extremities was normal. In a September 1975 separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had painful or trick shoulder. He also denied that he ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted.   

Post-service treatment records, including VA as well as private treatment records, show that the Veteran has received ongoing treatment for complaints of bilateral shoulder pain. The records indicate that the Veteran underwent right shoulder repair in June 1996 and November 1996. A July 2003 treatment note reported a diagnosis of right shoulder injury with surgery. The Veteran was diagnosed with left shoulder pain in January 2017 and chronic pain in the right shoulder in January 2018.  A December 2018 Magnetic Resonance Imaging  (MRI) scan revealed torn rotator cuff in the left shoulder and he was diagnosed with bilateral shoulder pain in January 2019.  In July 2019, he was diagnosed with torn right rotator cuff.  In May 2021, the Veteran was seen for complaints of pain in both shoulders; he was diagnosed with left shoulder pain with rotator cuff tear.  

The Board has first considered whether service connection for shoulder arthritis is warranted on a presumptive basis.  The Veteran's post-service treatment records show that he was not diagnosed with a right shoulder disorder until June 1996, approximately 21 years after his separation from service; he was not diagnosed with a left shoulder disorder until August 2018, more than 32 years after his discharge from service. The Board notes the lengthy absence of any complaints, treatment, or indication otherwise of a right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder to weigh against the Veteran's claim. See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Further, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with arthritis.  Consequently, presumptive service connection, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, for right shoulder and/or left shoulder disorder, is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; See Maxson v. Gober, supra.  

Further, there is no evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's claimed right and/or left shoulder disorder and service beyond his general contention. Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, as to the specific issues in this case, determining the etiology of neck and left elbow disorders falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  The Veteran has not been shown to possess the requisite medical training, expertise, or credentials needed to render a diagnosis or a competent opinion as to medical causations.  Nothing in the record demonstrates that the Veteran received any special training or acquired any medical expertise in evaluating musculoskeletal disorders.  See King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2012).  As such, the Board assigns no probative weight to the Veteran's assertions that his right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder were incurred in or aggravated by his active military service.  

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination addressing his claimed right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder.  However, the Board finds that such an examination is not required. In this regard, in determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration.  These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the appellant's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  With respect to the third factor above, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, supra.  

The service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder.  Further, the evidence does not indicate that his current right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder may be related to his military service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, supra.  In this regard, while the Veteran has advanced such a theory, a mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the current conditions is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278-79 (Fed. Cir. 2010). The Court has held that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service.  See Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010).  Therefore, the Board finds that a VA examination and/or opinion is not necessary to decide these claims. 

In addition, in adjudicating claims, the Board must assess not only competency of the Veteran's statements, but also their credibility. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The former, the Court has held, is a legal concept, which is useful in determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while the latter is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997). Credibility can be generally evaluated by considering interest, bias, or inconsistent statements, the demeanor of the witness, facial plausibility of the testimony, and the consistency of the witness testimony. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 510-511 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). The Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence it finds persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. Caluza, 7 Vet. App. at 506 (citing State v. Asbury, 415 S.E.2d 891, 895 (W.Va. 1992)).

In the present case, the Veteran has alleged suffering from a right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder since service. See July 2023 submission. However, a September 1975 service discharge examination found the Veteran's upper extremities to be normal. In a September 1975 Report of Medical History, the Veteran indicated that he did not have now and has never had a trick or locked shoulder. The Veteran also denied that he ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted. Therefore, the Veteran's current statements, made in connection with his pending claim for VA benefits that his right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder is due to an in-service injury, are inconsistent with the contemporaneous evidence and, therefore, are not credible. Consequently, the Board assigns no probative weight to such statements.

 Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for right shoulder disorder and/or left shoulder disorder is not warranted. The appeals are denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

6.   Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has a right foot disorder that developed as a result of his active service. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. He asserts that he injured his right foot during a fall in service and that he continued to experience pain and other issues with his right foot ever since the in-service injury. See July 2023 submission.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatment of, or diagnoses related to a right foot disorder.  The service separation examination, conducted in September 1975, shows normal clinical evaluation of the feet. In a September 1975 separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had foot trouble. He also denied that he ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted.   

The Board has first considered whether service connection for arthritis is warranted on a presumptive basis.  VA and private medical treatment records are negative for complaints, treatments, and diagnoses regarding the right foot until September 2020, when the Veteran was diagnosed with rupture of right achilles tendon and partial tear, mild pes planus, approximately 35 years after separation from active service. The Board notes the lengthy absence of any complaints, treatment, or indication otherwise of a right foot disorder to weigh against the Veteran's claim. See Maxson v. Gober, supra. Further, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with right foot arthritis.  Consequently, presumptive service connection, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, for a right foot disorder is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; See Maxson v. Gober, supra.  

The multi-year gap between discharge from active duty service and when the Veteran complained of a foot disability is a factor that weighs against in-service onset.  Further, the Veteran has not been diagnosed with right foot arthritis.  Consequently, presumptive service connection, to include on the basis of continuity of symptomatology, for right achilles tear is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; See Maxson v. Gober, supra.  

Further, there is no evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's right foot disorder and service beyond his general contention. Rather, in a September 2020 emergency note, the Veteran reported that he was pushing furniture the previous day and noted a "pop" in his right calf, and he continued to experience tightness and pain in the right calf; following an evaluation, he was diagnosed with rupture of the right achilles tendon with partial tear.  

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination addressing his claimed right foot disorder.  However, the Board finds that such an examination is not required.  In this regard, in determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration. These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the appellant's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  With respect to the third factor above, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, supra.  

The service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a right foot disorder.  Further, the evidence does not indicate that his current right foot disorder may be related to his military service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, supra.  In this regard, while the Veteran has advanced such a theory, a mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the current conditions is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination.  See Waters v. Shinseki, supra.  The Court has held that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service.  See Bardwell v. Shinseki, supra.  Therefore, the Board finds that a VA examination and/or opinion is not necessary to decide this claim.  

The Board has also considered the Veteran's statements and the arguments of his representative that his right foot disorder is related to his active service. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, express an opinion on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  However, as the origin or cause of a right foot disorder is not a simple question that can be determined based on mere personal observations by a lay person, the Veteran's statements are not competent to establish a medical etiology or nexus.  See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77; see also Davidson, 581 F.3d at 1316.  As such, the Board finds the etiology of the Veteran's current right foot disorder does not lie within the range of common knowledge but requires special experience or special knowledge.  Here, it is not shown that the Veteran is otherwise qualified through specialized education, training or experience to offer a medical opinion as to the etiology of his right foot disorder.  Similarly, apart from the Veteran and his representative's generalized belief that this this disorder is related to service, there is otherwise no lay evidence in support of a nexus either.  These arguments are therefore without merit.  

In addition, in adjudicating claims, the Board must assess not only competency of the Veteran's statements, but also their credibility. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. The former, the Court has held, is a legal concept, which is useful in determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while the latter is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, supra. Credibility can be generally evaluated by considering interest, bias, or inconsistent statements, the demeanor of the witness, facial plausibility of the testimony, and the consistency of the witness testimony. Caluza v. Brown, supra. The Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence it finds persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. Caluza, 7 Vet. App. at 506 (citing State v. Asbury, supra).

In the present case, the Veteran has alleged suffering from a right foot disorder since service. See July 2023 submission. However, a September 1975 service discharge examination found the Veteran's feet to be normal. In a September 1975 Report of Medical History, the Veteran indicated that he did not have now and has never had trouble with his feet. The Veteran also denied that he ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted. Therefore, the Veteran's current statements, made in connection with his pending claim for VA benefits that his right foot disorder is due to an in-service injury, are inconsistent with the contemporaneous evidence and, therefore, are not credible. Consequently, the Board assigns no probative weight to such statements.

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for a right foot disorder is not warranted.  The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

7.   Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disorder is denied.

8.   Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disorder is denied.

9.   Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disorder is denied.

10.   Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disorder is denied.

11.   Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity nerve disorder as secondary to cervical spine disorder is denied.

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder and a cervical spine disorder, all of which are related to military service. The Veteran also maintains that he has a nerve condition in his right upper extremity, which developed as a result of his cervical spine condition. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2023 submission.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints, diagnoses or treatment for a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve condition involving the right upper extremity.  The September 1975 service discharge examination found the Veteran's upper extremities and feet to be normal. In a September 1975 separation Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied that he had or ever had a painful or trick wrist, foot trouble or recurrent back pain. He also denied that he ever had any illness or injury other than those already noted.   

The post-service records do not reflect complaints, treatments or the diagnosis of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder n involving the right upper extremity.  Although a January 2018 treatment note reported a complaint of stiffness in the neck area for years; no pertinent diagnosis of a cervical spine disorder was noted.  

The Board finds that as the record does not reflect current diagnoses of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder involving the right upper extremity, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted.  Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  Post-service treatment records during the pendency of the Veteran's instant claims do not indicate the Veteran complained of or was treated for of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve condition involving the right upper extremity, nor do they document a diagnosis of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve condition involving the right upper extremity.  No further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary.  The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve condition involving the right upper extremity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d. 1356 (2018).  Moreover, the Veteran has not alleged manifestations of similar severity, frequency and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person.  Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).  

The Veteran has argued that he suffers from a right upper extremity nerve disorder that is secondary to a cervical spine disorder. As service connection for a cervical spine disorder is being denied herein, there simply is no legal basis to award service connection for a right upper extremity nerve disorder on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. See also Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination addressing his claimed right elbow disorder, right wrist disorder, left foot disorder, cervical spine disorder and nerve disorder of the right upper extremity.  However, the Board finds that such an examination is not required.  In this regard, in determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration.  These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  With respect to the third factor above, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, supra.  

The service treatment records are otherwise negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder involving the right upper extremity.  Further, the evidence does not indicate that his claimed right elbow disorder, right wrist disorder, left foot disorder, cervical spine disorder, and/or nerve condition involving the right upper extremity may be related to his military service.  See McLendon, supra.  In this regard, while the Veteran himself has advanced such a theory, a mere conclusory generalized lay statement that service event or illness caused the claimant's current condition is insufficient to require the Secretary to provide an examination.  See Waters v. Shinseki, supra.  The Court has held that VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is not credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service.  See Bardwell v. Shinseki, supra.  Therefore, the Board finds that a VA examination and/or opinion is not necessary to decide these claims.  

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra.  In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.  However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder involving the right upper extremity are not capable of lay observation, such as that of a, is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994).  In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of a right elbow disorder, right wrist disorder, left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve condition involving the right upper extremity.  Therefore, the Board finds that he does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose the claimed disabilities, and the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value.  Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.  Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder involving the right upper extremity for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.  

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for a right elbow disorder, a right wrist disorder, a left foot disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and/or a nerve disorder involving the right upper extremity is not warranted.  The appeals are denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1.   Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran essentially contends that he is entitled to service connection for right ear hearing loss due to noise exposure during military service.  The Veteran indicated that, as a result of his duties as a unit supply specialist, which included receiving, inspecting, inventorying, loading, unloading, storing, issuing, delivering and turning in and installing supplies and equipment, he was exposed to varying levels of noise from the jets, trucks, tractor trailers and generators. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2023 submission.  

The August 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service, that VA conceded military noise exposure based on Veteran's military occupational specialty of supply clerk and Armorer, and that he had been diagnosed with right ear hearing loss; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  

In July 2023, a VA examiner opined that the right ear hearing loss was less likely as not a result of military noise exposure.  The rationale was that the Veteran's hearing thresholds in the right ear were within normal limits at enlistment into the Army in July 1974 and at separation in September 1975 without significant shift or decrease during service tenure. The examiner stated that, if hearing thresholds are normal or there is no evidence of permanent threshold changes during military service, there is no direct evidence of a link between the current hearing loss and in-service events. The examiner reasoned that post military noise is reported in addition to diabetes is reported for the past 20 years with medication management.  The examiner noted that the etiology of right ear hearing loss is consistent with multi-factorial factors like post military noise exposure and diabetes. The examiner further noted that the relationship between noise exposure and hearing loss is well established in the research literature and diabetes mellitus is known to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss due to vascular damage to the cochlea. The examiner noted that the relationship between diabetes and sensorineural hearing loss has been established in the research literature when referencing the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism (2012) having analyzed results from 13 studies involving more than 20,000 participants and that the study concluded that diabetics were more likely to have hearing loss than those without the disease, regardless of their age.  

The Board finds the VA etiology opinion to be inadequate for adjudicative purposes. In support of the negative conclusion, the examiner relied on the absence of evidence in the Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007). The absence of in-service evidence of a hearing loss disability is not fatal to the Veteran's claim for service connection for a hearing loss disability.  Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992).  Evidence of a current hearing disability (i.e., one meeting the requirements of section 3.385, as noted above) and a medically sound basis for attributing such disability to service may serve as a basis for a grant of service connection for hearing loss. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 159; 38 U.S.C. § 1154.  

Additionally, the July 2023 VA examiner appears to attribute the Veteran's right ear hearing loss to his diabetes. Significantly, the examiner noted that the etiology of right ear hearing loss is consistent with multi-factorial factors like post military noise exposure and diabetes. The examiner also noted that the relationship between noise exposure and hearing loss is well established in the research literature and diabetes mellitus is known to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss due to vascular damage to the cochlea. The examiner stated that the relationship between diabetes and sensorineural hearing loss has been established in the research literature. Therefore, the Veteran's claim for service connection for right ear hearing loss is inextricably intertwined with the claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus type II remanded herein, and the adjudication of this claim depends on the outcome of the remanded diabetes mellitus type II claim.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).  

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate etiology opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right ear hearing loss. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

2.   Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, to include as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran maintains that service connection is warranted for diabetes mellitus type II which developed as a result of his service-connected PTSD. Specifically, the Veteran maintains that his diabetes mellitus type II was caused by the medications prescribed for his service-connected PTSD as well as his diet and restricted activity level. See July 2023 VA Form 20-0995; July 2023 submission. The Board notes that although the Veteran claimed entitlement to diabetes mellitus, type II on a secondary basis, the AOJ also considered it on a direct basis. See February 2024 rating decision.

A December 2023 VA examined opined that the claimed diabetes mellitus, type II is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner noted that the conditions of diabetes mellitus type II and PTSD are not medically related and that the diabetes mellitus type II is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it. The examiner observed that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship; therefore, a nexus has not been established. The examiner explained that diabetes mellitus type II is the most common form of diabetes and is caused by several factors, including lifestyle factors and genes. The examiner further explained that major risk factors for the development of diabetes mellitus type II include being overweight, obesity, physical inactivity, poor diet, genes and family history, certain medical conditions such as hypothyroidism and Cushing's syndrome, and damage or removal of the pancreas.  The examiner noted that review of the claims file shows that the Veteran has a family history of diabetes.  She indicated that there is no evidence to support that PTSD causes diabetes mellitus type II. Therefore, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II was caused by his service-connected PTSD.  

Subsequently, in January 2024, another VA examiner opined that the claimed diabetes mellitus type II is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition. The examiner noted that the conditions of diabetes mellitus type II and PTSD are not medically related; she also noted that the diabetes mellitus type II is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it. The examiner observed that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship; therefore, a nexus has not been established. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's entire claims file is silent for any searchable documents confirming the diagnosis of obesity; review of Veteran's weight reflects normal body mass index of 25 ranging from the year 2000 to 2001.  The examiner stated that a nexus for aggravation due to the intermediate step of obesity cannot be established when no diagnosis of obesity exists.  

The Board finds the VA etiology opinions incomplete to decide the appeals. Neither the December 2023 VA examiner nor the January 2024 VA examiner addressed secondary aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (when proximate causation and aggravation are at issue, the Board must ensure that the medical opinion addresses each). 

In light of the foregoing, a remand is required to obtain an adequate etiology opinion that addresses the Veteran's contentions, direct service connection and secondary aggravation.  Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

3.   Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as secondary to PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that his hypertension is related to his service connected PTSD. The Veteran maintains that his hypertension developed as a direct result of his weight gain, which is attributable to his PTSD and related symptoms. See July 2023 VA Form 20-0995; July 2023 submission. The Board notes that although the Veteran claimed entitlement to hypertension on a secondary basis, the AOJ also considered it on a direct basis. See February 2024 rating decision.

A December 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner reasoned that the condition of hypertensive vascular disease (high blood pressure) is a separate entity entirely from PTSD and unrelated to it. The examiner noted that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship; thus, a nexus has not been established. The examiner indicated that factors that increase the risk of development of hypertension include being overweight, a diet high in salt and low in fruits/vegetables, not exercising enough, drinking too much alcohol or coffee, smoking tobacco, increased stress levels, age, genetic or family history, and being of black African or black Caribbean descent.  The examiner explained that although stress is identified as a risk factor for the development of hypertension, the Veteran also has a family history of hypertension and a history of tobacco use, both of which also contribute to the risk of hypertension  The examiner further noted that the overwhelming evidence supports the conclusion that cigarette smoking causes various adverse cardiovascular events and acts synergistically with hypertension and dyslipidemia to increase the risk of coronary heart disease. The examiner concluded that, due to the presence of multiple other risk factors, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by his service-connected PTSD.  

A January 2024 VA examiner opined that the claimed hypertension is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition as the conditions of hypertension and PTSD are not medically related.  The examiner explained that hypertension is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it. The examiner indicated that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship; therefore, a nexus has not been established. The examiner explained that current definition of hypertension is systolic blood pressure values of 130 mm Hg or more and/or diastolic blood pressure of more than 80 mm Hg.  The examiner noted that hypertension ranks among the most common chronic medical condition characterized by a persistent elevation in arterial pressure, and most cases of hypertension are idiopathic, which is also known as essential hypertension.  The examiner explained that there are various mechanisms described for the development of hypertension, which include increased salt absorption resulting in volume expansion, an impaired response of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and increased activation of the sympathetic nervous system; it was noted that these changes lead to the development of increased total peripheral resistance and increased afterload which, in turn, leads to the development of hypertension.  The examiner further noted that other risk factors include a family history and genetics, advancing age, race/ethnicity, obesity, alcohol use, tobacco use, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet and diabetes.  

The Board finds the VA etiology opinions incomplete to decide the appeals. Neither the December 2023 VA examiner nor the January 2024 VA examiner addressed secondary aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra.

In light of the foregoing, a remand is required to obtain an adequate etiology opinion that addresses the Veteran's contentions, direct service connection and secondary aggravation.  Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

4.   Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches, to include a as secondary to service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that his migraine headaches are related to his service connected PTSD. The Veteran maintains that his headaches usually occur when he experiences stress, anxiety, tension, panic attacks, mood swings and emotional outbursts, all of which are symptoms of his PTSD. See July 2023 VA Form 20-0995. The Board notes that although the Veteran claimed entitlement to migraine headaches on a secondary basis, the AOJ also considered it on a direct basis. See February 2024 rating decision.

A July 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The rationale was that the medical records document the Veteran reported a history of migraine headaches in the past on examination in August 2000, and he was diagnosed with PTSD in June 2001, per VA rating letter dated in March 2006.  The examiner concluded that, since the Veteran's migraines preceded the diagnosis of PTSD, the claimed PTSD did not cause the migraines.  

The Board finds the VA etiology opinion incomplete to decide the appeal. The July 2023 VA examiner did not address secondary aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra. 

In light of the foregoing, a remand is required to obtain an adequate etiology opinion that addresses the Veteran's contentions, direct service connection and secondary aggravation.  Barr v. Nicholson, supra.  The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

5.   Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his lumbar spine disorder is related to his period of active duty. The Veteran indicated that he has suffered with lumbar spine pain ever since his discharge from military service. See July 2023 VA Form 21-536; July 2023 submission. A September 2021 made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with lower back pain; the Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

An October 2023 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner noted that the Veteran is claiming service connection for lumbar spine condition and noted that the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of the spine, lower extremity neuropathy, bilaterally, degenerative spondylosis, and mild dextroconvex scoliosis.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran was seen for medical attention in August 2000, with complaints of back pain as a result of a motor vehicle accident that occurred one week prior to August 2000.  The examiner indicated that the claims file is silent for back pain during the Veteran's period of service from July 1974 to October 1975 or dates soon thereafter.  Therefore, the examiner concluded that the claim condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  

In providing the October 2023 etiology opinion, the VA examiner appears to rely entirely on the absence of low back symptoms documented during service.  See e.g., Dalton v. Nicholson, supra. However, the service treatment records indicate that the Veteran was seen in June 1975 for complaints of low back pain for the past two weeks; he reported that the back pain began while lifting some crates and the impression was lumbosacral strain. The October 2023 VA examiner did not address these complaints.

As such, the October 2023 etiology opinion appears to be based on an inaccurate factual premise and is insufficient to decide the claim.  An etiology opinion is inadequate if it relies on an inaccurate factual basis.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 460, 461 (1993) (an opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  On remand, a new etiology opinion should be obtained.  Barr v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

6.   Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

7.   Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

The Veteran has claimed that his right and left lower extremity radiculopathy is secondary to his lumbar spine disorder which had its onset during service. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  As a decision on the remanded issue of service connection for a lumbar spine disorder could significantly impact a decision on the issues of service connection for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy, the issues are inextricably intertwined.  Harris v. Derwinski, supra.  A remand of the claims of service connection for radiculopathy of the right and left lower extremities is required.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1.   Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right ear hearing loss.  The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, should be made available to the examine in connection with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail. The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the right ear hearing loss had its onset and/or is otherwise etiologically related to service, to include as due to the Veteran's conceded in-service acoustic trauma?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.  

2.   Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate physician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed diabetes mellitus and hypertension.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished, and all clinical findings must be reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis.  The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should respond to the following questions:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II had its onset and/or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

(B)  Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset and/or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

(C)  Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus was aggravated by his service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, to include any medications taken to treat this condition?

(D) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's hypertension was caused or aggravated by his service connected PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder, to include any medications taken to treat this condition?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.  

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3.   Obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraine headaches.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished, and all clinical findings must be reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis.  The need for further in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should respond to the following questions:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraine headaches had its onset and/or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

(B) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's migraine headaches are aggravated by his service connected PTSD?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

Any medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

4.   The Veteran should be afforded appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed lumbar spine disorder.  The electronic claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  All indicated evaluations, studies and tests should be conducted.  The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion.  

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder had its onset in service or is etiologically related to service? The examiner should address the impact, if any, of the June 1975 service treatment record reflecting a complaint of low back pain and an assessment of lumbosacral strain.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Suzie Gaston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.