Citation Nr: A25030875
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230720-362915
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain status post varicocelectomy and erectile dysfunction is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a right ring finger condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain did not manifest in any urinary tract infections.  Long-term drug therapy, 1-2 hospitalizations per year, and/or requiring intermittent intensive management were not shown.

2. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction is manifested by loss of erectile power without actual external or internal deformity of the penis or impairment analogous to deformity of the penis.

3. The Veteran's right ring finger condition manifested by pain with limitation of motion in the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint, which causes interference with fine hand movements making it harder to type, write, and hold objects.  He is in receipt of the maximum level of schedular compensation; his symptoms are anticipated by the diagnostic rating criteria and do not cause frequent hospitalizations or economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain status post varicocelectomy and erectile dysfunction have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.1-4.14, 4.115a, 4.115b, Diagnostic Codes 7522, 7525.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for a right ring finger condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5010, 5227, 5230.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1990 to May1994 and June 1994 to October 2002.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes the Veteran submitted his appeal on July 20, 2023, and was identified as having an appeal impacted due to an error with the VA.gov website.  He was notified on October 3, 2024, about a problem that may have prevented the uploading of documents related to his appeal.  The letter specifically identified the issues on appeal, directed that no further action was required if the issues are correct, and afforded him 90 days to file a new Notice of Disagreement if any issues are missing.  The Veteran did not file a new Notice of Disagreement.  Therefore, the Board will proceed with adjudication of the appeal.

The Board notes that the Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for basal cell carcinoma (residuals) in his July 2023 Notice of Agreement.  Here, his claim for entitlement for service connection was expanded to include November 2021 diagnoses of actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis.  The scope of a claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 App. 1 (2009).  Therefore, the issue on appeal has been characterized as entitlement to service connection for a skin condition diagnosed as basal cell carcinoma (residuals), actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity based on the specific diagnostic codes identifying the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  See generally, Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991); 38C.F.R. § 4.1.

In cases where the original rating assigned is appealed, consideration must be given to whether a higher rating is warranted at any point during the review period.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  Where there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Where a claimant is awarded service connection and assigned an initial disability rating, separate ratings can be assigned for different periods of time since the effective date for the award of service connection ("known as staged ratings").  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-27 (1999).  Staged ratings apply to both initial and increased rating claims.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain status post varicocelectomy and erectile dysfunction

The Veteran seeks a compensable rating for his orchitis, residuals from a varicocelectomy (varicocele with testicular pain), and erectile dysfunction contending his condition is worse than contemplated by his currently assigned rating.

In the June 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO granted service connection for orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain post varicocelectomy and erectile dysfunction.  A noncompensable rating was assigned with an effective date of August 27, 2021, the date the Veteran filed his intent to file.  The RO also granted service connection for a left inguinal scar (post varicocelectomy) with an evaluation of 10 percent and awarded special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ, effective August 27, 2021.

The Veteran's testicle condition is rated under Diagnostic Code 7543-7525.  Prior to November 14, 2021, DC 7525 addressed only chronic epididymo-orchitis, but still directed that it be treated as a urinary tract infection.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b.  Under the pre amended version of the criteria for rating urinary tract infections, to warrant a compensable rating the evidence must show:

"	Long-term drug therapy, 1-2 hospitalizations per year, and/or requiring intermittent intensive management (10 percent); or

"	Recurrent symptomatic infection requiring drainage/frequent hospitalization (greater than two times/year), and/or requiring continuous intensive management (30 percent)

38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, urinary tract infection.

Here, as the Veteran filed his claim prior to the amendments and new rating criteria are more restrictive, the Board is only considering the pre-amended rating criteria.

Furthermore, prior to November 14, 2021, erectile dysfunction was not specifically listed within the Rating Schedule but was rated by analogy under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7522, for penile deformity.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27.  Diagnostic Code 7522 instructed VA to assign a 20 percent disability rating when there is both (1) loss of erectile function and (2) deformity of the penis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522; see also Williams v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 134, 138-39 (2018).  Because Diagnostic Code 7522 only provided for a 20 percent disability rating, a noncompensable rating was assigned when the requirements for the 20 percent rating had not been met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31 ("In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.")

There is no schedular rating for loss of erectile power alone.  Although DC 7522 requires a "deformity" for a compensable rating, VA has not expressly defined this term, but the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has found that the ordinary meaning of this word is appropriate, noting that a "deformity" is a "distortion of any part or general disfigurement of the body."  See Williams v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 134 (2018) (citing Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 478 (32d ed. 2012)). "Deformity" under Diagnostic Code 7522 means a "distortion [or general disfigurement] of the penis, either internal or external."  Id.  Furthermore, the Board notes that rating by analogy requires that the penile deformity listed in Diagnostic Code 7522 must be "closely related," not identical to the Veteran's erectile dysfunction.  See Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377 (2023).

The Board has considered application of 38 C.F.R. § 4.20 in view of Webb, which emphasized that strict compliance with the requirements of a diagnostic code may be inappropriate when the diagnostic code is applied by analogy.  Thus, while a compensable rating may require "deformity," the Board should also consider whether there may be other ancillary symptoms that might indicate a similar level of impairment.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that any such ancillary symptoms must have an impact on earning capacity resulting from lost wages or missed time from work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Diagnostic Code 7522 was also amended during the appeal period, no doubt in response to Webb.  There, effective November 14, 2021, Diagnostic Code 7522 specifically lists "erectile dysfunction" and states that the condition, with or without penile deformity, will be assigned a 0 percent rating, although entitlement to SMC under 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 based on loss of use of a creative organ should still be considered.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b; see 86 Fed. Reg. 54081 (Sept. 30, 2021). 

The amended version is less favorable because it specifies that erectile dysfunction will always be assigned a 0 percent rating.  Accordingly, the pre amended rating criteria is for application.  Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Karnas v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 308 (1991).  However, this amendment is instructive in that the impact of deformity, or any other ancillary symptoms may not result in actual limitation in earning capacity.

The Board finds a compensable rating for the Veteran's orchitis with varicocele and testicular pain status post varicocelectomy and erectile dysfunction is not warranted.  

The Veteran underwent VA examinations in May 2022 and June 2023 in which he reported.  In the May 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported difficulty with maintaining an erection, constant dull achy pain in his scrotum that starts in the left side and gets worse over the course of the day.  In the June 2023 examination, he reported he has chronic intermittent bilateral testicular pain, and experiences swelling towards the end of the day.  He has a dull pain radiating from the scrotum, and it is greater on the left side where his scar is located.  He occasionally has a sharp pain which almost doubles him over and brings him to a halt.

The May 2022 examiner observed abnormal testes, with slight fullness to superior scrotum on the right testicle and mild fullness to superior scrotum on the left testicle and noted a left inguinal scar from a previous varicocelectomy.  The scar was observed as stable and not painful.  Furthermore, the June 2023 examiner noted he has orchitis due to an injury in 1998 with chronic bilateral testicular pain and erectile dysfunction and observed abnormal testicles, with mild swelling, the left more than the right, with tenderness to palpation and the presence of a tender varicocele and noted a scar from a prior varicocelectomy.  Moreover, both examiners included a February 2022 ultrasound which showed sonographically normal-appearing bilateral testicles and epididymides, no evidence of testicular torsion or asymmetric hyperemia, small varicocele on the left, and small bilateral hydroceles with mobile debris.

However, both examiners noted a normal penis and epididymis, no orchiectomy, no renal or voiding dysfunction, does not experience retrograde ejaculation, nor have a history of chronic prostatitis, urethritis, epididymitis, or urinary tract infections.  Furthermore, the examiners noted his conditions did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks.

Therefore, as the Veteran did not experience any urinary tract infections during the period on appeal, a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code DC 7525 is not warranted.

Moreover, even when applying DC 7522 loosely, a separate compensable rating is not warranted under this diagnostic code.  Both examiners noted that he exhibited normal anatomy with no deformity or abnormality of the penis, testes, and/or epididymis, and there has no additional evidence to suggest otherwise.  Moreover, the Veteran has not specifically noted any other symptoms that may be applicable. 

Overall, the functional impairment from the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is limited to interference with his ability to maintain an erection.  However, there is no indication how this impacts earning capacity.  While he has a separate rating for a scar from a prior varicocelectomy, both examiners specifically noted no physical deformity or other impairment that would support a basis for a compensable rating. As such, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim for a compensable rating for erectile dysfunction.

As a final matter, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran has been separately awarded special monthly compensation based upon loss of use of a creative organ under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).  This compensation contemplates impotence and may be awarded even if a veteran can achieve erection and penetration with the use of medication.  

As such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply and an increased rating for orchitis, residuals from a varicocelectomy (varicocele with testicular pain), and erectile dysfunction is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for a right ring finger condition.

The Veteran seeks a compensable rating for a right finger condition including chronic sprain with osteoarthritis in the proximal interphalangeal with subluxation post fracture contending his condition is worse than contemplated by his currently assigned rating.

The Veteran's right finger condition is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5010-5230.

Under Diagnostic Code 5010 Post traumatic arthritis, the disability is to be rated as a limitation of motion, dislocation, or other specified instability under the affected joint.  Under DC 5230, a noncompensable rating is the maximum rating for any limitation of motion of the ring finger.  The Board also considered the application of Diagnostic Code 5227, though a noncompensable rating is also the maximum rating for favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the ring finger.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in October 2021 and May 2023.  In the October 2021 examination the Veteran reported chronic pain and hypermobility, describing popping and catching when he moves his finger in a certain direction, causing interference with fine hand movements making it harder to type, write, and hold objects.  Furthermore, in the May 2023 he reported chronic finger pain, which increases in cold weather, hyperextension and locks back in that position, impacts the use of his right hand, specifically the loss of fine dexterity, and he has flare ups.

Both examiners noted limitation of motion for the right ring finger.  Specifically, the October 2021 examiner noted a limitation of motion after repetitive use and repeated use over time, with pain and a lack of endurance.  The May 2023 examiner noted limitation in range of motion and pain on active and passive motion, in weight bearing and non-weight bearing, and a loss of endurance for the right ring finger.  Furthermore, both examiners noted objective evidence of objective evidence of localized tenderness.  Specifically, the October 2021 examiner noted mild tenderness to palpation over the middle phalanx and the May 2023 noted moderate tenderness on all joints of the right ring finger.   However, no ankylosis or functional loss to the degree as if an amputation of the right finger were noted.

An October 2021 X-ray of the right hand showed moderate osteoarthritis of the right fourth proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint with mild subluxation, likely sequelae of prior injury.  A May 2023 X-ray showed stable subluxation of the PIP joint of the right fourth finger and associated degenerative changes of the joint remain evident.  Furthermore, no acute abnormality of the right hand is identified.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reported symptoms, including painful and reduced movement on use, as well as difficulties with typing and his grip.  However, any level of limitation of motion of the ring finger results in a noncompensable rating.  See Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 472, 480 (2016) (there is no minimum compensable rating available for painful motion under DC 5230 for the ring and little finger).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Sowers that because DC 5230 provided no minimum compensable rating, this preempted the general intent of section 4.59 to account for "actually painful" joints.  This is directly applicable here as Diagnostic Code 5230 is the most appropriate DC for the Veteran's right ring finger disability, and it does not provide for any minimum compensable rating.  Thus, a compensable rating is not warranted on this basis.

Based upon the evidence of record, there is no basis upon which to assign a higher rating, to include a rating based on the more serious condition of ankylosis of functional fixation of the joint.  As such, there is no basis upon which the Board may grant an increased schedular rating in this matter.  As the Veteran is already in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for his right ring finger condition, there is no legal basis upon which to award a higher schedular rating, the appeal must be denied.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App.

The Board further finds that referral for consideration of an extraschedular rating is not warranted, as the evidence regarding the Veteran's right ring finger condition does not show an exceptional disability picture that would render the available schedular rating inadequate.  Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008).  The Veteran has not provided any evidence that his right finger condition is of such a degree that the noncompensable schedular disability rating is insufficient.  In that regard, upon review of the Veteran's claims file, the Veteran has described his condition as causing pain and limited motion which causes interference with fine hand movements making it harder to type, write, and hold objects.  Such symptoms are precisely the type of symptoms anticipated by the rating criteria, which explicitly rate based on limitation of motion of the finger itself, which would give rise to difficulty using that finger to type, write or hold objects.

Here, there is no evidence to support a finding that the Veteran's right ring finger symptoms are not addressed by the rating criteria or that his condition has resulted in an exceptional or unusual disability picture.  The evidence does not show frequent hospitalization or marked interference with employment as a result of his right ring finger disability.  Therefore, the Board finds that the noncompensable rating for the Veteran's right ring finger condition is adequate, and no referral is required for extraschedular consideration.  38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b).

In considering the appropriate disability ratings, the Board has considered the Veteran's statements that his disabilities are worse than the ratings he currently receives.  In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his disabilities according to the appropriate diagnostic codes.

On the other hand, such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations.  The medical findings (as provided in the examinations) directly address the criteria under which these disabilities are evaluated.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a skin condition contending sunburns he sustained while on active service in Colorado caused his basal cell carcinoma in 2005 and resulted in ongoing skin conditions such as actinic and seborrheic keratosis.  The Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error related to his skin condition claims.

The Board is required to consider theories of entitlement to benefits that are either raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record.  Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

In 2005 the Veteran was diagnosed with basal cell skin cancer on his nose which was removed and left a scar.  Furthermore, he provided November 2021 private treatment records in which his dermatologist found actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis during his annual screening for skin cancer.  He has also provided articles concerning skin cancer and sun exposure at higher altitudes and has asserted he is at higher risk for skin cancer, specifically basal cell carcinoma and other pre-cancerous skin conditions because he has previously been diagnosed with skin cancer.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022 in which no opinion was provided and another in June 2023, in which he reported he had sunburns while stationed in Colorado.  The Board notes only a secondary service opinion was requested and obtained with the June 2023 examination.

The Board finds the information of record is inadequate to adjudicate this claim. Here the evidence of record indicates a claim for direct service connection is reasonably raised by the record, and a remand is necessary to obtain an opinion to determine the etiology of his skin conditions, to include residuals of his 2005 basal cell carcinoma, and his actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of his skin condition.  The examiner is asked to provide an opinion:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (whether there is a 50 percent or better probability) the Veteran's skin condition, including residuals of his 2005 basal cell carcinoma removed from his nose, his actinic keratosis and seborrheic keratosis identified in his November 2021 annual skin cancer screening are etiologically related to his service.

In forming their opinion, it would be helpful if the examiner addressed the articles the Veteran submitted in support of his claim and explain whether the articles apply to his medical history.

A complete rationale for all opinions should be provided.

?

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Miller, Associate Counsel