Citation Nr: A25030482
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 200218-68400
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1991 to September 1995.

In an October 2023 decision, the Board declined to readjudicate the matters herein on appeal, finding that evidence received into the record following a final denial of these claims did not constitute new and relevant evidence. The Veteran appealed that decision to the Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (Court) which, pursuant to a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), vacated the Board decision and has returned the matter to the Board for action consistent with the JMPR.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the claims herein on appeal were denied in a February 2010 rating decision. The Veteran was notified of that decision and did not appeal within a year of its issuance. Thus, that decision became final.

The Veteran then sought to have the matter readjudicated and submitted new evidence, including VA medical records from Poplar Bluff VAMC, St. Louis VAMC, Paragould Community Based Outpatient Center (CBOC), and Cape Girardeau CBOC, demonstrating the presence of the medical conditions enumerated above and the Veteran's ongoing treatment therefor.

The evidence is new because it was not extant at the time of the February 2010 rating decision, and it is relevant insofar as it has bearing on material issues herein on appeal. As such, the Board finds warranted readjudication of these issues.

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection OSA is remanded.

The Board observes that the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations in connection with the claims on appeal. Competent evidence in the record indicates that the Veteran's sleep disorder may have been present during active-duty service, and that his hypertension and type II diabetes may bear an etiological relationship to his OSA. 

The Board thus finds that the low threshold for triggering the duty to assist by scheduling VA examinations has been cleared in this case, and the failure to schedule VA examinations constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error in this case. 

On remand, VA examinations for the above-enumerated conditions should be conducted, and expert medical opinions concerning etiology obtained. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to explore the etiology of his OSA. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be reviewed prior to the examination. 

The examiner should identify all current sleep-related diagnoses. For all identified conditions, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that the condition had onset in service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to explore the etiology of his hypertension. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be reviewed prior to the examination. 

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that hypertension had onset in service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

If direct service-connection is not shown, the examiner should state whether, on an approximately at least as likely as not basis, hypertension has been caused or aggravated in any degree by the Veteran's OSA or by his type II diabetes, individually or in combination.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to explore the etiology of his diabetes. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be reviewed prior to the examination. 

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, if not higher) that diabetes had onset in service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

If direct service-connection is not shown, the examiner should state whether, on an approximately at least as likely as not basis, diabetes has been caused or aggravated in any degree by the Veteran's OSA or by his hypertension, individually or in combination.

All opinions expressed must be supported by thorough rationale, and due consideration must be afforded the lay statements of record, and those advanced by the Veteran at the examination(s). 

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Z. Sahraie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.