Citation Nr: A25030050
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452863
 DATE:

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1999 to July 2007.  For his service, he was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  Therefore, this matter is adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In the July 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R.§ 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the August 2023 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, or if the Veteran would like to submit any new and relevant evidence, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, since the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudicating the claim.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Preliminary Matters

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran submitted a statement with the July 2024 VA Form 10182 that selected the Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182 and Attorney Representative Brief.  Under the AMA, if a Veteran elects the Direct Review docket, only argument - not evidence - can be considered after the AOJ decision on appeal.  The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently held that if a Veteran submits evidence with a VA Form 10182 but selects the Direct Review docket, VA is required to clarify with that Veteran that he intended to proceed with direct review by the Board.  See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  Here, the statement submitted with the VA Form 10182 is argument only and presents no new evidence; thus, clarification is not required, and the Board will proceed without further delay.

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is due to weight gain caused by his service-connected Intervertebral Disc Syndrome, Lumbosacral Spondylosis without Myelopathy, and bilateral Lumbosacral Radiculitis (Lumbosacral conditions).  

The Veteran states that in June 1999 at enlistment, he weighed 160 pounds and in May 2023, at the time of his statement he weighed 203 pounds.  See May 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran's representative asserts that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for OSA, either on a direct or secondary basis, including the intermediate step of weight gain. It is asserted that the weight gain was a result of the Veteran's more sedentary lifestyle related to his disabling service-connected lumbosacral conditions.  See July 2024 Attorney Representative Brief (submitted with Notice of Disagreement).

In the August 2023 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding of a current disability of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The Board is bound by these favorable findings, absent clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R.3.104(c).  Therefore, the issue to be determined by the Board is whether the OSA was incurred in service, aggravated by service, or otherwise related to service; or whether the OSA was due to or aggravated by the Veteran's intermediate weight gain, associated with his service-connected lumbosacral conditions.

The Veteran submitted a May 2023 private medical opinion in support of his claim.  See May 2023 Private Medical Opinion.   The private clinician opined that (1) it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain was due to or related to his service connected lumbosacral conditions; (2) the OSA was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain from the service connected lumbosacral disabilities; and (3) it was at least as likely as not that without the Veteran's weight gain he would not have incurred OSA.  The private clinician's rationale is that the symptomatology of the service-connected lumbosacral disability conditions caused weight gain, which in turn caused OSA.

The private clinician states that the Veteran weighed 160 pounds at military entrance and that his current weight was 203 pounds, with a BMI of 27.5, which satisfies the CDC standard for being overweight. The Board notes that the medical records do not reflect complaints, treatment, counseling, or diagnosis for obesity or being overweight.  There is no explanation or analysis of whether the studies and literature discussing the relationship between OSA and obesity applies to this Veteran's level of weight gain, for the pertinent time periods.  As noted by the Board, the Veteran weighed 159 pounds at enlistment.  However, throughout his active-duty service, his weight was recorded in medical records to vary from 170 pounds to 200 pounds, with a high of 205 pounds in November 2006.  At separation from service, in September 2007 the Veteran weighed 198 pounds.  The private clinician does not rely on this factual data concerning the Veteran's weight, and further, does not provide explanation or analysis of this weight pattern during service, in comparison to the weight gain after service.  Nor does the private clinician explain whether it is significant or not at to the etiology of the Veteran's OSA. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).  The Board further notes that the private clinician fails to comment on this Veteran's specific medical history, such as the applicable time frames for manifestation, development, or worsening of the Veteran's diagnosed insomnia, sleep difficulties, lumbosacral conditions, and weight gain.  See February 2023 Private Treatment Records; February 2023 Military Personnel Record; June 2009 Service Treatment Records.  This is particularly significant since the Veteran gained 40 pounds during service but only 3 to 8 pounds after service.  

The enlistment examination states that the Veteran weighed 159 pounds and at separation from service his weight was 200 pounds.  There is no medical rationale or medical analysis for the significance, or not, of the Veteran's weight gain during service of close to 40 pounds, in comparison to his much smaller weight gain of 3 to 8 pounds, after separation from service.  See February 2023, Private Treatment Record; June 2009 VA Service Treatment Records.  The private clinician does not comment on or address the symptomatology of the Veteran's diagnosed and service-connected Insomnia, as compared to the diagnosed OSA.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); see also June 2023 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the private medical opinion is not adequate for service connection purposes.  The private opinion is not based on accurate facts particular to this Veteran's medical history and medical treatment.  Further, the rationale is conclusory and fails to provide the Board with a medical analysis sufficient to weigh and balance the probative value of the opinion.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993); Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97 (2012); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231 (2012); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA Sleep Apnea DBQ examination and a Medical Opinion DBQ finding that the Veteran's OSA was not causally related to the toxic risk exposure activities (TERA).  However, the AOJ failed to obtain a VA Medical Opinion to address direct and secondary service connection, to include obesity as an intermediate step, theories of entitlement specifically raised by the Veteran.  See August 2023 VA Sleep Apnea DBQ; August 2023 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.  However, this examination and opinion is not adequate.

In McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims ("CAVC")  held that an examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, or (2) evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to service, but (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case.  See McLendon, supra. Here, the Board finds that the requirements of McLendon, regarding when such VA examinations are required, have been satisfied.  38 U.S.C.§ 5103A(d); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, supra. There is a conceded current disability.  The Veteran is service-connected for lumbosacral conditions, with a longstanding history of sleep difficulties dating back many years, to include his diagnosed insomnia. 

Yet, there is no probative medical opinion of record addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA, to include the theories of service connection raised by the Veteran.  Therefore, the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion was a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, the deficiencies in the medical opinions must be corrected before the case can be decided.  On remand the Veteran will be afforded an additional and adequate VA medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Please request a medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted to provide the requested opinions, one should be provided.

The clinician should address the following:

Direct service connection / TERA

a) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea began during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service?

In doing so, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments (and service as a military police officer) and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, and the Veteran's lay statements.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the clinician is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

Secondary service connection / Obesity as an intermediate step

b) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected IVDS, lumbosacral, and/or insomnia disabilities? 

In other words, would the Veteran's sleep apnea have occurred "but for" the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral disabilities; or, whether "but for" the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, the functional impairment of sleep apnea would have improved/worsened.   

c)  Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused the Veteran to become overweight or obese?

(i) If so, was obesity a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's sleep apnea?

(ii) Whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for his obesity?

Obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.

The clinician is also to consider the Veteran's reports of his symptoms, not only associated with the OSA but also his insomnia and lumbosacral conditions.  If the clinician rejects the Veteran's lay statements, please provide a reason for doing so.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, Linda L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.