Citation Nr: A25030569
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 200825-109174
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for major depressive disorder (MDD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1995 to November 1998. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from July 2020 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In February 2024, the Board denied an increased rating for the Veteran's service connected MDD. The Veteran appealed to the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In November 2024, the Court issued a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (Remand). In the Remand, the parties agreed that remand was necessary because the Board failed to ensure the VA met its pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining evidence. A June 15, 2020, VA primary care note indicated the Veteran was treated with fluoxetine which was prescribed by his non-VA physician Dr. Christian at the Gessler Clinic. However, there are no records in the claims file from this physician or facility. In addition, the VA has not sent the Veteran a release letter in order to assist him with obtaining such records. 

The parties also agreed the Board did not provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases. The Board did not discuss relevant evidence contained in the March 23, 2020, private psychological evaluation. On the evaluation, the physician indicated the Veteran was "easily upset, being impatient with others, becoming easily angered, and sometimes being overcome by anger. He [was] indeed very likely to have problems with anger, irritability, and low tolerance for frustrations; to hold grudges; to have and to be argumentative and abusive." The physician also noted the Veteran "[engaged] in physically aggressive, violent behavior and losing control, and is indeed likely to have a history of violent behavior." The Board must address this evidence on remand. 

Lastly, the Board must send a letter permitting no fewer than 90 days for the submission of additional argument to the Board prior to adjudication barring an explicit waiving by the Veteran. 

The Board acknowledges the instructions and directives in the Court's Remand. In compliance with the directives, the Board remands the claim to obtain records from the Gessler clinic and any other facility the Veteran identifies that he received treatment for his disability. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the Veteran and request that he identify any facilities he received treatment for his service connected MDD to include records from the Gessler Clinic under the care of Dr. Christian. Provide the Veteran with a VA 21-4142 Authorization to Release Information and make sufficient attempts to obtain any records from those facilities. Any negative responses for records should be indicated in the claims file.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Harris

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.