Citation Nr: A25030775
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-438538
DATE: April 3, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches.

ORDERS

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is DENIED.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches is DENIED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD has been manifested by a disability picture that more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

2. The migraine headaches have been manifested by a disability picture that more nearly approximates symptoms of characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, Diagnostic Code 8100.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States from May 2003 to July 2015. On January 8, 2024, the Veteran filed a claim with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). On April 11, 2024, the RO issued a rating decision pertinent to the issues on appeal. On May 3, 2024, the Veteran noted a timely appeal of the rating decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board). 

The appeal was prosecuted pursuant to the modernized review system.   

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

I.

General Disability Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.321(a), 4.1. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38?C.F.R. §?4.7. 

It is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified; findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom are sufficient; and above all, a coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38?C.F.R. §?4.21. 

In accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.2 of Title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations and Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?589 (1991), the Board has reviewed all evidence of record pertaining to the history of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. The Board has found nothing in the historical record which would lead to the conclusion that the current evidence of record is not adequate for rating purposes. 

When it is not possible to separate the effects of a non-service-connected condition from those of a service-connected disorder, reasonable doubt should be resolved in the claimant's favor with regard to the question of whether certain signs and symptoms can be attributed to the service-connected disability. Mittleider v. West, 11?Vet. App.?181, 182 (1998); see also 38?C.F.R. §?3.102. 

Additionally, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §?4.3. 

Where the criteria for a compensable rating are not met, a noncompensable rating will be assigned.?38 C.F.R. § 4.31. Separate disability ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one condition is not "duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology" of the other condition. Esteban v. Brown,?6 Vet. App. 259, 262?(1994).? 

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). 

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). 

That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). This practice is known as staged ratings. Id. 

The Board is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). 

Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

II.

PTSD - Legal Criteria and Analysis

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411. 

Pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Rating Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula), a 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-term and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id. 

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id. 

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behaviour; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id. 

The symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi,?16?Vet. App.?436, 442?(2002). 

Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Instead, VA must consider all symptoms associated with the Veteran's disability and its effect on the level of occupational and social impairment.?Id.?

When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the Board will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely based on social impairment.?38?C.F.R. §?4.126(b). 

The?United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit)?has acknowledged the "symptom-driven nature" of the General Rating Formula and that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under section 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki,?713 F.3d 112, 116?(Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The Federal Circuit has explained that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Id. at 117. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA-contracted examination in February 2024 in which the examiner found a level of occupational and social impairment of reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported symptoms to include emotional numbing and detachment, restless sleep and nightmares, depressive intrusive thoughts, irritability, avoidance, being overwhelmed by his emotions, and episodes of crying. 

His symptoms were also noted to include intrusive distressing memories, distressing dreams, dissociative reactions, intense or prolonged psychological distress and marked physiological reactions, avoidance, persistent negative emotional state, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, feelings of detachment or estrangement, hypervigilance, problems with concentration, sleep disturbances, depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occurred weekly or less, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

Based on review of the evidence of record, the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD are of the severity to cause the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a higher disability rating than the currently assigned 50 percent evaluation. 

The Veteran's PTSD is shown to cause panic attacks; impairment of memory; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. These symptoms most closely approximate a 50 percent evaluation. 

Symptoms more closely approximating a 70 or 100 percent evaluation such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behaviour; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, were not shown. 

The Board finds that the complete disability picture for the Veteran's PTSD, for the reasons set forth above, does not reflect impairment more closely approximating a 70 percent evaluation.

All potentially applicable diagnostic codes have been considered, and there is no basis to assign an alternative evaluation. See Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 593.

In addition to the medical evidence above, the Board has considered the lay evidence in the form of the Veteran's statements.  A layperson is competent to testify regarding the onset and continuity of symptomatology. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991). However, affording the Veteran full competence and credibility, his statements do not show impairment more closely approximating the criteria for a higher rating.

As the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 50 percent for the PTSD, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply, and the appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

III.

Migraine Headaches - Legal Criteria and Analysis

Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100. 

Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks. 

A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months. 

A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under DC 8100.

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases. The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 253 (2018). 

The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraine attacks must render the veteran entirely powerless. Id. The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Id. (internal citation omitted). 

Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability." Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation. "'Prostrating' means 'lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low.' "Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252 (citing Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged 1822 (1966)); see also Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012) (defining prostration as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."). Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that "typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality." Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

DC 8100 contemplates more than just headache symptoms and requires that the Board consider all the symptoms the veteran experiences as a result of migraine attacks, and then rate those symptoms based on the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of the attacks. Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 73 (2020). Thus, symptoms other than headaches, such as various non-headache symptoms like dizziness, nausea, vertigo, mood swings, sleep impairment, etc., are adequately contemplated by the migraine headache rating criteria under DC 8100. Id. at 73.

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252. This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Id. However, § 4.3, concerning the resolution of reasonable doubt, is applicable. Id. at 254.

In rating headaches or migraines under DC 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA-contracted examination in January 2024 in which he reported having migraines every other day, lasting one to two days on average, on the bilateral side of the head, with it being worse over the right side.  The Veteran reported nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and dizziness. He also reported pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, pain worsening with physical activity, and nausea. The examiner noted that the migraine/non-migraine had characteristic prostrating attacks once every month; and there were completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine/non-migraine pain once in two months.

The medical evidence shows the Veteran's migraine headaches have been manifested by a disability picture that more nearly approximates characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months. 

In making this determination, the Board acknowledges that it may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication in evaluating the Veteran's migraine headaches, as indicted above. Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 63. 

Very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability has not been shown. As such, a rating in excess of 30 percent for the migraine headaches is not warranted.

All potentially applicable diagnostic codes have been considered, and there is no basis to assign an alternative evaluation. Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 593.

In addition to the medical evidence above, the Board has considered the lay evidence in the form of the Veteran's statements.  A layperson is competent to testify regarding the onset and continuity of symptomatology. Heuer, 7 Vet. App. 379; Falzone, 8 Vet. App. 398; Caldwell, 1 Vet. App. 466. However, affording the Veteran full competence and credibility, his statements do not show impairment more closely approximating the criteria for a higher rating.

(Continued on the next page)

As the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply, and the appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R.M.K., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.