Citation Nr: A25030752
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 210712-172003
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a headache condition is granted.

Service connection for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (claimed as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) is granted (on a direct basis, NOT based on the PACT Act presumptions).

Service connection for a lower back condition is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that a headache condition was incurred during active duty.

2. The Veteran had service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War and is presumed to have been exposed to toxic substances, chemicals and airborne hazards during his deployment in Iraq and Kuwait. In February 2021, the Veteran's treating oncologist provided a well-reasoned opinion stating that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was directly caused by his in-service toxic exposures. 

3.  The most probative and persuasive evidence reflects that a lower back condition was incurred during active duty.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria have been met to establish service connection for a headache condition. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1116, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

2. The criteria have been met for service connection of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma [on a direct basis, NOT based on the PACT Act presumptions]. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102.

3. The criteria have been met to establish service connection for a lower back condition. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1116, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 2009 to March 2010, including in the Southwest Asia theater of operations (Iraq and Kuwait). His military occupational specialty was in motor transport (88M10). See Form DD 214. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2021  rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) of the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  In July 2021, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 that reflects his wishes to appeal this matter to the Board via the Evidence submission docket.  As such, the Board may consider all evidence of record at the time of issuance of the July 2021 rating decision and within 90 days of the receipt of the VA Form 10182 on July 12, 2021 (October 10, 2021).

Evidence was added to the claims file outside the evidentiary scope of the Veteran's Evidence Submission docketed appeal. For example, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion that was received by the Board in November 2021. For claims appealed in the Evidence Docket, the Board may not consider that evidence in its decision at this time. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. However, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence and, if it is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim considering the new evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board also notes that the present appeal stems from a February 2021 Supplemental Claim to reopen a prior final denial. Critically, in the July 2021 rating decision, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received by VA since the prior final denial was issued and, thus, readjudication of the matter on the merits was warranted. As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary to this favorable finding, the Board need not address the threshold matter of VA's receipt of new and relevant evidence prior to considering the matter on the merits.

Legal Criteria 

Service connection may be established for a disability that results from personal injury that is suffered, or disease contracted in the line of duty, in the active military, naval or air service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131.   

Generally, to establish service connection for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in service, there must be competent evidence of (1) the current existence of the disability for which service connection is being claimed; (2) incurrence of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a nexus or connection between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred in service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed Cir. 2004).  

Compensation may be paid to a Persian Gulf War Veteran who exhibits objective indications of chronic disability due to undiagnosed illnesses or a combination of undiagnosed illnesses that became manifest either during active duty in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more before December 31, 2026. 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a).

For purposes of this regulation, there are three types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) (such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome) that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms; and (3) any additional diagnosed illness that the Secretary establishes by regulation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317; see 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (d). 

While the present appeal was pending, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was passed. In relevant part, the PACT Act establishes a presumption of in-service exposure to burn pits and other environmental hazards for service in the Persian Gulf (also known as the Southwest Asia theater of operations). The PACT Act also identified lymphoma cancer of any type to be presumed due to in-service exposure to burn pits and other environmental hazards. 38 U.S.C. §1120

Lay statements may serve to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation. 38 U.S.C. § 1153(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

When there is an approximate balance (nearly equal) of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  

1. Service connection for a headache condition

Procedural History and Factual Background

In February 2009, the Veteran underwent a pre-deployment health assessment. There was no indication of headache or any head or neurological condition.

In February 2010, the Veteran underwent a post-deployment health assessment. The Veteran indicated "no" when asked about symptoms of "bad headaches." 

In April 2018, the Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection for headaches, noting that they were secondary to a traumatic brain injury (TBI) and caused "debilitating events once per month."

In June 2018, the AOJ denied service connection for headaches as secondary to a TBI. The Veteran was not and is not currently service connected for any residuals of a TBI.

In February 2021, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection  for a headache condition. The Veteran included a private medical opinion and lay statements as new and relevant evidence to reopen the claim. The private medical opinion was from a family practice doctor, who opined that it was as least as likely as not that the Veteran's headaches were connected to military service and had been chronic since that time. The physician based these findings on adverse environmental conditions including "musculoskeletal insults" and "years of repetitive motion. The physician also found that "it is impossible to quantify the relative percentages and proportionate impact. However, I firmly believe that their cumulative effects are inextricably intertwined." In the lay statement, the Veteran asserted that he drove a truck to pick up and deliver equipment throughout Iraq and Kuwait in his military occupational specialist as "88M" (motor transport). He described spending "countless hours on terrible road conditions, hitting potholes and driving through rough terrain." He asserted that he was "constantly bumping his head and body on the roof and metal frame of the truck... due to the multiple large potholes, speed bumps and swerving through checkpoints." The Veteran reported that he had experienced "chronic" headaches since deployment which affect his daily life and employment.

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a lay statement from his mother, T.E. She recounted that the Veteran would tell her while he was deployed that he was developing headaches from begin jostled around the truck during long drives across Iraq and Kuwait.   

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a lay statement from his spouse, A.E.  A.E. asserted that the Veteran has experienced many physical problems, including headaches, as long as she has known him (approximately 4 months after he returned from deployment). A.E. stated that the Veteran's headaches had become an "almost daily struggle." She believed that the Veteran did not experience this problem prior to being deployed.  

In April 2021, the AOJ readjudicated the claim and deferred the decision for service connection of a headache condition for additional development.

In June 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination related to his headaches. The examiner diagnosed him with "tension headaches." The Veteran reported an onset of 2010 (while in service) with the headaches staying "about the same" since that time. He experienced "regular headaches" on both sides of his head as well as on top of his head, a few times a month. He described weekly headaches that are "dull" and other headaches happening every few weeks with "sharp pain." The headaches were "so bad he has to lay in bed." They happened "for no reason, anytime per day." He stated that he had not sought any treatment for his headaches. He "holds his head, puts ice on it and takes ibuprofen." There was no opinion provided on whether the headaches were caused by the Veteran's service. 

In July 2021, the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial of service connection for a headache condition. The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current diagnosis of "tension headaches" during the June 2021 VA examination. However, the AOJ apparently denied the claim based on the lack of in-service or post-deployment reports of headaches, and an (unexplained) finding that "[t]he lay evidence was found not to be competent and sufficient in this case to establish a link or nexus[.]"

In July 2021, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement appealing the July 2021 denial of service connection for a headache condition. 

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that service connection for "tension headaches" is warranted. See July 2022 Informal Hearing Presentation. 

As for the first element of service connection, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with "tension headaches" during the June 2021 VA examination. As such, the first element of service connection (a current disability) has been established with respect to a headache condition. 

As to the second element of service connection, "an in-service incurrence of aggravation of a disease or injury," there is no evidence to indicate the Veteran reported headaches during service. The Veteran did however credibly report that he was "constantly bumping his head and body on the roof and metal frame of the truck" while driving on difficult road conditions and rough terrain while making deliveries in Iraq and Kuwait. As a result, the Veteran asserted that he began having headaches during deployment and since service. See February 2021 Lay Statement. The Veteran's mother provided a competent and credible lay statement that the Veteran would tell her, while he was deployed, that he was developing headaches from being jostled around in his truck. The Veteran's spouse also competently and credibly reported that the Veteran had experienced headaches as long as she had known him (since approximately four months after his return from deployment) and that the headaches had become an "almost daily struggle." Moreover, it was noted by a June 2021 VA examiner that the Veteran had first experienced headaches in 2010 (while in service), although he did not seek treatment at that time. The Board finds these assertions to be competent and credible. In light of this, the Board finds that there is ample evidence suggesting that the Veteran experienced in-service symptoms sufficient to fulfill element (2) regarding his claimed headache disability. 

The final element for service connection requires a causal linkage between the Veteran's in-service injury or disease and the claimed disability. The Board notes that, while the Veteran underwent a VA examination in June 2021, no medical opinion on a potential causal linkage was provided. However, the Veteran submitted a February 2021 private medical opinion from a family medical doctor that the Veteran's headaches were the cumulative result of "adverse environmental conditions" and "years of repetitive motion" while in service. The Board assigns significant probative value to the February 2021 private medical opinion. The physician performed a review of the Veteran's records and an interview of the Veteran. The physician also considered corroboration from the Veteran's wife about the Veteran's condition. This opinion was based on an accurate factual premise and supported by a thorough explanation (rationale) and, therefore, the Board assigns it significant probative weight. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning); Reonal v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).?

As recounted above, the Board has only been presented with a favorable opinion as to the question of causal linkage. After thorough consideration of the evidence of record, which includes a private medical opinion, treatment records and several lay statements, the Board finds the most probative and persuasive evidence bolsters the Veteran's assertions regarding his headache condition.

For the reasons outlined above and resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection for a headache condition ("tension headaches") is warranted. As such, the appeal is granted. 

2. Service connection for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (claimed as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma)

Procedural History and Factual Background 

 In February 2009, the Veteran underwent a pre-deployment health assessment which did not indicate any diagnosis or treatment related to lymphoma.  

In February 2010, the Veteran underwent a post-deployment health assessment.    which did not indicate any diagnosis or treatment related to lymphoma. 

In September 2011, the Veteran was seen to discuss CBC test results (low hemoglobin) and pain in his upper lateral chest wall pain. He was diagnosed with mild anemia requiring follow up. 

In December 2011, the Veteran was seen by a physician and reported that, in the past 5 days, he had not felt well in general. He had ongoing, constant fatigue and decreased stamina. The physician diagnosed him with a possible viral syndrome and ordered further CBC testing.  The December 2011 CBC test results indicated that his hematocrit and hemoglobin levels were out of range and at critical levels

In December 2011, the Veteran underwent an appendectomy and a small bowel mass was discovered. He underwent exploratory laparotomy with bowel resection and was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. The Veteran underwent a course of chemotherapy. A June 2012 PET/CT scan of the Veteran's abdomen and pelvis demonstrated that the small bowel mass was no longer present. 

In April 2018, the Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection of non-Hodgkins lymphoma. The Veteran reported that he was "in remission diagnosed in 2011 treated in 2012 no meds since 2012."   

In May 2018, the Veteran underwent a Gulf War VA examination related to his exposures during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. The examiner opined that there were no "diagnosed illness with no etiology" and no additional signs and/or symptoms representing an "undiagnosed illness" or "diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI)." 

In June 2018, the AOJ denied service connection for non-Hodgkins lymphoma.

In February 2021, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection  of non-Hodgkins lymphoma. The Veteran included a private medical opinion and several lay statements as new and relevant evidence to reopen the claim. The private medical opinion was by the Veteran's treating oncologist, who performed a records review, interviewed the Veteran, and opined that "the adverse environmental conditions that precipitated [the Veteran's] condition clearly can be placed as a cause for developing non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, suffered as a consequence of his military career. At this point, it is impossible to quantify the relative percentages and proportionate impacts. However, I firmly believe that their cumulative effects are inextricably intertwined. Therefore, I believe that it is at least as likely as not that [the lymphoma] is connected to military service."

Also included with the Supplemental Claim was a lay statement from the Veteran, reporting that he was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma approximately a year and a half after returning home from Iraq and while still in the Army Reserve. He had a tumor in his small intestine which he reported that his physician had stated "had started growing months before I started experiencing symptoms." He described his in-service exposure to multiple burn pits, parasites, fungi, bacteria and poor air quality (from trash burning), and reported his belief that these toxic exposures contributed to the development of the lymphoma. 

In addition, the Veteran submitted a lay statement from his mother, T.E., who reported that the Veteran had been "extremely healthy" his whole life until shortly after returning from deployment. She described the Veteran's emergency surgery for a non-Hodgkin's lymphoma-related tumor and his treatment with six months of chemotherapy while still attending drill weekends. She reported that the Veteran incurred medical debt and missed work as a result of this condition. She believed that the Veteran's exposure to burn pits, hazardous air quality, bacteria and fungi in Iraq and Kuwait caused the Veteran to develop lymphoma. 

The final piece of evidence submitted with the February 2021 Supplemental Claim was a lay statement from the Veteran's spouse, A.E., who reported that the Veteran was diagnosed with lymphoma about a year after she met him. She stated that he "lost a lot of blood internally" before his diagnosis. After his diagnosis, the Veteran underwent surgery to remove the tumor and received treatment with chemotherapy, which caused terrible side effects. She asserted that the couple also experienced a significant financial burden as a result. 

In March 2021, a VA records review examination was performed related to hematologic and lymphatic conditions. The physician opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lymphoma was incurred in service. They reasoned that the Veteran had reported 'weakness' prior to this diagnosis and the lymphoma had been likely growing slowly for some time before the Veteran was diagnosed and treated. 

In April 2021, the AOJ readjudicated the claim and deferred the decision for service connection of non-Hodgkins lymphoma for additional development.

In June 2021, the Veteran underwent an in-person VA examination for hematologic and lymphatic conditions. The examiner noted the following history: in 2011, the Veteran was found to have an intestinal mass consistent with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma during an appendectomy; he underwent partial surgical removal of his small bowel in December 2011l; he underwent a course of chemotherapy for six months in 2012; and he had been in remission since that time. He had no current symptoms and no continuous treatment was required. The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition of lymphoma was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service, based on the lack of diagnosis during service and the lack of related service treatment records. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not exhibit typical symptoms of lymphoma during service (such as abdominal symptoms, bleeding, fatigue, night sweats, swelling, enlarged lymph nodes). The examiner also noted that people with a compromised immune system are more susceptible to the development of diffuse large B cell lymphoma. See June 2021 Medical Opinion.

In July 2021, the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial, but made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current disability.

In July 2021, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement, appealing the July 2021 denial. 

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that service connection for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (claimed as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) is warranted due to his exposure to burn pits and other potentially toxic materials while deployed in Iraq and Kuwait.  See July 2022 Informal Hearing Presentation; see also February 2021 Lay Statement. 

Service Connection under the PACT Act

A January 2023 Memorandum confirmed the Veteran's status as a Persian Gulf Veteran with service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. The Veteran additionally submitted a lay statement documenting his service exposure to multiple burn pits, parasites, fungi, bacteria and poor air quality (from trash burning) in Iraq and Kuwait. See February 2021 Lay Statement. The Veteran was determined to have qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations which satisfies the criteria for presumptive toxic exposure per 38 U.S.C. § 1119. See December 2022 Toxic Exposure Memorandum. As such, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to substances, chemicals and airborne hazards during his service. 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

The Veteran's treatment records reflect a diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. See December 2011 Service Treatment Records. 

Because the Veteran has a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and toxic exposure has been established, the Veteran is entitled to presumptive service connection for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act). 

Service connection under a direct theory (for an earlier effective date)

The Board notes that an earlier effective date may be available for the award of service connection for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma under a different theory of entitlement. A grant of service connection based on the PACT Act would be effective August 10, 2022, the date that law went into effect. Therefore, service connection for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma on a theory of entitlement other than pursuant to the PACT Act will also be addressed, to determine if the Veteran is eligible for an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022.

As noted above, a current disability and an in-service injury have been established.

As for the third element of direct service connection, the issue at hand is whether there is a causal link between the Veteran's lymphoma and the in-service toxic exposures.

The Board assigns significant probative weight to the positive February 2021 private medical opinion from the Veteran's treating oncologist. The opinion is supported by a well-reasoned explanation (rationale) and the Board finds the oncologist, as the Veteran's treating physician, to be highly qualified and informed in rendering this opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning).

The Board also assigns significant probative weight to the positive March 2021 VA hematologic and lymphatic conditions opinion, because the examiner's conclusion was supported by a thorough rationale, including the fact that the Veteran's treatment records had longstanding reports of weakness prior to his diagnosis and the lymphoma had likely been growing for some time before the actual diagnosis and treatment. See id.

However, the Board cannot assign significant probative value to the negative June 2021 causal linkage opinion by the VA hematologic and lymphatic conditions examiner. The negative opinion was impermissibly based primarily on a lack of treatment records during service and, therefore, is not adequate to use as evidence in this appeal. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that direct service connection is warranted for the Veteran's non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and the claim is granted, on a direct basis, and NOT based on the PACT Act presumptions.

3. Service connection for a lower back condition

Procedural History and Factual Background

Before service, in December 2008, the Veteran was treated for a "backache." However, this pain was actually arm and shoulder pains that was misdiagnosed or misreported as a backache. At that time, the Veteran stated that, in 2006, he fell about 20 feet off a building but never sought treatment. He described the pain as located in the right shoulder blade. 

In February 2009, the Veteran underwent a pre-deployment health assessment. There was no indication of a lower back condition or symptoms at that time. 

In February 2010, the Veteran underwent a post-deployment health assessment. He reported back pain, muscle aches and swollen, stiff painful joints, which still bothered him at that time.

In April 2018 (approximately nine years after service), the Veteran filed an initial claim for service connection of a lower back condition. The Veteran reported that he experienced sharp pains in his back "on a daily basis since 2010 while in the USAR no treatment no diagnosis."

In July 2018, a VA examiner opined that the low back condition was less likely than not related to service, because: "[t]he Veteran states that his back pain started several months after his deployment in 2010. He was seen by a chiropractor for about a month. He has not had any treatment since that time. He does not have a LOD for his back. He did not report any back pain while on AD. Thus, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed back condition is due to service [because] the records are silent for any treatment and/or injury during his time on AD."

In July 2018, the AOJ denied service connection for a lower back condition with sharp pains.  

In February 2021, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for service connection  of a lower back condition.  The Veteran included a private medical opinion and lay statements as new and relevant evidence to reopen the claim. The private medical opinion was from a family practice doctor, who opined that it was as least as likely as not that the Veteran's lower back condition was connected to military service and had been chronic since that time. The physician opined that "the adverse environmental conditions that precipitated [the Veteran's] conditions clearly included musculoskeletal insults, years of repetitive motion and absolute health is also clearly connected to, and resultant of the many chronic infirmities suffered as a consequence of his military career." The physician also found that "it is impossible to quantify the relative percentages and proportionate impact. However, I firmly believe that their cumulative effects are inextricably intertwined." 

Also submitted with the February 2021 Supplemental Claim was a lay statement from the Veteran, reporting that he drove a truck to pick up and deliver equipment throughout Iraq and Kuwait in his MOS as "88M" (motor transport). He described spending "countless hours on terrible road conditions, hitting potholes and driving through rough terrain." He asserted that he was "constantly bumping his head and body on the roof and metal frame of the truck... due to the multiple large potholes, speed bumps and swerving through checkpoints." The Veteran reported that he had experienced a "tremendous amount" of lower back pain since deployment which affects his daily life and employment.

The Veteran also submitted a lay statement from his mother, T.E., who recounted that, while the Veteran was deployed, he would tell her that he experienced lower back pain due to long drives across Iraq and Kuwait, where the roads were rough and he would often be jostled around the truck.

The final piece of evidence submitted with the February 2021 Supplemental Claim was a lay statement from A.E., the Veteran's spouse. A.E. asserted that she met the Veteran about four months after he returned from deployment and that, as long as she has known him, he has experienced lower back pain, which was an "almost daily struggle."

In June 2021, the Veteran underwent x-ray testing of his thoracic and  lumbosacral spine, which was negative for arthritis.

Also in June 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination related to his lower back condition with sharp pains. The examiner diagnosed "strain of muscle, fascia and tendon of lower back, sequela" and "sprain of ligaments of thoracic spine, sequela." The Veteran reported that his back (including the upper lumbar and lower thoracic area) started to hurt during his deployment but he "sucked it up and kept going." He did not seek treatment for his back pain at any time during service. He reported that he was treated by a chiropractor in 2011. The Veteran reported that his back pain had worsened over time. He stated that he could not sit for more than an hour and that his low back hurt if he "ben[t] over for long periods of time" or if he drove more than half a day. He described the pain as "dull pain with sitting, sharp pain with working off and on." He treated the back pain with Tylenol or Ibuprofen. He also stated that he experienced functional impact in his occupation in construction from pain with lifting over 100 pounds and bending.

The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed lower back condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service, on the basis that the Veteran was never treated in service for back pain, and that one visit for a "backache" turned out to be posterior shoulder pain. The examiner also rationalized that the Veteran has worked at multiple jobs post service using his back, including working as a construction worker, as a railway carman, and as a welder.

Additionally, the examiner noted a painful lump in the soft tissue of the Veteran's lower mid back on the right side of the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine. Due to the Veteran's history of lymphoma, the examiner notified the Veteran to follow up about this issue with his primary care physician. Id. 

In July 2021, the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial of service connection for a lower back condition. The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current disability during the June 2021 VA examination.

 In July 2021, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement appealing the July 2021 denial of service connection for a lower back condition. 

Analysis

The Veteran asserts that service connection for "strain of muscle, fascia and tendon of the lower back and sprain of ligaments of thoracic spine" (claimed as a "lower back condition with sharp pains") is warranted. See July 2022 Informal Hearing Presentation.

As for the first element of service connection, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a current diagnosis (strain of muscle, fascia and tendon of the lower back; sprain of ligaments of thoracic spine) during the June 2021 VA examination. As such, a current disability has been established.

As to the second element of service connection, "an in-service incurrence of aggravation of a disease or injury" the Veteran did not report lower back pain during service. However, the Veteran did credibly report that he was "constantly bumping his head and body on the roof and metal frame of the truck" while driving on difficult road conditions and rough terrain while making deliveries in Iraq and Kuwait. As a result, the Veteran asserted that he began having "a tremendous amount of back pain" during deployment and since service. See February 2021 Lay Statement. The Veteran's mother provided a competent and credible lay statement that the Veteran would tell her while he was deployed that he was experienced lower back pain from being jostled around during long drives across Iraq and Kuwait. The Veteran's spouse also competently and credibly reported that the Veteran had experienced lower back pain as long as she had known him (since approximately four months after his return from deployment) and that his back pain had become an "almost daily struggle." Moreover, it was noted by a June 2021 VA examiner that the Veteran had first experienced lower back pain while in service but that he "sucked it up" and did not seek treatment. The Board finds these assertions to be competent and credible. In light of this, the Board finds that there is ample evidence suggesting that the Veteran experienced an in-service injury in the form of traumatic stress based on his being jostled around during the long drives across Iraq and Kuwait.

The final element for service connection is a causal linkage between the Veteran's in-service back injury and the low back condition. 

The Board assigns significant probative value to the February 2021 private medical opinion. The physician performed a thorough review of the Veteran's records and an interview of the Veteran. The physician considered corroboration from the Veteran's wife about the Veteran's condition. This opinion was based on an accurate factual premise and supported by a thorough explanation (rationale). See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning); Reonal v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).?

The Board assigns only minimal probative weight to the negative June 2021 VA causal linkage opinion because the examiner did not adequately consider the entirety of the record, including the Veteran's assertion that he experienced back pain during service but did not report it. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993). The Board finds no reason to doubt the credibility of the Veteran's statements as an explanation of why he experienced back pain during service but did not report it. The negative opinion was also impermissibly based on a lack of treatment records or reports of back pain during service - that is, a lack of objective contemporaneous medical evidence.

The Board also considered the competent and credible lay statements from the Veteran, his mother (T.E.) and his wife (A.E.) regarding the Veteran's observable symptoms of back pain while in service and continuing to the present. See February 2021 Lay Statements. The Board has no reason to doubt the competency and credibility of these statements, all of which bolster the Veteran's assertions.

Having reviewed all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence is at least evenly balanced whether the Veteran's lower back condition was incurred in service.  Accordingly, the benefit of the doubt doctrine applies and service connection for a lower back condition is granted. 

 

Victoria Moshiashwili

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	De Angelis, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.