Citation Nr: A25030703
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241108-490367
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for Barrett's Esophagus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1965 to January 1969, and was honored with multiple decorations for his service, including the National Defense Service Medal; Coast Guard Unit Commendation Ribbon; Coast Guard Good Conduct Medal; and Vietnam Service Medal.

The matter comes before the Board on appeal from a rating decision issued in June 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง?20.301.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for Barrett's Esophagus.

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

The Veteran contends that his GERD began in service when he was participating in standing loran watches in Thailand on a tactical loran chain. The Veteran stated that these were installed to support the Vietnam War effort, which was quite nerve racking, as they were to maintain a lighter signal tolerance than other non-tactical loran chains. Thus, the Veteran stated this is when his heartburn began and started his lifelong issues, including his Barrett's Esophagus, which started as a result of his GERD over decades. 

In the June 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found the Veteran had been diagnosed with GERD and Barrett's Esophagus. The AOJ also conceded that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents during his military service, as he was within the qualifying geographical zone of deployment. As the file is devoid of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104(c). The Veteran's Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum also found the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents in Thailand and asbestos exposure due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) as Electronic Technician. 

In a March 2024 VA examination for his claimed GERD and Barrett's Esophagus, the examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD began in 2000 when he went to the emergency room for chest pain and Barrett's Esophagus in 2017 after he started experiencing abdomen pain after a long bike ride. The examiner also noted the Veteran's TERA in service, including his exposure to herbicide agents and asbestos. Relying on the Veteran's file and medical research, the examiner found that there was no medical or scientific evidence available to support a relationship between the Veteran's development of GERD and Barrett's Esophagus with the Veteran's in service TERA. The examiner explained that there were other risk factors outside of military service like Veteran's older age, diet, and body mass index (BMI) of 28 that far outweighed the factors identified in the TERA. Thus, the examiner opined the Veteran's GERD and Barrett's Esophagus were less likely than not caused by his TERA in service.

The Board finds that the March 2024 VA examination did not adequately consider the Veteran's lay statements that his GERD began in service while he was stationed in Thailand and that his Barrett's Esophagus began as a result of his GERD. Thus, a remand is required for an adequate opinion regarding both direct and secondary service connection for the claimed conditions.

Therefore, the Board finds the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain an adequate VA opinion and address all of the Veteran's theories of entitlement. Thus, a remand is necessary for a new opinion to address such issues. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed GERD.

Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

(a.) The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed GERD is related to his military service. Specifically, the examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his experiences in and out of service. 

2. Forward the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed Barrett's Esophagus, to include as secondary to his claimed service connected GERD.

Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to provide responses to the following:

(a.) The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed Barrett's Esophagus is related to his military service. Specifically, the examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his experiences in and out of service. 

(b.) The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's diagnosed Barrett's Esophagus was caused by or aggravated by his claimed service connected GERD.

The examiners are advised that a lack of documentation is not dispositive of the question, and a nexus opinion cannot be based solely on the absence of documentation of in service findings or continuity of care thereafter.

Any opinions offered should be accompanied by the underlying reasons for the conclusions.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hageman Gaina, Samantha L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.