Citation Nr: A25030210
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240514-441421
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to April 10, 2021 is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 2003 to August 2004, October 2004 to January 2006 and January 2008 to February 2009.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied the claim on appeal.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ/RO) decision, which was subsequently subject to the January 2024 higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ/RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the appealed claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ/RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

By way of procedural background, the Veteran was granted entitlement to individual unemployability granted effective April 10, 2021 in a December 2021 rating decision. 

The Veteran initially sought a higher level review in March 2022, seeking review of the effective date for eligibility to individual unemployability. A rating decision was issued in April 2022, which denied the claim because the Veteran was considered full time at the U.S. Postal Service until his last day of employment on April 9, 2021. 

In October 2022, the Veteran sought a supplemental review for an earlier effective date for the grant of individual unemployment. A rating decision was issued in December 2022, which denied the claim because the Veteran was considered full time at the U.S. Postal Service until his last day of employment on April 9, 2021. 

In September 2023, the Veteran sought a higher level review for entitlement to an earlier effective date for total disability based upon individual unemployability. A rating decision was issued in January 2024, which denied the claim because the Veteran was considered full time at the U.S. Postal Service until his last day of employment on April 9, 2021. 

The Veteran timely submitted a notice of disagreement (10182/NOD) in May 2024, seeking review of the claim. As such, the claim for entitlement for a TDIU prior to April 10, 2021 is properly before the Board for adjudication.

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to April 10, 2021.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 10, 2021. The Veteran asserts that he worked in a sheltered environment before April 10, 2021 and his employment was marginal starting in 2014. See Veteran's May 2024 NOD argument. 

VA will grant a TDIU when the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of his service-connected disabilities, from securing and following "substantially gainful employment" consistent with his education and occupational experience. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. The central inquiry is, "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).

The regulations provide that if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more; and if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability must bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

As pertinent to this case, the Veteran had a single disability of 70 percent from January 2019. The disability was subsequently reduced, had disabilities of one or both upper extremities or disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident will be considered as one disability for the purposes of one 60 percent disability or one 40 percent disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

Since 2014, the period claimed by the Veteran, the Veteran has been service-connected for the following disabilities: posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), rated 50 percent from December 10, 2013, 70 percent from January 23, 2019 and 50 from July 26, 2021 following a reduction; right and left upper radiculopathy, rated 20 percent from August 3, 2012 and 40 percent from March 9, 2020, respectively; cervical strain, rated 20 percent from September 1, 2013 with changing diagnoses and Diagnostic Codes; residuals of boils, rated noncompensable from January 17, 2006; chronic headaches, rated noncompensable from February 16, 2009; scar of left anterior neck, rated noncompensable from December 10, 2013; and left thigh scar, rated noncompensable from December 10, 2013.

The Board must evaluate whether there are circumstances in the Veteran's case, apart from any non-service-connected condition and advancing age, which would justify a total rating based on individual unemployability due solely to the service- connected conditions. See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment. Marginal employment generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran's earned income does not exceed the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person. Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts found basis (including but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019), the Court defined the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The non-economic component includes consideration of: the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

In LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 123-124 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that under § 4.16(a), "employment in a protected environment... unambiguously means a lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market."

As noted above, the Veteran asserts that he "is entitled to an earlier effective date for his TDIU. Although he was employed, his employment was marginal and not substantially gainful employment in 2014. [The Veteran] was entitled to compensation for his employment issues in 2014 and is therefore entitled to an earlier effective date for his TDIU." See Veteran's May 2024 NOD argument. 

First, the Board will consider the Veteran's non-economic claim he was working in a sheltered environment.

The Veteran was afforded a November 2017 PTSD examination. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's PTSD and adjustment disorder with depressed mood were both moderate and neither condition precluded employment.

In December 2017, the Veteran was afforded a VA neck examination. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's report of functional loss of "limits lifting 10 lbs. can't work overhead. No sedentary restrictions."

In January 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA back examination. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's current occupation was that of a mail clerk at the Post Office, reported two to four weeks of work time lost in prior 12 months and the Veteran reported difficulty standing for prolonged periods of time and not being able to lift heavy objects.

At a June 2019 VA PTSD examination, the Veteran reported he was working but indicated he was unable to work a full forty hour week: "I am lucky if I can make it 20 hours a week." The examiner noted the Veteran reported he had been able to work full time due to recent disc removal and chronic pain. His expected salary is $60,000 but last year he made $23,000 because of calling in, sick time, and poor motivation to work.

At a June 2019 VA neck examination, the Veteran reported his occupation was at the Post Office, had lost more than five weeks work time in the last 12 months and reported standing for long periods of time made his neck hurt. 

On his March 2020 application for increased compensation based on unemployability, the Veteran reported the disabilities that preventing, securing or following any substantially gainful occupation were PTSD, cervical radiculopathy, neck fusion C4-C5 and cervical strain. The Veteran reported he last worked full time on May 15, 2013 and became too disabled to work in "April 2001." The Veteran reported: "Due [to] my serious health conditions. I am unable to maintain full time employment. I work less than 20 hrs per week."

At a May 2020 VA PTSD examination, the examiner noted "the veteran is employed through the Postal Service, where he has been employed for 14 years. He works as a processing clerk. He has been on two weeks leave due to COVID-19 with plans of going back to work on Wednesday. He stated that he works independently in his work responsibilities and that he is on permanent light duty due to neck issues. He reported that he physically struggles with his responsibilities due to having to stand throughout his workday." The VA examiner further noted that "the veteran's symptoms of emotional distress impact his work in that he sometimes has difficulty working in areas in which he would have to interact extensively with others. Veteran indicated that in his current position, he is able to work independently and at his own pace; however, he described some limitations he experiences related to physical issues that is beyond the scope of practice of this examiner."

At a June 2020 VA neck examination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran "should avoid tasks that require hyperextension of the neck for prolonged periods of time or repetitive movement, such as a mail sorter, painter, or factory worker." The VA examiner further opined "there are limited occupational settings and environments that this veteran could effectively labor in. Those that would be beneficial would be ones that allow him to manage symptoms, maintain medication regimen, and rest privileges. Additionally, not requiring the individual to work with electrical equipment and repetitive movement of the neck such as a distribution center or production worker. Medically, individuals with degenerative disc disease can be severely limited by the condition. If the individual works in a physical job or a sedentary one, the pain of degenerative disc disease can be enough to prevent the individual from performing both mental and physical job duties. Pain in performing physical job duties is the most common limitation that people with degenerative disc disease experience, but loss of flexibility is also quite common. As the disease advances, many individuals experience loss of motion in their cervical spine. The area of the spine in which degenerating discs are present becomes less flexible and hyperextension, twisting, and movement from side to side of the neck, may become a problem. Pain medications, muscle relaxers and other medications that may be necessary to treat degenerative disc disease can have side effects that impact mental capacity. Any of these issues may result in limitations that prevent the individual from being effective in normal job duties. As the conditions progress, joints become affected and limitations may be greatly impacted. The neck condition can make it difficult to return to any type of work including sedentary jobs. Although sedentary jobs are less physical than other work situations, some sedentary jobs, particularly those involving management or sales, are also known for being high-stress careers."

In a July 2020 response, a supervisor from the U.S. Post Office noted that the Veteran had been employed since May 13, 2006 as a processing clerk. The supervisor noted that the Veteran had "reduced to part time or less to accommodate Veteran's health. He has also been on light duty for 4 years." The supervisor further remarked that "[The Veteran] is still employed at the United States Postal Service. Despite allowing him to work fewer days than full time employees are required to and despite putting him on light duty [the Veteran] is still unable to perform his duties in full."

In an undated letter received in October 2020, Dr. W. H. stated "Currently with medication, [the Veteran] is only able to work 2-3 days per week. He is increasingly unable to continue to function at work." The provider further stated: "It is my opinion that [the Veteran] is unable to continue to work in a competitive work environment."

In a September 2020 determination letter, the Veteran was denied eligibility for FMLA leave as he had limited work hours. 

In a letter bearing a fax date of October 23, 2020, the Veteran's U.S. Post Office supervisor stated that the Veteran "is a full time regular career employee at the Little Rock P&DC. [The Veteran] has been an employee of mine for 2 years, during this time he has never been regular in attendance. While [the Veteran] has been assigned to me, I have never offered a part time work assignment to [the Veteran], [the Veteran] is a full time regular employee and he is to report to work as scheduled." 

At VA neck, headache and peripheral nerve examinations in December 2020, the Veteran reported he was employed as a processing clerk at the Post Office, lost none to two weeks of work in the prior 12 months and reported he had severe neck pain with prolong standing, headache pain so severe he was unable to work and was unable to stand for long periods of time because of peripheral nerve pain.

In a December 2020 VA individual unemployment statement, the Veteran was found able to complete light work which was defined as: "Exerting up to 20 pounds of force occasionally, and/or up to 10 pounds of force frequently, and/or a negligible amount of force constantly to move objects. Physical demand requirements are in excess of those for Sedentary Work. Even though the weight lifted may be only a negligible amount, a job should be rated Light Work: (1) when it requires walking or standing to a significant degree; or (2) when it requires sitting most of the time but entails pushing and/or pulling of arm or leg controls; and/or (3) when the job requires working at a production rate pace entailing the constant pushing and/or pulling of materials even though the weight of those materials is negligible."

At a January 2021 VA PTSD examination, the Veteran reported he had worked for the Post Office as a processing clerk for 15 years. Since he had spine surgery in 2013 the Veteran missed work and may only get there 2-3 days a week. He was disciplined at first but then he got a new supervisor who helped him get his VA benefits. The Veteran reported he was not able to meet the requirements of his full time job so he felt that eventually he would get tired of it. The Veteran reported he got along with coworkers and with his bosses.

At the January 2021 VA PTSD examination, the Veteran reported that his coworkers who had the same jobs were making more money than him. The Veteran reported that he made much less because he can't get there very often and he was paid hourly. The examiner noted: "When asked about his claim for unemployability, he said he has missed a lot of work. He gets into a cycle in that if he tries to work 2-3 days in a row he ends up hurting so bad that he can't work for several days and he gets so stressed that he may miss a week of work. He can't force himself to go in. He reported no problems with the quality of his work. When asked if he wanted to add anything, he said he was denied for unemployability because his job was making concessions so he could work part time and 'that's not true.'"

Additionally, in a January 2021 individual unemployability statement, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran "misses up to a week of work at a time due to PTSD symptoms."

In an April 2021 letter, Dr. W.H. stated the Veteran "is no longer able to work in any occupation. He has severe chronic pain from neuropathy associated with cervical spinal injury. He takes multiple medications that impair his ability to work. [The Veteran] is unable to consistently lift over 10 pounds or raise his arms above shoulder level." Dr. W.H. further stated that "Multiple attempts have been made to accommodate for his condition including reduced work schedule and light duty. However, he is no longer able to meet those standards." The doctor concluded that "It is my opinion that [the Veteran] is completely disabled from any occupation and meaningful employment in the future." Additionally, the doctor provided the Veteran with an out of work order dated March 31, 2021 that stated: "Effective immediately. Recommend indefinite leave of absence from work due to medical conditions." 

In an October 2022 statement, the Veteran reported "Veteran was supposed to be off work for 6 months for rehab, while being paid by the military. The military didn't pay him during that time and he lost his car and home. Veteran doctor gave him a note after 2 months of rehab for limited duty because the Veteran needed to make money. Veteran supervisor for postal service on [sic] August 2014 approved him for light duty (work accommodations) because of severe pain from spinal issue. The Veterans sheltered environment lasted 7 years while making less money every year. At the start of the Veterans accommodations he was making $60,000 and by his final year was only making $18,000."

In an argument with his October 2022 supplemental claim, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran was granted entitlement to TDIU with an effective date of April 10, 2021, the "date set by the VA is based on their belief that [the Veteran] was fully employed, when he was actually in a sheltered environment provided by his employer starting on August 2014. That sheltered environment financially impacted [the Veteran] in the effect of annual decreases in compensation."

The Court addressed the meaning of employment in a protected work environment in Cantrell v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 382, (2017). The Court found that the plain language of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a) does not expressly define employment in a protected environment and that it was unable to defer to the Secretary's definition, finding that "the Secretary ha[d] refused to proffer any definition of employment in a protected environment for the Court to analyze." Id. at 390. (noting that the Secretary had argued that VA has purposely chosen not to define employment in a protected environment, leaving it to the discretion of the factfinder on [a] case by-case basis). Absent an articulated standard for employment in a protected environment, the Court concluded that it was unable to effectively review the Board's decision. Id. at 392.

In this case, the Veteran remained employed as a postal clerk with the U. S. Post Office until April 2021. While the Veteran was assigned to light duty and worked when he was able, he was still considered a full time Federal employee. Because the Veteran was an hourly worker, his reported loss of income was the result of his failure to work, rather than his employer providing a special environment in which the Veteran could work. Rather, the Board finds that opposite is true: the Veteran was treated the same as someone in a similar hourly position because he was paid when he worked. Likewise, the Veteran was eligible to apply for FMLA, but was declined due to a lack of work hours. Over the course of many years, the Veteran's attendance was not "regular," yet he was still regarded as a full time employee and still considered able to work. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was afforded great leeway in his employment, but that was reflected in the lack of work hours rather than special accommodations or special treatment. Likewise, the Board notes that the many VA examinations noted the Veteran's limitations but did not opine that the Veteran was unable to work. It was only the Veteran's private provider, Dr. W.H. that opined the Veteran was unable to work and issued and out of work note addressing the same. As such, the Board does not find that the Veteran was the beneficiary of "a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop." 38 C.F.R. § 3.16 (a)(5).

Second, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim of working in a protected environment, marginal employment or economic loss. 

The Veteran asserts that he was financially impacted because of his disability, however, the Veteran has not provided any evidence of the same.  

As noted above, the Veteran was an hourly employee, so when he did not work, he did not get paid. The Board finds that this was not the result of a special relationship, but the general nature of employment. 

In August 2020, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim stating that he was entitled to unemployability based on the poverty level of the Veteran. The Veteran stated that "records show that Veteran plus 5 with a poverty threshold of 35,159 US Census Bureau entitle threshold." However, a July 2020 employment response from the U.S. Post Office reported that the Veteran was working part time as a processing clerk to accommodate the Veteran's health and reported the Veteran's income of $22,500 during the prior 12 months. 

Recently, in a precedential decision, Court addressed the meaning of the phrase "employment in a protected environment" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a) in the consolidated cases of LaBruzza v. McDonough, No. 21-4467, and McBride v. McDonough, No. 20-8562. The Court held that the phrase 'employment in a protected environment' "unambiguously means employment in a lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." See LaBruzza/McBride v. McDonough, No. 21-4467/20-8562 U.S. App. 72 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2024).

As such, the Board finds a duty to assist error in that there is no development for the Veteran's income from 2014 to 2021 to determine if the Veteran's income was exceeded the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census per 38 C.F.R. § 3.16 (a)(5).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ/RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ/RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). Additionally, the Board must remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ/RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ/RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the above reasons, a remand is warranted for a new opinion to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request the Veteran to submit any records regarding any employment and income (i.e., tax returns and W-2 forms or an earnings statement from the Social Security Administration) for the period of 2014 to 2021.

2. Make all attempts to verify the Veteran's income/earnings throughout the period on appeal for the purposes of determining whether the employment was marginal (below the poverty threshold) for the period of 2014 to 2021. 

3. All attempts to secure this evidence must be documented in the claims file, and if, after making reasonable efforts to obtain named records, they are not able to be secured, provide the required notice and opportunity to respond to the Veteran and his representative.

4. After ensuring full compliance with this remand, readjudicate the claim on appeal.

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	MELNYK, H.      

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.