Citation Nr: A25030101
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240517-441591
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2004 to June 2008, and from February 2010 to December 2013. 

The Rating Decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that, as per a VA Form 21-22a received in April 2024, Thomas J. Ellis was authorized as the Veteran's attorney at the time she submitted her VA May 2024 VA Form 10182.  Thereafter, a VA Form 21-22a received in September 2024 appointed Michael J. Ogden as the Veteran's attorney.  In correspondence received in January 2025, Michael J. Ogden indicated that he had closed his representation of the Veteran in her claim for VA disability compensation.  However, as the September 2023 VA Form 21-22a designating Michael J. Ogden as attorney was received more than 90 days following receipt of the May 2024 VA Form 10182 and did not show good cause for the change in representation, the Board continues to recognize Thomas J. Ellis as the Veteran's attorney for purposes of this appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.6.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for a pre-decisional duty to assist error is required. 

The Veteran filed her claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea in February 2023.  In an attached statement, the Veteran alleged that her sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by her service-connected chronic adjustment disorder.  Alternatively, she alleged that her service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities (right hip strain, left hip strain, right knee strain, and left knee strain) prevented her from exercising, implying that weight gain caused by her service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated her sleep apnea.  

Obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 at 2. The first inquiry is whether the service-connected disability caused the veteran to become obese. If so, then the adjudicator must address whether the obesity (as a result of the service-connected disability) was a "substantial factor" in causing the non-service-connected disability, and whether the non-service-connected disability would not have occurred, but for the obesity. See id. at 9-10. In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 307 (2020), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) concluded that obesity as an "intermediate step" in a causal chain for service connection can be established on either a causation or aggravation basis. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

Attached to the Veteran's February 2023 claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea was a "Medical Nexus Letter" in which a private physician indicated that:

As a licensed healthcare provider, it is my professional medical opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50%  probability) that this veteran's weight gain is due to their service connected condition of Chronic Adjustment Disorder, Right Knee, Left Knee, Right Hip, Left Hip, and that overweight condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current Obstructive Sleep Apnea.

In support of this conclusion, the examiner explained, in part:

The veteran has a known service connected disability condition(s) which can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances (related to pain and forced sleep positions related to disabilities), diminished motivation, and/or 'comfort" overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, which leads to and/or promotes weight gain.  

The medical literature has documented that weight gain is known to predispose patients to and directly cause Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA).  It has described from a pathophysiological perspective how Obstructive Sleep Apnea is associated with weight gain, exacerbates hyperglycemia and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the OSA condition.

The Veteran was thereafter provided with a VA Sleep Apnea examination in April 2023, at which time she was diagnosed as having obstructive sleep apnea.  The examination report was accompanied by an opinion indicating that the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

Subsequently, in August 2023, the AOJ obtained a series of additional opinions in which another VA clinician opined that the Veteran's diagnosed sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected right hip strain, left hip strain, right knee strain, left knee strain, and chronic adjustment disorder.  Specifically, as to the question as to whether any or all of these disabilities caused obesity which resulted in the development of sleep apnea, the VA clinician explained that:

Provider reviewed claims file.  Veteran is claiming SC diagnoses caused obesity which in turn caused Veteran to develop obstructive sleep apnea.  It is possible that pain and other symptoms from SC diagnoses make it difficult to exercise but obesity is not accomplished through inactivity alone.  Obesity, like obstructive sleep apnea, is a multifactorial condition. Genetics, diet, certain medications and comorbid conditions also contribute to the development of obesity.  Inactivity does not affect what the Veteran eats, how much the Veteran eats, and how often the Veteran eats. Inactivity does not cause the metabolic changes that occur with aging. Obesity alone cannot be credited for the development of obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep apnea exists in the absence of obesity and is not the only factor in the development of obstructive sleep apnea.  The etiology of obstructive sleep apnea involves the relaxation of the muscles that support the soft palate.  Age, male sex, comorbid factors, genetics, and substance use contribute to the development of sleep apnea.  The Veteran's obesity is less likely than not an intermediate step between service connected diagnoses and obstructive sleep apnea.  A nexus has not been established.

The Board affords little probative value to both the February 2023 "Medical Nexus Letter" provided by the private physician as well as the August 2023 VA opinion, as both opinions were not specific to this particular Veteran's individual circumstances.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating that, "The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion.")  Indeed, both medical opinions simply stated general medical principles regarding risk factors for sleep apnea without applying these factors to the Veteran's unique medical circumstances.  For example, the August 2023 VA clinician listed "male sex" as one of the factors that could contribute to the development of sleep apnea, whereas the Veteran in this case is female.  Moreover, the August 2023 VA clinician also referenced "the Veteran's obesity" without discussing any details specific to the Veteran or her medical records.  For instance, a December 2019 VA treatment note indicated that the Veteran weighed 172.4 pounds, with a body mass index of 24.8 (indicative of healthy weight), while the February 2023 Medical Nexus Letter reported a body mass index of 28.0 (indicative of being overweight); however, the record does not reflect a body mass index of 30 or greater (indicative of obesity) at any time during the appeal period.  Interestingly, in the STOP-Bang questionnaire (used to screen for obstructive sleep apnea) attached to the February 2023 "Medical Nexus Letter," the private physician explicitly acknowledged that the Veteran's body mass index was not greater than 35 (presumably the point at which obesity has been found to become a risk for the development of sleep apnea).  Finally, the August 2023 VA opinions did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravated the Veterans OSA.

For these reasons, the Board finds that the August 2023 VA opinions are inadequate.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311-312 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide a medical examination or opinion, it must provide an adequate one).  As such, the AOJ's reliance on this examination report when denying the Veteran's service connection claim at the time of the October 2023 Rating Decision on appeal constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  On remand, adequate opinions are necessary to address whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities either (1) caused the Veteran to become obese or (2) aggravated any obesity; whether any obesity or aggravation of obesity was a substantial factor in causing the currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea; and whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for any obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disabilities.  Such opinions must discuss the specific facts pertaining to this Veteran's unique medical history and individual circumstances rather than merely list general risk factors for sleep apnea and/or obesity. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with another VA Sleep Apnea examination in order to obtain an adequate opinion regarding the likely etiology of her diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea.  The claims file must be made available for review and the examiner should indicate that review of the claims file was conducted.  

The VA examiner should furnish opinions with respect to the following questions:

(a.) Whether any of the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric and/or orthopedic disabilities (right hip strain, left hip strain, right knee strain and left knee strain), to include any overeating and/or diminished physical activity caused by these service-connected disabilities, either (1) caused the Veteran to become obese or (2) aggravated any obesity.  Both causation and aggravation must be addressed.  If the Veteran is not found to be obese, then the examiner should include this finding in the opinion.

(b.) If so, then the examiner is asked to opine as to whether the obesity or aggravation of obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.

(c.) The examiner is also asked to opine as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for any obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability(ies).

The examiner is reminded that aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of the nonservice-connected disability.  Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for any incremental increase in disability, meaning any additional impairment of earning capacity in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase regardless of its permanence.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all opinions offered. In providing these opinions, the examiner is asked to specifically address and discuss in further detail the February 2023 "Medical Nexus Letter" submitted in support of the Veteran's claim.  The examiner should also address the Veteran's statements, to include her statement received in February 2023.

Additionally, if the examiner lists risk factors associated with the development of obesity and/or sleep apnea, then the examiner must explain how each of these risk factors apply (or do not apply) to this Veteran's unique medical history and individual circumstances.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should identify all medical and lay evidence considered in this conclusion, fully explain why this is the case, and identify what additional evidence (if any) would allow for a more definitive opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, then he/she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his/her conclusions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Flamini, Anthony

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.