Citation Nr: A25030508
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250305-518798
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's anxiety disorder did not clearly and unmistakably preexist his active service; the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder was incurred in or is otherwise attributable to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 20, 1967 to July 21, 1967.      

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2025 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In March 2025, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request form opting into AMA and selecting the Direct Review lane.  As explained in the VA Form 10182, "direct review" means that the Board's decision must be based upon the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing request.  As such, the Board has considered only the evidence of record at the time of the February 2025 decision.

Service Connection Claim

Every Veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  This is more commonly referred to as the presumption of soundness.  For the presumption of soundness to apply, a Veteran must serve at least 90 days of continuous active duty service.  See Grose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 144, 148 (1993).

The Veteran entered service on June 20, 1967 and was discharged on July 21, 1967; thus, the Veteran served 31 days of active duty service.  Because the Veteran served less than 90 days of continuous active duty service, the presumption of soundness on entry to service does not apply.  See Grose, 4 Vet. App. 144.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called nexus requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A service treatment record shows a pre-induction Medical History Report, dated in January 1967, in which the Veteran did not report any psychiatric problems.  The Medical Examination report, dated that same day, does not show that any psychiatric issues were noted.  "Normal" was indicated for the Veteran's clinical evaluation of for psychiatric issues.  

A Clinical Record, dated in June 1967, shows an impression of acute anxiety reaction.  A Clinical Record, dated in July 1967, indicates that the Veteran had been admitted to a hospital the month before for a psychiatric illness.  The Veteran had noted intermittent episodes of anxiety and depression prior to service.  

A Medical Board Proceedings report, dated in June 1967, indicates that a nervous condition was identified and that the Veteran was medical fit.  It was noted that the Veteran had latent type schizophrenic reactions, manifested by social isolation, flat affect, and overwhelming and incapacitating anxieties in a new situation.  It was also noted that the cause was not an incident to service and existed prior to entry on active duty.  No aggravation by active service was noted.     

The record shows that in a July 1985 correspondence, the Veteran noted that his nerves had been bad since service.  A February 2020 correspondence shows that the Veteran reported that he did not have mental issues before service.    

Post-service private and VA treatment records reflects treatment for anxiety.  (See September 2018 private medical note and VA treatment note dated in September 2021).

A VA mental disorder examination report, dated in March 2020, shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder.  The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  It was noted that service connection was denied in 1985, noting a history of mental health issues prior to military service in a mental health examination from 1967.  So, it was less likely than not that the current diagnosis was caused by the schizophrenic reaction during service.

A July 2024 private medical note shows that the private doctor. Dr. K. noted that since discharge, the Veteran continued to experience bouts of anxiety, nightmares and worries about Vietnam, health, finances, family, etc.  It was noted that the Veteran's sleep was also affected, to include periodic nightmares of being in service.  A diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder was provided.  The private doctor opined that it was more than likely that the Veteran's condition was worsened by service. 

A VA mental disorder examination report, dated in January 2025, shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder.  The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The VA examiner noted that there was a documented history of mental health related issues prior to the military, based on evidence notes and self-report by the Veteran.  Therefore, making it less likely than not that his current mental health related symptoms were incurred in or caused by the mental health related symptoms during service.  The VA examiner also opined that the claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  There was no objective evidence that linked the Veteran's military service to aggravating his mental health related condition.  Furthermore, a July 1982 rating decision documented "no aggravation in service" and there was no documented evidence since then that refuted this opinion.

In this case, the evidence of record does not show, despite the Medical Board's findings, that the Veteran had a diagnosis of any psychiatric related disorders upon entry into service.  Significantly, the Medical Board Report indicates that the Veteran had a pre-existing schizophrenia disorder, but there is no objective evidence to support that finding, and the entrance examination specifically contradicts that finding.  Therefore, the burden is on VA to rebut the presumption by clear and unmistakable evidence that a psychiatric condition was both preexisting and not aggravated by service.

The Board does not find that there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had a psychiatric related disability that preexisted service.  The Board acknowledges that the Medical Board determined that the Veteran's condition pre-existed service.  However, the Medical Board report also showed that the Veteran was fit and his enlistment examination was silent for any related conditions.   Further, the Veteran denied any related conditions or symptoms, and the physical examination revealed no known defects.

Other than the Medical Board's conclusion that he had a pre-existing condition, there is no indication in the record, to include medical evidence, that a condition existed prior to enlistment, until the Veteran's hospital visit after enlistment.  Even if the Veteran had a condition prior to service, presumably, it was not causing symptoms at the time of enlistment, as the medical examination found the Veteran fit at entry.  If a condition pre-existed and was, in fact, the reason for the Veteran's hospital visit, the Board could reasonably infer that symptoms related to the psychiatric disorder would have shown upon examination and noted in service treatment records.  Further, while the January 2025 VA examiner noted that Veteran's reported self-history, there is no medical evidence of record showing treatment for or a diagnosis of psychiatric problems prior to service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1).  Thus, the objective medical evidence of record does not show clearly and unmistakably that a psychiatric related disability existed prior to service.

As the Board has not found that there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had a psychiatric disorder that existed prior to service, the Veteran's claim essentially becomes one for service connection based on service incurrence.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1111; Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1094-96.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

In this case, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed anxiety disorder was incurred in or is otherwise attributable to service.  The Board notes that the Veteran has been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

In support thereof, the Board relies primarily on Dr. K's July 2024 evaluation, during which he opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's condition was worsened by service.  It was noted that the private doctor had been treating the Veteran's condition and that the Veteran, since discharge, had continued to experience bouts of anxiety, nightmares and worries about Vietnam, health, finances, family, etc.  The Board finds his opinion to be highly probative of the issue at hand.  By contrast, the March 2020 and January 2025 VA examiner offered a negative opinion regarding the relationship of the current diagnosis to the in-service schizophrenic episode with no rationale as to why the psychiatric disorder was not attributable to service and a negative opinion regarding the finding of the preexisting nature of the psychiatric disorder.  However, as noted above, the Board does not find that the psychiatric disorder clearly and unmistakably preexisted service.  

In this matter, as there is medical evidence both in favor of and against the issue of whether the psychiatric disorder was incurred in or otherwise attributable to service, the Board is of the opinion that equipoise has been attained.  Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection is warranted for an anxiety disorder on a direct basis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The claim is thus granted in full.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.