Citation Nr: A25030075
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 211207-203005
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, is dismissed.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a skin disability, identified as tinea cruris, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for status post transurethral resection of prostate (TURP) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bladder outlet obstruction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile disfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disability is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The record evidence shows that, in a rating decision dated in August 2021, and issued to the Veteran and his service representative in the same month, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted a claim of service connection for coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis; thus, there remains no case or controversy with respect to this claim.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The claim of entitlement to service connection for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from May 1972 to May 1976. The Veteran had nautical service in the offshore eligible waters as defined in the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2021 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of March 2020 and May 2020 decisions. In May 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2020 and May 2020 decisions, for the associated issues. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2020 and May 2020 decisions for the relevant issues and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window. 

In the December 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. In May 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2020 and May 2020 AOJ decisions, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of [list claims], any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that in the Veteran's December 7, 2021, VA Form 10182, the Veteran additionally seeks to appeal claims of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and entitlement to a total disability due to individual unemployability (TDIU) and identifies the rating decision appealed as May 2021. However, the May 2021 rating decision did not adjudicate these issues finding that there was a duty to assist error and returned them for additional development. Therefore, they are not on appeal as part of this appeal stream.

Finally, in the December 7, 2021, VA Form 10182, the Veteran appeals the evaluations assigned for diabetes mellitus, type II, and associated upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathies, that were continued in the May 2021 rating decision on Higher Level Review from the March 2020 rating decision that granted service connection and assigned the initial evaluations. However, subsequently, in a July 2021 rating decision, the AOJ found that the decision was the product of clear and unmistakable error and assigned earlier effective dates and reconsidered the initial evaluations assigned. The Veteran has submitted a separate appeal of the July 2021 rating decision that has been docketed at the Board under docket number 211210-203449. Under Pirkl v. Shinseki, 718 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (Pirkl I), the implementation of a CUE finding in an earlier rating decision requires renewed consideration of subsequent rating decisions to determine the extent to which the CUE finding changes the legal or factual basis of the later evaluations. Also, in Pirkl v. Shinseki, 906 F.3d 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (Pirkl II), the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit explained this reconsideration should be conducted as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the original decision. Therefore, the Board finds that the March 2020 rating decision and subsequent May 2021 Higher Level Review rating decision were not final and that the effective dates and the evaluations of the Veteran's diabetes mellitus and associated neurological disabilities will be considered in the appeal of docket number 211210-203449.

Dismissed

1. Entitlement to service connection for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, is dismissed.

The Board finds that the Veteran's claim of service connection for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, must be dismissed as a matter of law. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II. The Board notes initially that it may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202. The record evidence shows that, after the Board docketed his currently appealed service connection claim for atherosclerosis, claimed as coronary artery disease, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, in an August 2021 rating decision service connection for coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis was granted, effective June 11, 2009. The effective date awarded predates the August 2019 date of claim giving rise to the March 2020 rating decision currently on appeal. Therefore, as the Veteran's claim of service connection for coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis has been granted in full by the AOJ, there remains no case or controversy before the Board as to this claim and it is dismissed.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a skin disability, identified as tinea cruris, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus, type II, is remanded.

The Board finds that the AOJ committed pre-decisional errors and remand is necessary to correct them. Regarding these issues, as the May 2021 rating decision on appeal is a Higher-Level Review of a March 2020 rating decision, the evidence period for consideration ends at the rating decision in March 2020 and extends for 90 days from the date the Veteran withdrew his request for a hearing. 

VA treatment records in 2018 show that the Veteran was in receipt of Social Security Administration (SSA) disability. In particular, an August 2018 VA treatment note the Veteran reported social security and in an August 2019 VA 21-8940, the Veteran reported that he received or expected to receive disability. The claims file does not contain an SSA decision or any of the medical records upon which an SSA determination was based prior to the September 2019 rating decision that was the subject of the HLR that is currently on appeal. Although the SSA records appear to have been associated with the claims file in April 2020, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) to not attempt to obtain the records pertaining to any SSA disability claim prior to the September 2019 adjudication as they are potentially relevant to this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Thus, a remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In addition, the Board notes that in January 2020 a VA examiner found that the Veteran's skin disability was less likely as not proximately due to his diabetes mellitus. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by his diabetes mellitus and did not provide an opinion regarding whether it was otherwise directly related to his active service. 

In addition, in January 2020 a VA examiner found that the Veteran's hyperlipidemia is less likely than not related to diabetes mellitus, type II. The examiner noted that the disability was diagnosed at the same time as diabetes and was related to diet and also genetic factors. However, the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by his diabetes mellitus and did not provide an opinion regarding whether it was otherwise directly related to his active service.

Accordingly, remand is necessary for adequate medical opinions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159, McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (indicating that findings of "not due to," "not caused by," and "not related to" a service-connected disability are insufficient to address the question of aggravation).

9. Entitlement to service connection for status post TURP is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for bladder outlet obstruction is remanded.

11. Entitlement to service connection for erectile disfunction is remanded.

12. Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disability is remanded. 

Prior to the May 2020 decision that was reviewed by the HLR rating decision currently on appeal in January 2020 a VA examiner found that the Veteran's status post TURP with bladder outlet obstruction was less likely than not caused by or due to diabetes mellitus, type II. The examiner noted that the Veteran had evidence of prostate disease which is most likely causative for his current bladder and voiding dysfunction status post TURP. It was found that diabetes mellitus, type II, was not causative for enlarged prostate or prostate disease. His BPH pre-existed his diabetes mellitus, type II. However, the examiner did not render an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by his diabetes mellitus.

In March 2020 a VA examiner rendered the opinion that the Veteran's status post TURP condition was less likely than not caused by prostatitis in service. In another March 2020 opinion the examiner found that the Veteran's bladder outlet syndrome was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the urinary frequency and urethritis in service. However, in rendering the opinions the examiner does not contemplate the Veteran's exposure to herbicides. 

Prior to the May 2020 decision that was reviewed by the HLR rating decision currently on appeal in January 2020 a VA examiner found that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction predated his diabetes mellitus and, therefore, was not due to his diabetes mellitus. However, the examiner did not render an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by his diabetes mellitus. 

In March 2020 a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was less likely than not directly related to service, including the Veteran's prostatitis in service. However, the examiner did not contemplate the Veteran's exposure to herbicides in rendering the opinion. 

Prior to the May 2020 decision that was reviewed by the HLR rating decision currently on appeal in January 2020 a VA examiner found the Veteran does not have evidence of microalbuminuria or diabetic nephropathy to indicate his diabetes mellitus, type II, is causing kidney disease. The examiner reported that according to his medical records, the Veteran's microalbumin levels are normal and he has a history of polycystic kidney disease. His current kidney disease is unlikely related to diabetes mellitus, type II, as he does not have evidence of microalbuminuria. He was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and polycystic kidneys in 2005 at the same time as diabetes mellitus, type II, without evidence of diabetic related kidney disease. However, the examiner did not render an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's disability was aggravated by his diabetes mellitus.

In a March 2020 VA examination report, the examiner found that there was no evidence that the diabetes and the polycystic kidney disease were ever objectively or medically linked and there was not support found in the medical literature. The examiner noted that the Veteran had kidney disease that was inherited and not incurred in or due to service. However, in rendering the opinion the examiner did not contemplate the Veteran's exposure to herbicides.

Accordingly, remand is necessary for adequate medical opinions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159, McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (indicating that findings of "not due to," "not caused by," and "not related to" a service-connected disability are insufficient to address the question of aggravation).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ensure that the Veteran's complete Social Security Administration records are associated with the claims file. If the records are not available, such unavailability should be documented in the record. The Veteran and his representative should be notified of unsuccessful efforts in order to allow them the opportunity to obtain and submit those records for VA review.

2. Forward the Veteran's record to an appropriate medical provider for an advisory medical opinion to determine the nature and likely etiology of his hyperlipidemia, skin disability, status post TURP, bladder outlet obstruction, erectile dysfunction, and kidney disability. On review of the record (including this remand), the consulting provider should:

(a.) Identify (by diagnosis) each disability shown by the record during the pendency of the claim.

(b.) Identify the likely etiology for each hyperlipidemia, skin disability, status post TURP, bladder outlet obstruction, erectile dysfunction, and kidney disability diagnosed. Specifically, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such was etiologically related to his active-duty service? In rendering the opinions, the examiner must discuss the Veteran's exposure to herbicides in service.

(c.) If the response to (b) is No, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed hyperlipidemia, skin disability, status post TURP, bladder outlet obstruction, erectile dysfunction, and kidney disability was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected diabetes mellitus, type II, disability? The opinion must address aggravation. 

All opinions must include a complete explanation of rationale, with citation to supporting factual data and medical principles. By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.

 

 

T. RAYMOND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robert J. Burriesci, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.