Citation Nr: A25030846
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240605-521157
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand strain is granted.

For the entire period on appeal, entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed tinnitus had its onset during his active service.

2. The evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed left hand strain had its onset during his active service.

3. The evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the manifestations of the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for left hand strain are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD are met for the entire period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant in this case, served on active duty from December 1994 to December 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions dated December 2023 and January 2024 of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the December 2023 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for tinnitus, left hand strain, hypertension, and a bilateral hearing loss disability.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial disability rating of 50 percent, effective May 25, 2023.

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request) requesting direct review of the December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions.  However, the Veteran included lay evidence with his VA Form 10182.  Accordingly, the Board will liberally construe the June 2024 VA Form 10182 as a request for review under the evidence submission docket, instead of the direct review docket.  The Board acknowledges that in July 2024, the Board sent a letter to the Veteran to notify him that the matter had been docketed under the direct review docket.  The Board finds that this letter was sent in error, and that it should have specified the matter was docketed under the evidence submission docket.

For the service connection claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the June 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  For the PTSD and TDIU claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the June 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decisions on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for hypertension and a bilateral hearing loss disability, and entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015).

Service Connection Claims

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. 

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Tinnitus is considered by VA to be organic disease of the nervous system, which is a "chronic disease" listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Therefore, the presumptive service connection provisions based on "chronic" in-service symptoms and "continuous" post-service symptoms under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) apply.  Where a veteran served ninety days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  If the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the claim is denied.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for tinnitus.  See June 2024 VA Form 10182.

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO made the following relevant favorable findings: (1) the Veteran is currently diagnosed with tinnitus; and (2) participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is established based on the Veteran's active service in Southwest Asia.  See also DD-214; December 2022 "VA Memo"; December 2023 VA audiological examination report (Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus).  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, a current disability and in-service event are established.

Additionally, the Board finds that the Veteran was exposed to loud noise during his military service.  In his May 2023 claim application, the Veteran reported he was exposed to "extremely loud noises," explaining, "Berthing was located below the catapult on the USS Kittyhawk.  Constantly exposed to loud noises from the launching of aircraft and the firing of the CIWS [close-in weapon system]."  See also December 2023 VA audiological examination report (Veteran reported military noise exposure from the ship, equipment, and weapons).  The Board has no reason to doubt the Veteran's credibility, particularly since his lay report is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service since military personnel records confirm he served aboard the USS Kitty Hawk.  Therefore, loud military noise exposure is also established.

Thus, the remaining question before the Board is whether there is competent evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's current tinnitus and his active service.

On review, the Board finds that the evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current tinnitus had its onset during his active service.

First, given the observable nature of tinnitus, the Board finds the Veteran's lay statement that his tinnitus onset during service and continued ever since to be competent, credible, and highly probative.  See December 2023 VA audiological examination report (Veteran stated his tinnitus onset in 1998 while in service, that it is constant, and that it has not progressed since its onset).

Second, the VA examiner who conducted the December 2023 VA audiological examination was unable to render an etiology opinion regarding the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation, reasoning that the Veteran's audiological testing "results are consistent with non[-]organic hearing loss."  In the "Remarks" section of the VA examination report, the examiner further explained, "Veteran demonstrated inconsistent test results.  I am unable to comment.  His audio is not accurate and does not reflect anything organic in nature.  I cannot comment on his tinnitus."  The Board affords no probative value to this statement since no opinion was rendered.

Third, the December 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by an in-service TERA, reasoning, in pertinent part, that "[t]here is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure."  The Board finds this opinion to be inconsistent with the December 2023 VA audiological examination report, since the VA examiner found that the Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus.  Therefore, the Board finds the December 2023 VA TERA opinion to be inadequate and affords it no probative value.

Fourth, the Board acknowledges that there is no positive nexus opinion of record regarding the Veteran's tinnitus.  While a lay person is not always competent to relate past symptoms to a current diagnosis, in this case it is within the competence of a lay Veteran and the lay adjudicator to reach that conclusion based upon the observable nature of tinnitus.  As determined above, the Board finds competent, credible, and highly probative the Veteran's lay statement that his tinnitus symptoms began in service and have continued thereafter.

For these reasons, and with resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for tinnitus.  The appeal is therefore granted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for left hand strain

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for left hand strain.  See June 2024 VA Form 10182.

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran was currently diagnosed with left hand strain.  See also November 2023 VA "Hand and Fingers" examination, documented in a December 2023 VA examination report (VA examiner diagnosed left hand strain).  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, a current disability is established.

Next, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show he had a fracture of the 4th metacarpal in his left hand in February 1995, and had follow-up treatments in March and April of 1995.  See also May 2023 claim application (Veteran endorsed pain in his left hand and explained that he broke it during boot camp while doing a physical exercise with an M1 rifle).  Therefore, an in-service event is established.

Thus, the remaining question before the Board is whether there is competent evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's current left hand strain and his active service.

On review, the Board finds that the evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed left hand strain had its onset during his active service.

First, given the observable nature of symptoms of pain and weakness, the Board finds the Veteran's lay report that these symptoms onset after his left hand fracture during service and continued ever since to be competent, credible, and highly probative.  See December 2023 VA "Hand and Fingers" examination report (Veteran stated his condition began in 1994 when he fell on his left hand and sustained a fracture to the 4th metacarpal and was treated with a cast and continues to have dull pain in his left hand with weakness with prolonged gripping).

Second, the VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion in December 2023, reasoning that "according to 3/8/1995 STR and 4/3/1995 STR, there was report of left 4th Metacarpal fracture.  However, there was no evidence of chronicity.  A nexus for service connection cannot be made at this time due to the missing element[] of chronicity."  On review, the Board finds the December 2023 VA medical opinion to be inadequate under Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-60 (2020), as the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's lay report of continuing left hand pain and weakness since the in-service fracture in the December 2023 VA "Hand and Fingers" examination report.  Therefore, the Board affords no probative value to this medical opinion.

Third, the Board acknowledges that there is no positive nexus opinion of record regarding the Veteran's left hand strain.  While a lay person is not always competent to relate past symptoms to a current diagnosis, in this case it is within the competence of a lay Veteran and the lay adjudicator to reach that conclusion based upon the observable nature of left hand pain and weakness.  As determined above, the Board finds competent, credible, and highly probative the Veteran's lay statement that his left hand pain and weakness symptoms began after his in-service fracture and have continued thereafter.

For these reasons, and with resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for left hand strain.  The appeal is therefore granted. 

Increased Rating Claim

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  Staged ratings are appropriate for any initial rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities, other than eating disorders, are set forth in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted if there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted if there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A 100 percent rating (total occupational and social impairment) is warranted due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Thus, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Id. at 442.  

Nevertheless, all ratings in the General Rating Formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms; a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.  The Board recognizes that the Court in Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436, stated that the symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula is not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  However, the Court further indicated that without those examples, differentiating between rating evaluations would be extremely ambiguous.

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  If the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the claim is denied.

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD

In this matter, the Veteran is currently in receipt of an initial disability rating of 50 percent for PTSD for the entire period on appeal.  He asserts that a higher rating is warranted.  See June 2024 VA Form 10182.

On review, the Board finds that the evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the manifestations of the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, to warrant a higher rating of 70 percent under the General Rating Formula.  This is because in his June 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran included a lay statement in which he endorsed suicidal ideation, a symptom that is contemplated in the criteria for a 70 percent rating.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 20 (2017).  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran did not endorse suicidal ideation in the January 2024 VA PTSD examination report.  Even so, given the approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in this matter, the Board will resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran to find that, at worst, his PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, to warrant an initial disability rating of 70 percent under the General Rating Formula for the entire period on appeal.

However, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.  This is because the severity, frequency, and duration of his PTSD symptoms do not result in a level of impairment that more nearly approximates the symptoms contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria; namely, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD for the entire period on appeal.

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, apart from those discussed in the Remand section below.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for hypertension.  See June 2024 VA Form 10182.  

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO made the following favorable findings: (1) the Veteran is currently diagnosed with hypertension; and (2) the Veteran participated in a TERA during service, based on his active service in Southwest Asia.  See also DD-214; December 2022 "VA Memo"; November 2023 VA hypertension examination, documented in a December 2023 VA examination report (VA examiner diagnosed hypertension).  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  The Board finds that the matter must be remanded to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors by the RO.

In December 2023, the VA examiner provided negative nexus opinions as to direct service connection and as to whether the hypertension was caused by the Veteran's in-service TERA.  The Board finds the December 2023 VA medical opinions to be inadequate for the following reasons.

In the December 2023 VA medical opinion as to direct service connection, the VA examiner reasoned, "There was no information in STR to indicate that the [V]eteran developed hypertension during service.  A nexus for service connection cannot be made at this time due to the missing elements of origin and chronicity."  However, the October 1998 Report of Medical Examination at service separation shows that the Veteran was recommended for a blood pressure screening; and in STRs dated November 1998, service medical personnel determined that the Veteran had elevated blood pressure readings during service.  Therefore, the Board finds the December 2023 VA medical opinion as to direct service connection to be inadequate because the examiner did not address all relevant evidence.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008).  Additionally, the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's contention in his May 2023 claim application that his hypertension was caused by witnessing the death of a shipmate during service.  Notably, that was determined to be a stressor event that was adequate to support the Veteran's diagnosis of, and award of service connection for, PTSD.  See January 2024 VA PTSD examination report and medical opinion; January 2024 rating decision.

As part of the rationale for the December 2023 VA TERA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's hypertension, the VA examiner initially found that "[r]ecords reviewed do not indicate any risk factors outside of military service."  However, the VA examiner later found that "the [V]eteran has other plausible medical causes of this condition which outweigh toxic exposures."  On review, the Board finds the December 2023 VA TERA medical opinion to be inconsistent, and therefore inadequate.  

Prior to adjudicating the claim, the RO should have obtained an adequate VA medical opinion as to direct service connection and an adequate VA TERA medical opinion as to the Veteran's claimed hypertension.  This must be accomplished on remand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability.  

In the December 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO made the following relevant favorable findings: (1) the Veteran has a current bilateral hearing loss disability; and (2) the Veteran participated in a TERA during service, based on his active service in Southwest Asia.  See also DD-214; December 2022 "VA Memo."  While the Board finds there is no clear and unmistakable error in the TERA finding, for the reasons discussed below, the Board finds there is a clear and unmistakable error in the finding regarding the Veteran having a current bilateral hearing loss disability.

In December 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA audiological examination.  Although the Veteran's puretone test results revealed hearing loss for VA purposes in both ears, the VA examiner determined that the results were not valid for rating purposes since the "results are consistent with non[-]organic hearing loss."  In the "Remarks" section of the VA examination report, the VA examiner found that there is no diagnosis of hearing loss in either ear because the "Veteran demonstrated inconsistent test results...His audio is not accurate and does not reflect anything organic in nature."  

On review, the Board finds the December 2023 VA audiological examination to be inadequate since the VA examiner was not able to obtain valid puretone test results and was therefore unable to confirm whether the Veteran had a current bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  Prior to adjudicating the claim, the RO should have provided an adequate VA audiological examination to confirm whether the Veteran has a current bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  If so, VA medical opinions must be obtained as to direct service connection and whether the bilateral hearing loss disability was caused by the Veteran's in-service TERAs.  This must be accomplished on remand.

3. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

Under Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), a request for TDIU is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when raised by the record.  In the January 2024 VA PTSD examination report, the Veteran was found to have symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Additionally, the Veteran stated he had been employed as a part-time engineer for the fire department for the last 7 years.  The record is unclear as to whether the Veteran's part-time employment earns only marginal income or is in a protected environment.  Based on the foregoing, and with resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the issue of unemployability has been raised by the record as part and parcel of the Veteran's increased rating claim for PTSD.  

This evidence was of record when the RO adjudicated the Veteran's increased rating claim.  However, the RO did not undertake any development on the inferred TDIU claim, which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Remand is therefore warranted to request that the Veteran complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed hypertension.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.  If another examination is indicated, one must be provided to the Veteran.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's hypertension at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

In providing this opinion, please address the following evidence:

"	April 1993 Report of Medical Examination (BP: 142/88).

"	December 1994 dental STR (BP: 125/70).

"	February 1995 STRs (noting blood pressure readings of 146/74, 129/77, 144/72, and 154/81).

"	March 1995 STRs (noting blood pressure readings of 138/60, 137/78, 144/68, and 138/76).

"	April 1995 STR (BP: 136/74)

"	June 1995 STR (BP: 150/86).

"	October 1995 dental STR (BP: 147/83).

"	November 1995 STR (BP: 142/76).

"	December 1995 dental STR (BP: 121/71).

"	February 1996 STR (BP: 130/68).

"	May 1996 STR (BP: 126/80).

"	November 1996 dental STR (BP: 177/93).

"	November 1996 STR (BP: 132/84).

"	March 1997 STR (BP: 127/92).

"	November 1997 dental STR (BP: 118/69).

"	December 1997 STR (BP: 120/80).

"	October 1998 dental STR (BP: 131/79).

"	In an October 1998 Report of Medical Examination rendered at service separation, the Veteran was found to have a blood pressure reading of 130/80 and was recommended for a blood pressure screening.

"	In STRs dated November 1998, the Veteran was found to have a blood pressure reading of 130/84 and service medical personnel determined that the Veteran had elevated blood pressure readings during service.

"	In his May 2023 claim application, the Veteran asserted that his hypertension was caused by witnessing the death of a shipmate during service.  Notably, that was determined to be a stressor event that was adequate to support the Veteran's diagnosis of, and award of service connection for, PTSD.  See January 2024 VA PTSD examination report and medical opinion; January 2024 rating decision.

"	In the December 2023 VA hypertension examination report, the Veteran stated that his hypertension began in 1995.

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's hypertension and one or more of his TERAs, considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all his TERAs.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered. 

2. Provide the Veteran an additional VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral hearing loss disability.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a)	Confirm whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes.

(b)	If so, please provide an opinion as to the following:

a.	Whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

In providing this opinion, please address the following evidence:

o	October 1998 hearing conservation data (service medical personnel determined that the Veteran had a significant threshold shift in both ears compared to his December 1994 reference audiogram).

o	October 1998 STR, Hearing Conservation Program ("SNM shows sustained significant threshold shift after a 15hr noise free retest of hearing...").

b.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss disability and one or more of his TERAs, considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all his TERAs.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered. 

3. Send the Veteran a VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, for completion, with instructions to return the form to the RO.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. M. Gill, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.