Citation Nr: A25030570
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231011-383791
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for cardiomyopathy is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's hypertension is proximately due to obesity caused by his service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities.

2. The Veteran's cardiomyopathy is proximately due to obesity caused by his service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension secondary to service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for cardiomyopathy secondary to service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active-duty service from July 1991 to August 1994 and from May 1998 to February 2003.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from a pair of June 2022 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for his orthopedic conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for cardiomyopathy is granted.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be granted for disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary. The Secretary shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran is seeking service connection for cardiomyopathy and hypertension, which he contends are secondary to his service-connected bilateral lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities with obesity as an intermediate step. As there is considerable overlap in the evidence pertaining to these disabilities, the Board shall discuss them together.

Pertinent to this claim, although obesity itself is not considered a disability for VA purposes, when obesity has been caused by a service-connected condition, and subsequently causes another disability, obesity may be considered an "intermediate step" for establishing service connection on a secondary basis. See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 (Jan. 6, 2017). This inquiry extends both to causation and to aggravation. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306 (2020). The Veteran's level of physical activity is a factor that should be considered when addressing whether obesity served as an "intermediate step" in the causation or aggravation of disabilities on a secondary basis. Id., at 303 (2020).

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in February 2022. The private provider opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities caused his cardiomyopathy and hypertension with obesity as an intermediary link. The private provider stated that prior to entry into service, the Veteran weighted approximately 180 lbs., but that on the date of examination he weighed 305 lbs. The Veteran claimed that he not been able to work out without extreme pain during the last several years. The examiner then wrote that while weight gain is multifactorial, "medical research clearly indicates that an individual's inability to exercise is the primary cause of obesity in the majority of patients." In support of this contention, the private examiner cited multiple medical studies. In one study cited, the results showed that "BMI and waist circumference trends were associated with physical activity level but not caloric intake." Additionally, another study supported the conclusion that while diet was the most effective means for weight loss in the short term, it was "completely ineffective long-term."

The examiner then cited additional studies showing a causative relationship between obesity and hypertension and cardiomyopathy.

In an April 2022 VA examination, a clinician diagnosed the Veteran with hypertension and cardiomyopathy. The Veteran reported that he was admitted for heart failure in 2015 at which time he was also diagnosed with hypertension. 

In June 2022, VA obtained opinions from the examiner. However, the examiner found the Veteran's cardiomyopathy and hypertension were less likely that not secondary to his service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step. The examiner first asserted that obesity was commonly caused by a combination of a lack of exercise and excessive food intake, which the examiner stated were choices. Additionally, the examiner stated that while obesity was associated with hypertension and cardiomyopathy, that causality could not be shown. While the examiner cited other factors, including genetics, the examiner did not address the Veteran's own particular risk factors for the development of the diseases.

The Board finds that the February 2022 private medical opinion is more probative, with respect to these conditions than that of the VA examiner, as it cites an abundance of medical literature, and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence is in relative balance and service connection is therefore warranted for the Veteran's hypertension and cardiomyopathy as secondary to service-connected lumbar spine and bilateral radiculopathy disabilities, with obesity as an intermediate step.

As service connection has been granted on a secondary, causation basis, the Board therefore need not consider direct service connection or any other theory of entitlement.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left ankle condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he experiences a left ankle and bilateral knee disabilities as a result of physical training during service. Alternatively, he alleges that his bilateral knee and left ankle symptoms are due to his service-connected lumbar spine and bilateral radiculopathy disabilities with obesity as an intermediate step.

Pertinent to this case, the Court in Saunders clarified that evidence of pain alone which results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, can constitute a disability. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018). The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) found that the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability." The Board observes that Saunders does not eliminate the need for underlying pathology, disease, or injury (also sometimes called a diagnosis).

Later, in Wait v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) addressed the question of what is necessary for a claimant to demonstrate that his or her pain or other symptoms cause "functional impairment of earning capacity," and therefore meet the current disability requirement under Saunders. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1609, 2020 WL 5200689. The CAVC held that, to meet the current disability requirement under Saunders, "there must be competent evidence specific to the claimant tending to show that his or her impairment rises to a level to affect earning capacity, which may include showing manifestations of a similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person." The CAVC clarified that the Board must make the factual determination whether the appellant's manifestations rise to the level of a functional impairment in earning capacity.

In an April 2022 VA examination, a clinician diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral knee strains. The Veteran reported that he first noticed knee pain while running in service, but that also he began experiencing increased knee pain after gaining weight. The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion after concluding that the Veteran's condition was acute and transitory, and not chronic in nature. However, the report shows the Veteran's bilateral knee pain symptoms result in functional impairment. 

Regarding the claimed left ankle condition, the examiner declined to give a diagnosis, stating that there was no objective medical evidence to render a chronic diagnosis. Based on these findings the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion. However, the Veteran claimed that he experienced limitation of motion, pain, and occasional rolling of his left ankle during runs, that these symptoms began in service, and that the symptoms increased in severity after he gained weight.

Given the credible complaints of functional impact due to bilateral knee pain and left ankle pain, and the diagnosed bilateral knee strain, the Board concludes that the Veteran has left ankle and bilateral knee disabilities for VA purposes. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018).

Therefore, VA's failure to obtain adequate VA medical opinions constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the matters must be remanded to obtain addendum opinions.

4. Entitlement to service connection for eczema is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he experiences a skin disability, to include eczema, that began in service.

The Board notes that there appear to be outstanding Service Treatment Records. To wit, the Veteran reported in his March 2021 VA skin examination that he received treatment for eczema while on active duty in Gulfport, Mississippi. These records do not appear in the claims file.

VA is required to make attempts to obtain a "claimant's service medical records," and efforts to procure them "shall continue until the records are obtained unless it is reasonably certain that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain those records would be futile." 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3); Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Therefore, VA's failure to obtain all potentially outstanding Service Treatment Records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the matters must be remanded to obtain such records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request from all appropriate source(s) a copy of any additional STRs that may exist for the Veteran, specifically the Veteran's skin treatment records from 2001 to separation in Gulfport, Mississippi. Efforts to obtain the evidence should be fully documented and should be discontinued only if it is concluded that the evidence sought does not exist or that further efforts to obtain the evidence would be futile. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). The evidence procured, if any, should be associated with the record. If no further records are available, the record should be annotated to reflect that fact and the Veteran and his representative should be notified.

2. Forward the Veteran's claims folder to an examiner for an addendum opinion as to the etiology of the claimed bilateral knee disability. The examiner is requested to review the claims folder, to include this remand.

Following review of the claims file the examiner should provide an opinion on the following.

a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal if not higher) that his service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities caused or aggravated the Veteran's weight gain or obesity.

b) If the answer to the above question is yes, whether it is at least as likely as not that the weight gain or obesity resulting from the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his left and/or right knee disabilities.

c) If the answer to the above question is yes, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and/or right knee disability would not have occurred but for weight gain or obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.

The examiner should address the February 2022 medical opinion finding that the Veteran's lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities contributed to his obesity.

Rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided. If the clinician is unable to provide the requested opinions without resort to speculation, it must be so stated, and he or she must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.

3. Forward the Veteran's claims folder to an examiner for an addendum opinion as to the etiology of the claimed left ankle disability. The examiner is requested to review the claims folder, to include this remand.

Following review of the claims file the examiner should provide an opinion on the following.

a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal if not higher) that his service-connected lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities caused or aggravated the Veteran's weight gain or obesity.

b) If the answer to the above question is yes, whether it is at least as likely as not that the weight gain or obesity resulting from the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his left ankle disability.

c) If the answer to the above question is yes, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left ankle disability would not have occurred but for weight gain or obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.

The examiner should address the February 2022 medical opinion finding that the Veteran's lumbar spine and radiculopathy disabilities contributed to his obesity.

Rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided. If the clinician is unable to provide the requested opinions without resort to speculation, it must be so stated, and he or she must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. E. Geary

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.