Citation Nr: A25030767
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417544
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for pituitary adenomas, to include claimed benign neoplasm, is remanded.  

Service connection for hypopituitarism is remanded.

Service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

Service connection for hypogonadism is remanded.

Service connection for adrenal insufficiency, claimed as adrenal deficiency, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1990 to April 1994, April 2000 to April 2004, and March 2005 to June 2006.  This matter is before the Board following his appeal of a December 2023 rating decision.  The claims on appeal were filed in May 2012 and July 2023.

On a February 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the direct review docket.  As such, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the December 6, 2023, rating decision on appeal.

The Board finds that remand of this appeal is required in order to correct errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) that occurred prior to issuance of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.

Initially, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1), VA is required to provide notice of every decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief, including notice of the right to a hearing.  Claimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of the right to a hearing on any issue involved in the claim as provided in paragraph(d).  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1).  Additionally, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1), "upon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim within the purview of part 3 of this chapter before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim."

Here, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) failed to notify the Veteran of his right to a hearing before the December 2023 rating decision was issued, which was during a period where VA had a duty to assist in substantiating his claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As he was entitled to notice of his right to a hearing on his initial claims, this prevented the Veteran from making an informed decision with respect to the decision review options available to him.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is required pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), so the AOJ can provide the Veteran with notice concerning his right to a hearing, and an opportunity for a hearing before the AOJ.

Additionally, remand is required in order to obtain service treatment records and VA opinions.  Specifically, it does not appear that complete service treatment or personnel records from the Veteran's last period of active service (from March 2005 to June 2006) have been obtained.  As the Veteran's claims are based, at least in part, on that service, remand is required to request those records.

Finally, remand is required in order to obtain nexus opinions.  The Veteran contends that pituitary adenomas, one status post resection, and associated hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, and adrenal insufficiency, were caused by exposures during service, including smoke from burn pits.  At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the clinical records confirmed the foregoing diagnoses, and service records and VA memoranda confirmed the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia and his presumed toxic exposures.  As such, VA examinations to address his claims were scheduled for August 2023.  However, despite being given timely notice at his current address of record, the Veteran failed to appear for the examinations or provide good cause for his failure to appear.  Given the Veteran's failure to appear, the examiner did not provide any nexus opinions.  However, given that the record established both current disabilities and in-service exposures, the Board finds that nexus opinions based on review of the record could and should have been obtained prior to denying the Veteran's claims.   Accordingly, the Board finds that remand is required in order to obtain those opinions.

Because this appeal is being remanded on other grounds, the Board finds that the Veteran should be provided one more opportunity to appear for VA examinations.  However, the Board observes that the record shows a lengthy pattern of no-shows for VA appointments.  The Board points out that the duty to assist is a two-way street.  See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (noting the duty to assist is a two-way street that requires a claimant's active participation in a claim for VA benefits).  Therefore, the Veteran is notified that the failure to appear for the examinations could result in the denial of his claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Please provide the Veteran and his representative with notice of his option to participate in a pre-decisional hearing before a decision is issued on his initial claims for service connection for pituitary adenomas (also claimed as benign neoplasm), hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, and adrenal insufficiency, and allow a reasonable period of time for him to respond and request a hearing prior to readjudicating the claims.

2. After providing the Veteran and his representative with notice of the abovementioned pre-decisional hearing and holding the hearing if requested, undertake any additional necessary development if necessary.

3.  Request the Veteran's complete service personnel and treatment records from all periods of service, to specifically include active service from March 2005 to June 2006. 

4.  After the foregoing development is completed to the extent possible, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine if his pituitary adenomas, hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, and adrenal insufficiency, are related to service.  The Veteran's claims file should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.  All indicated tests and studies should be performed and the results reported in detail.  If the Veteran does not appear for the examination(s), the requested opinions should still be provided based on a review of the record.

For all diagnosed conditions:

(a.)  For each diagnosis, state whether it is a primary or secondary disability.  Please explain the relationship, if any, between the various diagnoses, to include whether or which disabilities are secondary to others. 

(b.)  For each primary disability diagnosed, please state whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability first manifested during or was otherwise caused by the Veteran's active service, to include exposures therein.  Please explain why or why not.

For purposes of the opinion, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to toxins and burn pits in service, and STRs also show exposure to asbestos during his first period of service. 

Please keep in mind that the phrase "at least as likely as not" means that the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal.

(b.) The examiner should consider medical and lay evidence dated both prior to and since the filing of the claims.  The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information/evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

S. C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Fagan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.