Citation Nr: A25030682
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-433906
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and hiatal hernia, no residuals is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record weighs persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder manifests as total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e), 4.1, 4.7, 4.96, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1991 to September 1993.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, for the issues of service connection for GERD with hiatal hernia and increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. For the issues of service connection for OSA, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for OSA and GERD with hiatal hernia, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records.  Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further than they have included or identified relevant evidence. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If a Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

38 C.F.R. § 3.103 provides that a Veteran, upon request, is entitled to a hearing prior to VA's adjudication of an initial or supplemental claim.  The Board observes that notice regarding the opportunity for a hearing at the AOJ was not provided in this case. In Bowen, the Court found that there was no due process violation in the denial of the Veteran's requested hearing before the AOJ because the Veteran had subsequently been offered the opportunity to have a hearing before the Board. Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253 (2012). Here, the Veteran was offered a choice of three dockets in the AMA framework to include the Board hearing docket. Although the issue in Bowen was not one of notice, the Board cannot discern a basis to find that the underlying holding and logic of Bowen would not lead to the same finding of a lack of prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.

Entitlement to an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

Legal Framework

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. If the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, the claim is to be denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

In any claim for an increased rating, "staged" ratings may be warranted where the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

Factual Background

In a May 2023 lay statement the Veteran stated that his service-connected leg injuries prevent him from completing chores around the house, exercising, and participating in hobbies which he used to enjoy, such as fishing, which has "made him feel down" that he can no longer do these things. He stated that he "often feels down, sad, and unmotivated because [he] can no longer function the way [he] used to." The Veteran also expressed that he withdraws from people and wants to be by himself often because of the way he feels, because he gets "overwhelmed and feels anxious" because of the limitation in his life now. He stated that he had to take a new role at work because of his limitations and he feels it makes him "less productive" at his job. He also expressed that he has difficulty sleeping, which leads him to being tired, irritable, and unable to concentrate. He stated he has a hard time remembering tasks, events, or directions and that he has to write things down to remember to do things such as chores or errands, and that he does find himself "forgetting the names of close family members as well as what they do for a living." He also stated that he "gets frustrated or angry easily, causing arguments with those close to me" and that he sometimes even "snaps" at his children. The Veteran stated that he "sometimes sees things that are not there" and that he has "thought about suicide in the past but did not decide to carry it out." He expressed that he does not see a therapist because he has in the past and "did not get much out of it."

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023, within which the Veteran was diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder and unspecified depressive disorder. The examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner noted that the Veteran attended therapy "in the past but did not feel it benefitted him." The Veteran reported that he feels overwhelmed and anxious because of his "life limitations" that he has a reduced role at his job due to his difficulties, and that he has fatigue and stress reactivity due to his limited and disrupted sleep. The Veteran reported that he has relationship issues due to irritability and reduced sexual performance. The Veteran reported feeling "useless and sad." The examiner noted that the Veteran has been married for 28 years to his first wife but noted that they were divorced and got remarried. The Veteran has two children and he reported he is close with them. The Veteran reported that he communicates with his siblings every few months and has a few friends from the military that he texts with. He also stated that he has a few social activities, but that he prefers to be alone, and has no current hobbies. The Veteran reported he has worked for the postal service for 30 years and there are no major concerns in his employment, and that he gets along with his peers and supervisors at work, and he completes his work tasks. He said he has no friends at work but has "positive acquaintances." The Veteran denied current suicidal or homicidal ideations, or any past suicide attempts. He stated that leaving service did have a negative impact on his social functioning. He reports having anxiety in crowds, avoidance of public places, negative mood, sleep disturbances, anxiety/inability to relax, regret over "missing out on stuff" with his children, loss of interest in activities, emotional numbing, short term memory issues, fatigue, anger/irritability, hypervigilance, and obsessive-compulsive behavior. The Veteran reported that he was arrested once post service for public drunkenness, and stated that now he drinks weekly, but not daily, and denied binge drinking or problems with alcohol use. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short- and long-term memory, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work. The examiner noted that "long-term recall and short-term memory appeared to be intact in that the Veteran was a good historian." The Veteran's thought processes were logical and goal-directed, and his speech was within normal limits. His mood was described as moderately depressed and anxious, he exhibited a constricted range of emotional expression with a constricted affect, and he did not appear to be attending to internal stimuli.

Analysis

The Veteran's date of claim, and the subsequent date of entitlement to service connection is May 23, 2022.  Thus, the period on appeal begins as of this date. 

The Board concludes that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The lay and medical evidence of record shows that he has had suicidal ideations, impaired impulse control, specifically that he was arrested for public drunkenness, irritability and anger, obsessive compulsive behavior, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, impairment of short- and long-term memory, including forgetting the names of close relatives, "seeing things that are not there," depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation or mood, and, emotional numbness, avoidance of public places, fatigue and hypervigilance. 

However, while the Veteran has difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work, the Veteran has worked for the postal service in maintenance for 30 years, he has been married for 28 years to his wife, and although they divorced, they got remarried and are still married. He has two children, and he is close with them. He has two siblings and stated that he talks with them every few months. Further, he communicates with friends from the military and has a few social activities. These occupational, familial, and social relationships indicates that he does not have total occupational or social impairment.  

In his lay statement he mentioned sometimes seeing things that are not there, but he does not describe "persistent delusions or hallucinations." Additionally, although the Veteran described in his lay statement sometimes forgetting the names of close relatives and their occupation, the VA examiner specifically noted that his "long-term recall and short-term memory appeared to be intact in that the Veteran was a good historian." He has not had a gross impairment in thought processes or communication. There is no evidence during this time that he had an inability to perform activities of daily living. There is no evidence during this time that the was disoriented to time or place. Further, although the Veteran had suicidal ideation, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, irritability and anger, depression and anxiety, suspiciousness, emotional numbness, obsessive compulsive behavior and avoidance of public places, these symptoms are contemplated by the rating criteria for a 70 percent rating. Therefore, the Board finds that the severity of his symptoms does not rise to the level of a 100 percent disability rating. Therefore, the Board finds that the severity of his symptoms does not rise to the level of a 100 percent disability rating. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively indicates that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder manifested as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas therefore, a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA.

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD with hiatal hernia.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

OSA - In a May 2023 lay statement the Veteran indicated that his service-connected left tibia fracture and residuals "keeps [him] from exercising" and that he has gained weight because of this. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023, which was accompanied by an opinion and an addendum opinion was obtained in January 2024. The November 2023 examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion stating that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected disabilities and stated that the Veteran has pertinent risk factors of obesity, hypertension, and male gender. 

A January 2024 examiner stated that the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not due to his obesity. He stated that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's service-connected residuals of left tibia fracture caused the Veteran to become obese and stated that this condition "can represent a risk factor for weight gain" but that "obesity is multifactorial and can be prevented by dietary discretion and non-weight bearing exercise which are still possible in the presence of the aforementioned condition." However, this opinion does not sufficiently describe whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (to include his left tibia fracture and residuals) aggravated (worsened) his obesity.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is required to obtain an additional opinion.

(a)	GERD with hiatal hernia - In a May 2023 lay statement, the Veteran stated that his service-connected disability of his left tibia fracture and residuals prevents him from being as active as he once was, and as a result he has gained weight. He also stated that he has taken Ibuprofen every day for his service-connected disabilities and that he began to develop symptoms of GERD after taking these medications on a routine basis. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. This examiner provided a negative secondary service connection opinion stating that Veteran's GERD with hiatal hernia was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disability and stated that the Veteran has pertinent risk factor history of advancing age, obesity, and poor diet. However, this opinion does not sufficiently describe whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (to include his left tibia fracture and residuals) aggravated (worsened) his obesity. Additionally, this examiner did not discuss the Veteran's allegations that his daily Ibuprofen use to manage the pain from his left tibia fracture and residuals caused or aggravated his GERD. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is required to obtain an additional opinion on whether the Veteran's medication use, and/or his obesity have aggravated his GERD.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW

1. Afford the Veteran an appropriate examination to consider the Veteran's OSA.

Following a review of the evidence of record and examination of the Veteran, and with consideration of the Veteran's statements, please provide the following:

(a)	Did any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities cause the Veteran to become obese, or aggravate (worsened) his obesity, either individually or by the total combined effect of two or more service-connected disabilities? Why or why not?

(b)	If so, was the obesity a substantial factor in causing the OSA? Why or why not?

(c)	Would the OSA not have occurred but for the obesity? Why or why not?

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

A positive opinion finding a relation to service does not require certainty. Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance both for and against the claim, the examiner should provide an opinion favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale for each opinion is required.

2. Afford the Veteran an appropriate examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's GERD with hiatal hernia.

Following a review of the evidence of record and examination of the Veteran, and with consideration of the Veteran's statements, please provide the following:

(a)	Is the Veteran's GERD with hiatal hernia at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include his residuals of left tibia fracture, and the medication used to treat his service-connected disabilities? Why or why not?

"	The examiner is informed that in a May 2023 lay statement, the Veteran indicated that he has "taken Ibuprofen, 4 x 200 mg every day, for my service-connected disabilities and began to get symptoms of GERD after taking these medications on a routine basis."

(b)	If not, did any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities cause the Veteran to become obese, or aggravated (worsened) his obesity, either individually or by the total combined effect of two or more service-connected disabilities? Why or why not?

(c)	If so, was the obesity a substantial factor in causing the GERD with hiatal hernia? Why or why not?

(d)	Would the GERD with hiatal hernia not have occurred but for the obesity? Why or why not?

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report. In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

A positive opinion finding a relation to service does not require certainty. Rather, if the evidence is in approximate balance both for and against the claim, the examiner should provide an opinion favorable to the Veteran.

A complete rationale for each opinion is required.

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Gillespie, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.