Citation Nr: A25030466
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240505-439245
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 15, 2023 for the grant of a 50 percent rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for left ankle disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

February 15, 2023 is the earliest date a claim for increased rating was received and it is not factually ascertainable that the increase in severity of the Veteran's PTSD to a 50 percent disability level occurred within the one year prior to that date. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an effective date earlier than February 15, 2023 for the grant of a 50 percent rating for PTSD are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2009 to October 2012. 

In October 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim seeking increased rating for his psychiatric condition and left ankle disability. VA 21-526 EZ is a form used to file original claims. However, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) treated the filing as a Supplemental Claim, filed less than a year after a May 2023 rating decision that adjudicated the claims. Accordingly, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision currently on appeal in February 2024.  Ordinarily, Supplemental Claims are filed on a VA Form 20-0995. Nevertheless, the Board finds that VA waived this claim processing rule because the AOJ accepted the VA 21-526 EZ as a Supplemental Claim. 

In February 2024, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

With respect to the claim for increased rating for left knee disability, the February 2024 rating decision constitutes an initial decision. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of increased rating for left ankle and left knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran listed the issues of service connection for appendectomy residuals and bilateral hearing loss from a May 2014 rating decision. However, VA regulations require that an appellant must file a properly completed VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the VA agency mails notice of the decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500 (a)(1), 20.203(b). Here, there are no rating decisions within a year prior to the date of the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement that address the issues of service connection for appendectomy residuals and bilateral hearing loss. Therefore, the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement was not a valid appeal of the issues of service connection for residuals of appendectomy and bilateral hearing loss. These issues are not on appeal before the Board at this time.

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 15, 2023 for the grant of a 50 percent rating for PTSD is denied. 

The Veteran is seeking an effective date earlier than February 15, 2023 for the grant of a 50 percent rating for PTSD. 

Generally, the effective date of an award of a claim is the date of receipt of the claim application or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. There is an exception for claims for increase: "Earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within 1 year from such date." 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2).

In the AMA, 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a)(2) states: "For purposes of determining the effective date of an award under this section, the date of application shall be considered the date of the filing of the initial application for a benefit if the claim is continuously pursued."

The Veteran's PTSD is evaluated under diagnostic code (DC) 9411. Under DC 9411, a 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

In this case, a May 2014 rating decision granted service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder (claimed as anxiety, depression, PTSD) and assigned a noncompensable rating. The Veteran did not appeal this rating decision, and no additional evidence was submitted within one year; as such, it became final. 

On February 15, 2023, he filed a claim for increased rating. In May 2023, the AOJ denied a compensable rating. Thereafter, in October 2023, less than a year after the May 2023 rating decision, the Veteran filed the VA 21-526EZ, which was treated as a supplemental claim. In February 2024, the AOJ granted a 50 percent rating effective February 15, 2023, and recharacterized the disability as "Posttraumatic stress disorder (previously rated as other specified trauma and stressor related disorder (claimed as anxiety, depression, PTSD))." This recharacterization does not have significant effects on the rating; the AOJ simply changed the Diagnostic Code from 9410 to 9411 to reflect the predominance of the PTSD symptoms in the disability. The rating criteria remain the same under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Thus, the Veteran continuously pursued his claim from his initial filing on February 15, 2023 until a 50 percent rating was granted in the February 2024 rating decision. Based on this procedural history, the date of claim is February 15, 2023. There is no evidence relevant to the Veteran's psychiatric disability during the one-year period prior to the date of claim. No other evidence in the claims file shows that the Veteran's PTSD increased in severity to a 50 percent disability level within the year prior to the date of claim. 

Under these circumstances, the Board finds that February 15, 2023 is the appropriate effective date for the grant of a 50 percent rating. Neither the Veteran nor his representative have presented arguments that show that an earlier effective date is warranted. The Board finds no basis to assign an effective date earlier than the date of claim. 

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 15, 2023 for the grant of a 50 percent rating for PTSD. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The claim is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for left ankle disability is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to rating higher than 10 percent for left knee disability is remanded. 

The Veteran underwent VA examinations in October 2023 to ascertain the severity of his left ankle and left knee disabilities. During the examinations, the Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups. With respect to his left ankle disability, he explained that he has daily flare-ups that last for 2-4 hours triggered by prolonged walking or standing. Similarly, during the left knee evaluation, the Veteran reported daily flare-ups lasting 1 hour to 30 minutes triggered by normal activities. Both the left ankle and left knee flare-ups are alleviated by over-the-counter pain medication. 

The examinations were not conducted during flare-ups or immediately after repeated use over time. While the examiner indicated there are no functional impairments of the left ankle and left knee during flare-ups, he did not explain how this conclusion considers the Veteran's lay evidence of flare-ups. He did not provide an estimate as to the Veteran's range of motion during flare-ups. Nor did the examiner provide the Veteran's range of motion after repetitive use over time. Accordingly, the Board finds that the left ankle and knee examinations do not comply with the requirements in Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017). Therefore, the examinations are inadequate. The failure to obtain adequate VA examinations is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected left ankle disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected left knee disability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Solomon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.