Citation Nr: A25030193
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240724-457533
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to a service-connected disability is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disability has met the percentage requirements for the award of a schedular?TDIU, and the evidence indicates that the nature and severity of her disability prevents her from performing gainful employment for which her education and occupational experience would otherwise qualify her. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for the award of a?TDIU?have been met.  38?U.S.C. §1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1996 to June 1999.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to individual unemployability is granted.

The Veteran asserts that she is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of her service-connected disability.  In her April 2024 Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, she stated that she is afraid to leave the home and feels as if everyone is "out to get me or hurt me." 

 A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.?38 C.F.R. § 4.16?(a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  See Ray v. Wilkie,?31 Vet. App. 58, 73?(2019).  The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id.  Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity).  Id. 

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training.  See Todd v. McDonald,?27 Vet. App. 79, 85?(2014).  It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi,?251 F.3d 1378, 1385?(Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown,?4 Vet. App. 361, 363?(1993). 

The Veteran's disability rating is currently 70 percent.  She is service connected for posttraumatic stress disorder at 70 percent from June 19, 2023, which is the day that the schedular criteria were met.  This is her only service-connected disability.  The Veteran filed her TDIU claim in April 2024.  The claim, therefore, may be evaluated on a schedular basis. 

During a VA medical center visit in May 2023, the Veteran reported that things have been going downhill for her since September of 2022 when she lost her job.  Five weeks prior to the medical visit, she attempted to commit suicide.  During the visit, she indicated that she graduated from high school and attended but did not complete college.  

The Veteran was seen at a VA medical center in September 2023.  It was noted that she has challenges with her daily functioning due to anxiety and depression symptoms.  She has difficulties going out and engaging due to increased anxiety symptoms and worry.

In June 2023, the Veteran advised a VA medical clinician that she has an unresolved case with a police department because she struggled with officers when they did a welfare check on her.  In January 2024, the Veteran advised a clinician at a VA medical center that she has been able to obtain a job due to her pending criminal charges.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for PTSD in March 2024. The Veteran reported that she typically socially isolates and does not want to leave the house. She previously volunteered with a friend/neighbor at food banks, but would often cancel last minute due to anxiety.   The examiner indicated that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

The Veteran experiences persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about herself, others, or the world; a persistent negative emotional state; markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; and persistent inability to experience positive emotions.  She has reckless or self-destructive behavior, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, problems with concentration and sleep disturbance.  She also has depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events.  She has disturbances of motivation and mood; and displays difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

In June 2024, a VA medical examiner opined that, based upon information provided during the aforementioned examination conducted in March 2024, the Veteran's claimed disability did not impede her ability to function in an occupational environment.  According to the Veteran's self-report during the examination, she was unemployed due to the grant funding for her job ending. Additionally, she reported longevity in jobs, to include jobs she held when her children were young.  The examiner opined that no functional impairment connected to the Veteran's claimed disability were reported regarding her ability to function in an occupational environment.

The Board affords high probative value to the portion of the March 2024 VA examination where it is noted that the Veteran has difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  She has consistently informed VA medical clinicians that she tends to socially isolate, and has anxiety about leaving the house and interacting with others.  The record also shows that she has expressed difficulty in obtaining employment due to an assault case which appears to stem from a situation that occurred when a wellness check was being performed on her. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected disability effectively precludes any gainful employment for which her education and occupational experience would otherwise qualify her.? Her psychiatric symptoms result in deficiencies in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting.  The Board therefore finds that the evidence shows that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD renders her unemployable under the applicable regulations and entitlement to TDIU is warranted.

 

 

D. Martz Ames 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sanders, Danielle A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.