Citation Nr: A25030439
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452546
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of July 20, 2020, but no earlier, for the 70 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for persistent depressive disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 8, 2022 for the grant of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On July 20, 2020, the Veteran filed VA 21-0966 Intent to File, and on November 5, 2020, the Veteran filed an increased rating for persistent depressive disorder.

2. For the period from July 20, 2020, the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. 

3. On January 8, 2022, the Veteran filed VA 21-0966 Intent to File, and on February 10, 2022 he filed a claim of service connection for bilateral hearing loss; a claim was not received prior to January 8, 2022.  

4. The Veteran has no worse than level VIII hearing loss in the right ear and no worse than level VII hearing loss in the left ear.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date of July 20, 2020, but no earlier, for the grant of a 70 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

2. Throughout the rating period on appeal, the criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for persistent depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 8, 2022 for the grant of service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 4.3, 4.10, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6100.

4. Throughout the rating period on appeal, the criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.10, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

In a November 2021 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted a 70 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder, effective November 3, 2021.  In an April 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of the 70 percent disability, and the AOJ decreased the disability rating to 50 percent disabling, effective March 1, 2022.  The AOJ granted service connection for bilateral hearing loss and assigned a 40 percent disability rating, effective February 10, 2022.  

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review with regard to the reduced 50 percent rating assigned to persistent depressive disorder; the effective date of the assignment of the 70 percent rating; and, the effective date assigned to bilateral hearing loss.  

In a July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ restored the 70 percent disability rating assigned to persistent depressive disorder, effective March 1, 2022; denied an earlier effective date prior to November 3, 2021 for the 70 percent disability rating assigned to persistent depressive disorder; and granted an effective date of January 8, 2022 to the grant of service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Earlier Effective Date

The applicable law and regulations concerning effective dates state that, except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The effective date of an award of service connection shall be the day following the date of discharge or release if the application is received within one year from such date of discharge or release. Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

The Court has interpreted "date entitlement arose" as the date when the claimant met the requirements for the benefits sought.  This is determined on a "facts found" basis.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); Mcgrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).  It is important to note that an effective date generally can be no earlier than the "facts found."  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45 (2011).  These "facts found" include the date the disability first manifested and the date entitlement to benefits was authorized by law and regulation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  For instance, if a claimant filed a claim for benefits for a disability before he had the disability, the effective date for benefits can be no earlier than the date the disability first manifested. Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008).  However, the date entitlement arose is not the date that the AOJ receives the evidence, but the date to which that evidence refers.  Mcgrath v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 28, 35 (2000).  When medical records indicate an increase in a disability, receipt of such medical records may be used to establish effective dates for retroactive benefits based on facts found of an increase in a disability only if a complete claim or intent to file a claim for an increase is received within 1 year of the date of the report of examination, hospitalization, or medical treatment.  Id.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a determination on a claim by the AOJ becomes final unless the claimant continuously pursues the claim by filing a supplemental claim, a request for higher-level review, or an appeal to the Board within one year of the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1103, 3.2500(c)(1).  If a claimant continuously pursues an issue by filing one of these administrative review options within one year, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).  For supplemental claims, VA will readjudicate the claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured and may assign an effective date as early as the date of receipt of the initial claim.  Id; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

Persistent depressive disorder

In a January 2019 rating decision, service connection was granted for persistent depressive disorder and a 30 percent disability rating was assigned effective December 7, 2018.

On July 20, 2020, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-0966 Intent to File.

On November 5, 2020, the Veteran submitted VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) wherein he sought an increased rating for persistent depressive disorder.  

The Board has reviewed VA treatment records for the one-year period prior to November 5, 2020.

With regard to the one-year period prior to November 5, 2020, there are no specific VA treatment records reflecting treatment for his persistent depressive disorder.  He failed to attend mental health appointments in January 2020.  06/18/2020 CAPRI.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a PTSD evaluation and independent medical opinion; such report was received on November 5, 2020 and is not dated.  The examiner diagnosed PTSD and major depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, with psychotic features.  The examiner also diagnosed residuals of a traumatic brain injury (TBI).  [The Board notes that, to date, service connection has not been established for PTSD and TBI.]  The examiner checked the box for total social and occupational impairment.  The Veteran reported nightmares, flashbacks, and intrusive thoughts.  He was hypervigilant and easily startled.  He avoided crowds.  He felt disconnected/detached from others and was emotionally numb.  He denied having friends but was close with his cousins.  He endorsed anger outbursts.  He reported sleep impairment.  He had fatigue during the day.  He voiced short term memory issues.  Even with his daily schedule, he still forgot or was unable to complete tasks.  He was anxious, had panic attacks, and was depressed.  He no longer enjoyed or desired to be around others.  He had little motivation.  He often stayed in his room for days and would neglect his hygiene.  He voiced vague suicidal ideations, denied intent/plan.  He described experiencing auditory and visual hallucinations, hearing noises with no known source and seeing shadows out of his peripheral vision.  

The examiner checked the symptom boxes for the following: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, persistent delusions or hallucinations, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  With regard to behavioral observations, the Veteran was cooperative and calm with easy rapport.  He was alert and oriented times 6 to person, date, month, year, day of the week, and reason for interview.  He was appropriately groomed and dressed.  He displayed expected eye contact.  He demonstrated appropriate receptive and expressive language; speech rate was slow, thought blocking appeared evident.  He exhibited no psychomotor agitation.  He denied homicidal ideation and delusions, he voiced paranoid thoughts, auditory/visual hallucinations.  He had a depressed mood and flat affect.  He reported a history of suicidal ideations.  11/05/2020 Medical Opinion.

In December 2020, the Veteran underwent a C&P examination wherein the examiner diagnosed persistent depressive disorder.  The examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  His symptoms were depressed mood, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The Veteran presented as overweight and appeared his stated age.  His speech was slow in pace and clear in articulation.  He appeared lethargic but alert.  His mood was sad but not tearful.  He denied drinking prior to coming to the interview.  His thought process was coherent and logical.  He was not married and had no children but saw his girlfriend a few times per week.  He kept in contact with his sisters.  The examiner commented that the Veteran has persistent depressive disorder symptoms.  He did not meet the criteria for PTSD.  He had no motivation or desire to look for work and instead did odds and ends jobs.  Since his December 2018 C&P examination he has started taking anti-depressant medication that helps address the depressive symptoms that are "on and off."  He reported minimal mental health improvement since December 2018 but did have some social contacts and an active relationship with a girlfriend.  

In a January 2021 rating decision, a 50 percent disability rating was assigned for persistent depressive disorder, effective July 20, 2020.  

In April 2021, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review with regard to the January 2021 rating decision.  

In a June 2021 rating decision, the AOJ denied an increased rating for persistent depressive disorder.

In July 2021, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application wherein he claimed an increased rating for persistent depressive disorder.  

Associated with the claims file were VA treatment records which reflect that in February 2021 the Veteran endorsed severe symptoms of depression, with very low mood, with feelings of hopelessness, anhedonia, and severe anxiety.  He had increased irritability, poor energy, no motivation and poor concentration.  On mental status examination psychomotor activity was normal with appropriate appearance.  His behavior was appropriate to situation.  His eye contact was good.  His level of arousal was alert.  He was oriented to person, place, time and situation.  His speech was normal rate, tone, and volume.  His affect was appropriate with full range.  His mood was dysphoric.  His thought processes were logical and goal directed.  His thought content was not abnormal.  He is not suicidal or homicidal.  Hallucinations/delusions were absent.  His memory and cognition were grossly intact.  His judgment was good and insight was fair.  02/14/2022 CAPRI at 80.

A May 2021 VA treatment record reflects a severe level of depression.  His mood was depressed and he felt stress at times, along with anhedonia.  His energy, motivation, and concentration were poor and he had a severe level of anxiety, some irritability, and he denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  On mental status examination, psychomotor activity was normal.  His appearance was appropriate.  His behavior was appropriate to situation.  His eye contact was good.  His level of arousal was alert.  He was oriented to person, place, time and situation.  His speech had a normal rate, tone, and volume.  His affect was appropriate with full range.  His mood was dysphoric.   His thought processes were logical and goal directed.  He had no abnormal thought content.  He was not suicidal/homicidal.  Hallucinations and delusions were absent.   His memory and cognition were grossly intact.  His judgment was good, and insight was fair.  Id. At 56.  

A September 2021 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran was alert and oriented times four.  He was pleasant and cooperative.  He was neatly groomed, with fair eye contact, and easily engaged in the appointment.  He appeared tired and lethargic.  He endorsed severe symptoms of depression without psychosis.  His mood was depressed, with some hopelessness, and he reported anhedonia.  He isolated at home and sat around all day.  He did not work and did not want to be around people.  He watched television.  He had no goals for life, no activities planned to get out of the home.  He lived with his aunt and uncle, which was going well.  He reported low energy, poor motivation, and poor concentration.  His anxiety level was severe, with some irritability reported.  He reported a disruptive sleep pattern, and he woke up tired in the morning.  There were no auditory/visual hallucinations or delusions with no paranoia.  He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  He did think that going to sleep and not waking up would be okay.  He had no thoughts and no plan or intent.  He denied past suicidal behavior.  On mental status examination, his psychomotor activity was normal with appropriate appearance and behavior.  His eye contact was fair.  His level of arousal was tired, somnolent.  He was oriented to   person, place, time and situation.  His speech was normal rate, tone, and volume.  His affect was appropriate with full range.  His mood was dysphoric.  His thought processes were logical, and goal directed.  He had no abnormal thought content.  He was not suicidal/homicidal.  Hallucinations/delusions were absent.  His memory and cognition were grossly intact.  His judgment was good, and his insight was fair.  Id. at 41.

An October 2021 VA treatment record reflects that on mental status examination the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, place and time.  His affect was blunted.  His eye contact was fair.  His mood was dysphoric.  His appearance was good hygiene.  His speech was slow and soft.  He was polite and cooperative.  There were no illusions or hallucinations.  He had no delusions, paranoia, suicidal/homicidal ideation.  His thought process was direct, logical, not circumstantial, and not tangential.  He experienced anhedonia, insomnia, and decreased motivation.  His cognition was grossly intact.  His psychomotor was retardation.  His insight and judgment were fair.  Id. at 18. 

On November 3, 2021, the Veteran underwent a C&P examination wherein the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  His symptoms were depressed mood, suspiciousness, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or awork like setting, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  He presented as overweight who appeared his stated age.  His eye contact was minimal, and he was slouched back in his chair.  His response to questions was slow and often times he mumbled.  His mood was irritable.  He had no current thoughts of harming self or others.  His thought process was logical and coherent.  He denied alcohol use prior to coming to the evaluation.  The examiner commented that while the Veteran denied drinking prior to coming to this evaluation, his severe alcohol use likely markedly exacerbates his level of depression and anger.  He needs alcohol detox and rehab services.  It was not possible to determine as to whether alcohol use or depression contributes more to the occupational and social impairment rating.  While the Veteran reported suicidal thoughts, he had no plan to harm self.  He has a supportive girlfriend, VA hotline number and ongoing VA mental health treatment. He lived with his girlfriend.

A November 4, 2021 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran was drowsy but oriented to person, place and time.  His affect was constricted.  His eye contact was fair.  His appearance was well groomed, appropriately dressed, with good hygiene.  His speech was slow with normal volume.  His attitude was pleasant, polite and cooperative.  His perceptions were no illusions and no hallucinations.  He had no delusions, paranoia, with no suicidal/homicidal ideation.  His thought process was direct, logical, and not circumstantial/tangential.  He had no anhedonia, hopelessness or worthlessness; but he does have insomnia.  His cognition was grossly intact.  He had no tremors, tics, with no abnormal movements.  His insight was fair, and his judgment was good.  02/14/2022 CAPRI at 8.  

A November 24, 2021 mental status examination reflects that he was drowsy and oriented to person, place and time.  His affect was constricted.  His eye contact was fair.  His mood was depressed.  His appearance was well groomed, appropriately dressed, with good hygiene.  His speech had regular rate and rhythm with normal volume.  His attitude was polite and cooperative.  There were no illusions or hallucinations.  There were no delusions, no paranoia, no suicidal ideations, and no homicidal ideations.  His thought process was direct, logical, not circumstantial, not tangential.  He had insomnia and feelings of worthlessness, with daily naps up to 2 hours.  His cognition is grossly intact.  He has no tremors, no tics, no abnormal movements, with normal gait and station.  His insight was fair with good judgment.  Id. at 5.  

In a November 2021 rating decision, a 70 percent disability rating was assigned to persistent depressive disorder, effective November 3, 2021.

In March 2022, the Veteran submitted VA 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

A March 2022 C&P examination reflects that the examiner checked the box for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  His symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Behavioral observations included the Veteran's beard being well-groomed.  He was initially in his car in the driver's seat when the appointment began.  He was on time for the appointment and fairly groomed in casual clothes.  He required no assistance to log on.  He made good eye contact and was somewhat talkative, though withholding.  Cognition was linear with no evidence of psychosis.  His mood was stable and appropriate; affect congruent.

In an April 2022 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the rating assigned to persistent depressive disorder from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective March 1, 2022, and denied an earlier effective date for the grant of the 70 percent disability rating.  

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review of the April 2022 rating decision.  He specifically requested restoration of the 70 percent disability rating, and also requested an earlier effective date of November 5, 2019 for the assignment of the 70 percent disability rating.  

In the July 2023 rating decision, the 70 percent disability rating was restored effective March 1, 2022, and an effective date earlier than November 3, 2021 for the assignment of the 70 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder was denied.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182 the Veteran expressed disagreement with the rating evaluation and effective date assigned to persistent depressive disorder in the July 2023 rating decision.  

As detailed, the July 2023 rating decision restored the 70 percent disability rating assigned to persistent depressive disorder, effective March 1, 2022.  Such constitutes a full grant and thus this issue is no longer in appellate status.  

The July 2024 VA Form 10182 references disagreement with the rating evaluation in the July 2023 rating decision and maintains that he is entitled to the relief outlined in the brief attached to VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review.  In such brief, the Veteran sought restoration of the 70 percent disability rating, and an earlier effective date for the grant of the 70 percent disability rating.  In the course of this appeal, there has been no assertion that the Veteran is entitled to a 100 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder.  However, as the July 2023 rating decision specifically determined that a 100 percent disability rating was not warranted, the Board will address whether entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent is warranted.  

The Board first observes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that the frequency, severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Indeed, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms such as the following: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Based on review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that an effective date of July 20, 2020 is warranted for the assignment of the 70 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder, but a disability rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for any portion of the rating period on appeal.  

As detailed, on July 20, 2020, the Veteran filed an Intent to File, and on November 5, 2020 he submitted an increased rating claim for persistent depressive disorder.  While a 50 percent disability was initially awarded effective July 20, 2020, corresponding to the Intent to File, the Veteran submitted a July 2021 supplemental claim and thus he continuously pursued his claim for an increased rating.  

As detailed, the November 2020 private evaluation reflects a finding of total occupational and social impairment, but the objective findings and behavioral observations are more consistent with a 70 percent disability rating.  Specifically, he had suicidal ideation, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently appropriately and effectively, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  Such symptoms are contemplated by a 70 percent disability rating.  The private examiner indicated that he had persistent delusions or hallucinations, which is contemplated by a 100 percent rating, but while the Veteran has described paranoid thoughts and reported auditory/visual hallucinations, his subjective complaints do not amount to persistent delusions or hallucinations.  Moreover, the C&P examination reports and VA treatment records do not reflect objective findings of persistent delusions or hallucinations.  Specifically, the December 2020, November 2021, and March 2022 C&P examination reports did not contain an objective finding of persistent delusions or hallucinations.  VA treatment records dated in February, May, September, October, and November 2021 reflect that hallucinations and delusions were absent.  Thus, while the November 2020 private examiner checked the box for persistent delusions or hallucinations, the other evaluations of record do not reflect that any described delusions or hallucinations are persistent in nature, as he such were not present on multiple evaluations conducted in December 2020 and in 2021.  There have otherwise been no objective findings of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Thus, there is no basis for the assignment of a 100 percent disability rating for persistent depressive disorder.  Further supporting this conclusion is the fact that the Veteran maintained a relationship with his girlfriend and had contact with his sisters.  For a time, he lived with his aunt and uncle and described that it was going well.  Thus, total social impairment is not shown.  

Otherwise, the Board finds that affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the November 2020 evaluation supports a 70 percent disability rating.  While the December 2020 and March 2022 C&P examination reports and VA treatment records did not specifically reflect symptoms consistent with a 70 percent disability rating, he described disturbances of motivation and mood and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  For example, he reported no motivation or desire to look for work at his December 2020 examination, and his 2021 VA treatment records reflect continued reports of severe symptoms of depression and poor energy, motivation, and concentration.  Such symptoms are contemplated by a 70 percent disability rating.  As the Veteran submitted an Intent to File on July 20, 2020, and a subsequent November 2020 increased rating claim, the Board finds that the 70 percent disability rating is warranted from July 20, 2020.  

Bilateral hearing loss

On January 8, 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-0966 Intent to File, and in February 2022 he submitted VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) wherein he sought service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

In an April 2022 rating decision, service connection was granted for bilateral hearing loss and a 40 percent disability rating was assigned effective February 10, 2022.  

In March 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review of the April 2022 rating decision with regard to the effective date assigned to the grant of service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  In the attached brief, the Veteran specifically requested an effective date of January 8, 2022 corresponding to the date of receipt of his Intent to File.  The VA Form 20-0996 did not request a higher-level review with regard to the disability rating assigned to bilateral hearing loss.

In the July 2023 higher-level review rating decision, service connection for bilateral hearing loss was granted effective January 8, 2022 corresponding to the date of his Intent to File.  This constitutes a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.  There is no basis for an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection, as his prior claims for compensation did not include a claim of service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  Thus, January 8, 2022 constitutes the earliest effective date service connection can be established for bilateral hearing loss.  

It is noted that in the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran included the 'rating evaluation' for bilateral hearing loss in the July 2023 rating decision.  While the March 2023 higher-level review request did not request review of the disability rating assigned, as the July 2023 higher-level review rating decision essentially reiterated the findings as contained in the April 2022 rating decision, the Board will assess whether a disability rating in excess of 40 percent is warranted.  

The Rating Schedule provides a table for ratings purposes (Table VI) to determine a Roman numeral designation (I through XI) for hearing impairment, established by a state-licensed audiologist including a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC), and based upon a combination of the percent of speech discrimination and the puretone threshold average which is the sum of the puretone thresholds at 1000, 2000, 3000 and 4000 Hertz, divided by four.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85.

Table VII is used to determine the percentage evaluation by combining the Roman numeral designations for hearing impairment of each ear.  The horizontal row represents the ear having the poorer hearing and the vertical column represents the ear having the better hearing.  Id.

When the puretone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz) is 55 decibels or more, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  Each ear will be evaluated separately.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a).  When the puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  That numeral will then be elevated to the next higher.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86(b).

To evaluate the degree of disability from defective hearing, the rating schedule establishes eleven auditory acuity levels designated from "I" for essentially normal acuity, through "XI" for profound deafness.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Tables VI, VII.

Pertinent case law provides that the assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment are to be derived by the mechanical application of the Ratings Schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometry evaluations are rendered.  Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345 (1992).

In December 2018 VA audiological evaluation reflects pure-tone thresholds for the ears as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	 0	5	0	5	5

LEFT	 5	5	0	5	10

A hearing loss disability was not shown per § 3.385.  

In February 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA audiological evaluation.  Pure-tone thresholds for the ears were as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 		1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	 	75	90	95	95

LEFT	 	50	55	65	70

The pure tone average in the right ear was 88.75 rounded up to 89 in the right ear and 60 in the left ear.  Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 60 percent in the right ear and 52 percent in the left ear.  Such findings translate to level VIII hearing in the right ear and level VII in the left ear.  38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Table VI.  Applying Table VII, Diagnostic Code 6100, this equates to a 40 percent disability rating.  (While an exceptional pattern of hearing loss applies for the right ear under 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a), this does not result in a change to the rating in this case, as Table VI also yields level VIII hearing).

Based on the above, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 40 percent is not warranted for bilateral hearing loss.    

The rating criteria are intended to compensate for the impairment resulting from the hearing loss disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.85.  Any manifestations of difficulty hearing or understanding speech are contemplated by the schedular criteria for hearing loss.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 371-72 (2017).  However, the pertinent and objective evidence of hearing impairment does not approximate the criteria for a compensable disability rating.  Lendenmann, 3 Vet. App. at 349 (noting that when VA assigns a schedular disability rating to a veteran's hearing loss, it generally is required by law to base its decision entirely on audiometric testing results); 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Tables VI and VII, Diagnostic Code 6100.  

Applying the audiologic test results most favorable to the Veteran to the regulatory criteria, the Board is compelled to conclude that the persuasive evidence of record is against a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for bilateral hearing loss.

The Court discussed extraschedular consideration in the context of bilateral hearing loss:

[T]he Court holds that the [schedular] rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate the functional effects of decreased hearing and difficulty understanding speech in an everyday work environment, as these are precisely the effects that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure.  Thus, when a claimant's hearing loss results in an inability to hear or understand speech or to hear other sounds in various contexts, those effects are contemplated by the schedular rating criteria.  However, as the rating criteria do not otherwise discuss, let alone account for, other functional effects, such as dizziness, vertigo, ear pain, etc., the Court cannot conclude that the rating schedule, on its face, contemplates effects other than difficulty hearing or understanding speech.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 (2017).

The Court further noted that "a hearing loss claimant could provide evidence of numerous symptoms, including-for purposes of example only-ear pain, dizziness, recurrent loss of balance, or social isolation due to difficulties communicating, and the Board would be required to explain whether the rating criteria contemplate those functional effects."  Id. at 371.

While recognizing any functional effects and limitations associated with his hearing loss, in consideration of Doucette, the Board finds that the schedular rating contemplates the effects of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss as they are related to functional effects of decreased hearing.  ?

In summary, for the reasons and bases expressed above, the Board has concluded that a disability rating in excess of 40 percent is not warranted; the appeal is denied.

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.