Citation Nr: A25030560
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-454039
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1975 to August 1978 and April 1979 to November 1995.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Commendation Medal.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for headaches.  He contends that his claimed headache condition is related to his active service.  Moreover, review of record also reveals that the Veteran contends that his headaches are secondary to sleep apnea.  The Board notes that the Veteran's claim of service connection of sleep apnea is subject to an August 2021 VA Form 10182 NOD and adjudication is forthcoming.  

The Veteran was afforded a March 2024 VA examination to determine the etiology of his headache condition.  The March 2024 VA examiner found a diagnosis of a migraine condition but found the condition unrelated to the Veteran's active service.  The VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran presented with headaches and a head injury in his service treatment records, however, the VA examiner failed to address the connection, if any, between the Veteran's in-service headaches and head injury and his current diagnosis of migraines.  Moreover, the VA examiner alluded to possible exposure to in-service toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The Board's review does not indicate that Veteran engaged in a TERA activity during his active service.  Nor has the AOJ prepared a VA memorandum as to whether the Veteran engaged in TERA during his active service.  

Under the Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins (PACT) Act, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring VA to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  A Veteran can establish participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, records showing participation in a TERA.  As such, the Board finds additional guidance is needed to address the nature of Veteran's service considering whether he engaged in TERA.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As discussed above, the etiology of the Veteran's headache condition and the nature of the Veteran's alleged TERA have not been fully developed.  Therefore, the Board finds that further development is needed prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim of service connection for headaches.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Prepare a TERA memorandum that details the exact nature of the toxic exposures to which the Veteran was exposed during his active service.  This memorandum must be specific as to what exposures the Veteran would have had as a result of his military occupational specialty and his service in Korea.  

2. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate examiner as to the possible relationship between the Veteran's current headache condition and his active service.  

The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's headache condition had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service, to include in-service notation of headaches and a head injury.  

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Higgins, Jeffery

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.