Citation Nr: A25030388
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210806-177922
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition, to include as secondary to the service-connected right ankle condition, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence supports finding that his right shoulder condition began in, and has continued since, active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.309.   

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from August 1968 to July 1976. This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In a July 2021 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the Veteran's claims for service connection. The Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) in August 2021 and, in so doing, requested the Hearing docket. 

Based on the Veteran's selection of the Hearing Lane, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. §?20.302(a). 

In December 2024, the Veteran testified at a virtual hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ), and a transcript of that proceeding has been associated with the claims file.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As such, the Board may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition

Service connection is granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§?1110, 1131; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. Service connection requires competent evidence of: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) inservice incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Under?38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b), service connection will be presumed where there are either chronic symptoms shown in service or continuity of symptomatology since service for diseases identified as "chronic" in?38?C.F.R. § 3.309(a).?Walker v. Shinseki,?718 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Arthritis is considered such a chronic disease and falls within the scope of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.

To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran contends that he has a right shoulder condition related to his service. He reported during his December 2024 Board hearing that he has had continued pain and chronic issues with his right shoulder since service, when he dislocated his shoulder. The Veteran reported that he began seeking care for his right shoulder condition shortly after service and has continued to be treated for his shoulder pain in the years that followed, including current treatment of injections in both shoulders. While there is some evidence against the claim, the Board finds that there is sufficient evidence to grant service connection for a right shoulder condition.

First, there is evidence of a current disability. The Veteran was accorded a VA examination in May 2021 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of right acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis. The VA examiner recorded the Veteran's reports of an in-service injury to his shoulder and shoulder dislocation.

Second, there is evidence that the current disability began in service. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) include a March 1975 report of dislocated shoulder and increased shoulder pain. Additionally, on his June 1976 separation report of medical history, the Veteran reported swollen or painful joints and bone, joint, or other deformity.

As for the third element of service connection, the Veteran has credibly reported continuous symptomatology of a chronic disease that began during service. The Veteran has reported having right shoulder pain related to his dislocation in service that has continued since service. The Veteran is competent and credible to report experiencing symptoms of shoulder pain during and since service and the Veteran's contentions are consistent with other evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(a)(2); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002) (finding the Veteran competent to testify to symptomatology capable of lay observation); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). The Board finds that the Veteran's testimony is highly probative and establishes continuity of symptomatology of a right shoulder condition. 

The Board acknowledges that the May 2021 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right shoulder condition is causally related to his shoulder dislocation sustained in service. The examiner only remarked that the Veteran did not have correlating glenohumeral joint arthritis which would occur with damage from a shoulder dislocation and that primary osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint is the result of a gradual, progressive breakdown of the fibrocartilaginous disk that cushions the articulation. The examiner noted that it is the most common cause of shoulder pain originating from the acromioclavicular joint and is a frequent finding in those over 50 years of age. The examiner failed to solicit or consider the Veteran's contentions and in-service reports in providing an opinion. In this regard, the Board finds the May 2021 VA examination to be inadequate and as such does not accord the opinion any probative weight. 

The Board finds that service connection is warranted for a right shoulder condition as he has credibly reported continuous symptomatology of a chronic disease that began during service. Accordingly, resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that continuous symptomatology of a chronic disease has been demonstrated and service connection for a right shoulder condition is warranted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that he has a left shoulder condition related to his service. The Veteran's STRs include a March 1975 report of dislocated shoulder and increased shoulder pain. Additionally, on his June 1976 separation report of medical history, the Veteran reported swollen or painful joints and bone, joint, or other deformity. The Veteran contends that he has had continued pain and chronic issues with his left shoulder since service. He reports that he has been treated for his shoulder pain through VA and receives injections in his left shoulder. 

The Veteran was accorded a VA examination in May 2021. The examiner indicated there was no diagnosis of a left shoulder condition and that the Veteran denied having a left shoulder condition. It is unclear how the examiner determined that there was no diagnosis of a left shoulder condition, as the examiner did not obtain X-rays of the left shoulder despite obtaining them for the right shoulder and finding a diagnosis of osteoarthritis. Additionally, the Veteran's VA treatment records note an active problem of pain in joint involving the shoulder region. While the records do not specify which shoulder is affected, the examiner failed to address this evidence in finding that the Veteran did not have a left shoulder condition. 

The Board finds the May 2021 VA examination to be inadequate, as the examiner failed to address Veteran's complete disability picture, failed to obtain X-rays, and failed to address the other medical evidence of record which is suggestive of a left shoulder condition. Failing to obtain an adequate examination and relying on an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). This pre-decisional duty to assist error should be remedied on remand by providing the Veteran a new VA examination that includes an adequate opinion and rationale.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot condition, to include as secondary to the service-connected right ankle condition, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a bilateral foot condition secondary to his service-connected right ankle condition. March 2021 Fully Developed Claim. Alternatively, the evidence suggests that his bilateral foot condition may have had its onset during service and may be related to his service on a direct basis. The Veteran contends that he first noticed pain in his feet in service following two surgeries on his right ankle. He reports that he was given special shoes with braces attached to them and that he wore them for several years. He contends that while the special shoes helped at first, they helped less and less over time. The Veteran reports that he over-favored both of his feet because of how he stepped due to the instability in his right ankle and that this threw off his gait as he walked. 

The Veteran's STRs note that the Veteran reported swollen or painful joints, foot trouble, and bone, joint, or other deformity on his June 1976 separation report of medical history.  

The Veteran was accorded a VA examination in May 2021. The examiner provided diagnoses of bilateral hallux valgus and bilateral osteoarthritis interphalangeal joints and first metatarsophalangeal joints. The examiner recorded the Veteran's reports of an injury in service in 1973. The Veteran reported that he had surgery on his right ankle and could not walk or stand on his feet for long. The examiner opined it is less likely than not that his bilateral foot conditions are proximately due to or the result of his service-connected right ankle condition. The examiner remarked that there is no data or research to demonstrate that an ankle condition contributes to the development of ipsilateral hallux valgus or multi-joint arthritis of the foot. The examiner indicated that, as both foot conditions are present bilaterally, this indicates an etiology other than a past injury on one side of the body. The examiner further noted that, while the exact etiology of hallux valgus is not fully understood, it is believed to be a result of multiple contributing factors and hallux valgus has been shown to be associated with osteoarthritis of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The examiner indicated that it is theorized that hallux valgus and osteoarthritis at other lower body joint sites (interphalangeal osteoarthritis) may be related, partially with any biomechanical alterations due to bunion and first metatarsophalangeal joint pain. Finally, the examiner remarked that foot osteoarthritis is a common cause of foot pain, affecting one in six adults aged 50 years and over. The examiner did not provide opinions addressing aggravation or addressing direct service connection, despite recording the Veteran's reports of an in-service bilateral foot pain continuing since that time. 

The May 2021 VA examiner failed to provide a complete and adequate opinion. The examiner failed to adequately consider the impact of the Veteran's right ankle condition on his bilateral feet and the Veteran's reports that he could not walk or stand on his feet for long following his in-service surgery on his right ankle. The examiner additionally failed to solicit or record the Veteran's contentions regarding his adjusted gait and overcompensation of his bilateral feet related to the pain and instability of his service-connected right ankle condition. The examiner further failed to address aggravation and failed to provide a direct service connection opinion. As such, the May 2021 VA examination is inadequate for adjudication purposes. 

Failing to obtain an adequate examination and relying on an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). This pre-decisional duty to assist error should be remedied on remand by providing the Veteran a new VA examination that includes an adequate opinion and rationale. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any left shoulder condition that the Veteran may have. The examiner should review the claims folder and indicate such on the examination report. Any testing deemed necessary, including X-rays, should be conducted, and the results thereof should be noted in the examination report. If the clinician determines that X-rays are not indicated and should not be performed, he or she should explain why. All relevant pathology shown on examination should be annotated in the examination report. After review of the claims folder, as well as an interview with, and examination of, the Veteran, the examiner is asked to:?

a. Identify/diagnose any left shoulder condition that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.?

b. Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any such diagnosed left shoulder condition onset in, or is otherwise?etiologically related to,?the Veteran's service. In other words, is any diagnosed left shoulder condition consistent with the Veteran's reported in service experiences, to include the documented March 1975 reports of a shoulder dislocation and increased shoulder pain noted in the Veteran's STRs and the report of swollen or painful joints and bone, joint, or other deformity noted on the Veteran's June 1976 separation report of medical history.  

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating all opinions. A clear explanation for all opinions would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, he or she should explain why.

2. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot condition. The record must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner in conjunction with this evaluation. If deemed necessary, the Veteran should be scheduled for an examination. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to do the following:?

a.	Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any such diagnosed bilateral foot condition onset in, or is otherwise?etiologically related to,?the Veteran's service. In other words, is any diagnosed bilateral foot condition consistent with the Veteran's reported in service experiences, to include the Veteran's reports of swollen or painful joints, foot trouble, and bone, joint, or other deformity noted in his June 1976 separation report of medical history.

b.	Notwithstanding the above, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral foot condition, was caused or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral right ankle condition. Causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be answered. 

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating all opinions. A clear explanation for all opinions would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, he or she should explain why.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Goreham, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.