Citation Nr: A25030716
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-457410
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for heart disease, to include supraventricular arrhythmia, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a liver disability, to include cirrhosis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1976 to June 1977.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 and January 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for a liver disability and the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for heart disease. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of a liver disability and heart disease, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for heart disease, to include supraventricular arrhythmia, is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for heart disease, to include supraventricular arrhythmia, which he contends is due to water contamination at Camp Lejeune. See 5/16/24 VA Form 21-526EZ. Although the Board regrets the delay, upon review of the claims file, the Board believes that additional development is necessary. 

Under the?AMA,?remand?is permissible only for correction of?pre-decisional?duty to assist errors and correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.? 

When VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or opinion, it has a duty to ensure that examination or opinion is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007). The medical expert must have applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion. Id. VA must consider all lay and medical evidence of record.?38 U.S.C. §§ 1154(a), 5107;?38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) requires that, when a veteran whose active service subjected the veteran to participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) files a claim to service connect a disability and there is evidence of such disability, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. §?1168(a)(1).

Here, the Veteran has current disabilities of supraventricular arrhythmia (supraventricular tachycardia), hypertensive heart disease, angina pectoris, non-ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation. See 12/21/23 VA Examination at 2; see also 6/16/22 Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility at 9. He claims his heart disability is due to the water contamination he was exposed to at Camp Lejeune. See 5/16/24 VA Form 21-526EZ. Service treatment records show that the Veteran was stationed at Camp Lejeune. See Military Personnel Records at 19, 23. The AOJ also found the Veteran served more than 30 days at Camp Lejeune from June 21, 1976 to June 24, 1977, which is a favorable finding upon the Board. See 1/16/24 Rating Decision at 4; see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).

While there is a VA medical opinion of record, including an addendum opinion, finding that the Veteran's supraventricular arrhythmia (supraventricular tachycardia) is not due to service, the Board finds the opinion inadequate as it failed to consider other cardiovascular medical records indicating treatment of other heart diagnoses. See 12/21/23 VA Opinion; see also 1/12/24 VA Addendum Opinion; 38 U.S.C. §§ 1154(a), 5107;?38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Specifically, the VA examiner only addressed whether the Veteran's diagnosed supraventricular arrhythmia (supraventricular tachycardia) was due to a toxin exposure and did not address whether the Veteran's other heart diagnoses, noted in private treatment records, of hypertensive heart disease, angina pectoris, non-ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation, were due to service, including toxin exposures. Therefore, a VA opinion, including a TERA opinion, is necessary in order to adjudicate the claim on a direct basis.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a liver disability, to include cirrhosis, is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a liver disability, to include cirrhosis, which he contends is due to the water contamination at Camp Lejeune. See 7/14/22 VA Form 21-526EZ. Although the Board regrets the delay, upon review of the claims file, the Board believes that additional development is necessary.

The law provides that VA shall make reasonable efforts to notify a claimant of the evidence necessary to substantiate a claim and requires the VA to assist a claimant in obtaining that evidence. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Such assistance includes providing the claimant a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide a claim. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 83 (2006). Moreover, when VA undertakes to provide a veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it has a duty to ensure that examination or opinion is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007). 

Here, private treatment records indicate the Veteran may have a current diagnosis of cirrhosis of the liver. See 8/9/22 Medical Treatment Record-Non-Government Facility at 10. He contends his liver disability is due to the water contamination at Camp Lejeune, as fully explained above. However, there is no VA examination or opinion of record addressing whether the Veteran's liver disability is due to service, including any toxin exposure at Camp Lejeune. Therefore, a medical examination and opinion, including a TERA opinion, is necessary to adjudicate the claim on a direct basis.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate VA clinician with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertensive heart disease, angina pectoris, non-ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and hyperlipidemia. The examiner shall be provided with and review the claims file. No additional examination is necessary unless the examiner determines otherwise. With respect to the diagnoses of hypertensive heart disease, angina pectoris, non-ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and hyperlipidemia, the examiner shall provide a detailed opinion to the following:?

(a.) Whether it is at least likely as not (likelihood of approximately 50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's hypertensive heart disease, angina pectoris, non-ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation, and had their onset in service or are otherwise causally related to his active service, to include exposure to toxins such as contaminated water at Camp Lejeune? 

(b.) When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is also advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. 

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with the complete rationale for any conclusions reached. 

2. Afford the Veteran a VA examination by a clinician with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed liver disability. The entire claims file and all pertinent evidence of records should be reviewed by the examiner prior to examination. All necessary tests and studies should be performed. The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran has a liver disability. If the Veteran is diagnosed with a liver disability, please opine to the following as to each diagnosis: 

(a.) Whether it is at least likely as not (likelihood of approximately 50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's liver disability had its onset in service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his active service, to include exposure to toxins such as contaminated water at Camp Lejeune? 

(b.) When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner is also advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions.? 

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with the complete rationale for any conclusions reached. 

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Sproviero

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.