Citation Nr: A25030692
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 200406-80250
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for erectile dysfunction is denied.

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bowel control is denied.

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bladder control is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's loss of bladder control and its resulting complications were not the result of delay in treatment, carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault as a result of VA hospital treatment, nor the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable or the lack of informed consent.

2. The Veteran's loss of bowel control and its resulting complications were not the result of delay in treatment, carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault as a result of VA hospital treatment, nor the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable or the lack of informed consent.

3. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction and its resulting complications were not the result of delay in treatment, carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault as a result of VA hospital treatment, nor the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable or the lack of informed consent.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bladder control are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1151, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

2. The criteria for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bowel control are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1151, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

3. The criteria for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for erectile dysfunction are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1151, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from July 1974 to August 1976. 

This matter was originally before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2019 rating decision, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied entitlement to the benefits currently sought on appeal. In a November 2023 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's claim. The Veteran appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC). In a September 2024 decision, the CAVC granted the parties' joint motion seeking vacatur and remand. 

Following the October 2019 rating decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in April 2020. The Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the VA Form 10182 was received. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Board notes specifically that while it has considered argument submitted by the Veteran in his January 2025 appellate brief, evidence submitted at that time has not been considered as it falls outside the evidentiary window.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for erectile dysfunction.

2. Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bowel control.

3. Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for loss of bladder control.

The Veteran contends that he has erectile dysfunction, loss of bowel control, and loss of bladder control as a result of VA medical treatment.

A veteran disabled as a result of VA medical treatment may receive compensation for a qualifying additional disability in the same manner as if such additional disability were service connected. 38 U.S.C. § 1151.

An additional disability is a qualifying disability if: (1) it was not the result of the veteran's willful misconduct; (2) the disability was caused by VA hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination furnished the veteran under any law administered by the VA; and, (3) the proximate cause of the disability was carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance on the part of the VA in furnishing the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination, or the proximate cause of the disability was an event not reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a).

In determining whether a veteran has an additional disability, VA compares the veteran's condition immediately before the beginning of the hospital care or medical or surgical treatment upon which the claim is based to the veteran's condition after the care or treatment is rendered. The additional disability or death must not have been due to the veteran's failure to follow medical instructions. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361.

To establish actual causation, the evidence must show that the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination resulted in the veteran's additional disability or death. Merely showing that a veteran received care, treatment, or examination and that the veteran has an additional disability or died does not establish cause. Hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination cannot cause the continuance or natural progress of a disease or injury for which the care, treatment, or examination was furnished unless VA's failure to timely diagnose or properly treat the disease proximately caused the continuance or natural progress. 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(c).

To establish proximate causation, the evidence must show that: (i) VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider (i.e., negligence); or (ii) VA furnished the hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination without the veteran's or, in appropriate cases, the veteran's representative's informed consent; or (iii) the proximate cause of the additional disability was an event that was not reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.361(d).

Turning to the available evidence, the Veteran submitted a statement in January 2019. The Veteran wrote that he originally went to VA because he "was having problems urinating," and that VA then discovered that his PSA levels were high. Following a biopsy, prostate cancer was identified. The Veteran wrote that he "was given [his] options, and I decided on the seed implant." Following the prostate cancer radiation treatment, the Veteran then had bowel and bladder retention issues. This then led to him being given a catheter, but it 'began to leak and bleed," so he went back to the emergency room but was told that "the damage had been done and they would try their best to make me functional." The Veteran described bladder, bowel, and erectile dysfunction symptoms that have "left me with a quality of life that I would wish on no one."

The Veteran's spouse also submitted a statement, received by VA in April 2020. She described the Veteran's symptoms of bowel and bladder incontinence, and that they are not able to travel far due to the Veteran's embarrassment due to that incontinence. She argued that the emergency room treatment by VA was a "nightmare," and that her husband did not have any erectile dysfunction prior to the treatment. The Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he experiences, such as those associated with his bladder and bowel incontinence, as well as his erectile dysfunction. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Veteran's spouse is also competent to report as to that which she witnesses and experiences. Id.

Turning to the criteria for entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151, the Veteran was issued an AMA rating decision by the RO in October 2019. The AMA rating decision made a number of favorable findings, including that the Veteran had been diagnosed with disabilities, including loss of bladder control, loss of bowel control, and erectile dysfunction. The RO also found that additional disability arose during the period of hospital care and treatment, as bowel, bladder, and erectile dysfunction were a progression from the treatment for a medical condition. The Board is bound by these favorable finding. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

The Veteran's claim was forwarded to a VA examiner for a medical opinion in July 2019. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file, and then provided various opinions. The physician noted that erectile dysfunction was directly related to prostate cancer treatment and not the placement of the catheter, and that urinary catheters do not involve the incontinence issues. They continued that urinary incontinence, voiding dysfunction, and erectile dysfunction are "a well-established consequence of prostate treatment and [are] unavoidable." 

They noted that the risk was well-documented, and VA had obtained the Veteran's informed consent for the procedure. The physician noted that symptoms such as chronic diarrhea and bowel incontinence, due to "radiation colitis is an unavoidable side effect of brachytherapy." They further found that the "radiation colitis ... develops 6 months to five years after regional radiotherapy for malignancy, owing to the deleterious effects of the latter on the colon and the small intestine." Regarding the treatment procedure, the physician also noted that 

catheter placement after prostate cancer treatment is standard and common to avoid urinary obstruction and does not contribute to the long-term urinary dysfunction caused by [the] prostate cancer treatment.

A similar opinion was given for erectile dysfunction: that it was an "unavoidable consequence of prostate cancer treatment," that the side-effect was documented, and informed consent was received.

The physician then opined that, in relation to the bowel/bladder incontinence and erectile dysfunction,

It is less likely than not that [the disabilities were] caused by or became worse as a result of the VA treatment, additional disability from carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of the attending VA personnel or additional disability resulted from an event that could not have reasonably been foreseen by a reasonable healthcare provider, and/or failure on the part of VA to timely diagnose and/or properly treat the claimed disease or disability allowed the disease or disability to continue to progress.

As such, negative opinions were provided regarding the Veteran's claims.

The Veteran's claims file also contains a private opinion submitted by Dr. K.W., received by VA in April 2020. The doctor noted that the Veteran had radiation for his prostate cancer through the VA, and then they noted some of the Veteran's follow-up symptoms, including urinary, bowel, and erectile dysfunction. The doctor stated that,

It is my feeling that many of the patient's urinary and bowel symptoms could have been avoided by choosing a different treatment modality initially. With the prostate measuring 90 cm [cubed] or greater at the age of 55, I would not expect brachytherapy to be the appropriate management option due to high complication risk.

They then continued that the Veteran's treatment will continue, and this will "hopefully improve his complications from radiation management of the prostate cancer." 

There is no evidence that the VA examiner or the private physician are not competent or credible, and as their reports were based on accurate facts and objective examinations, the Board finds they are entitled to significant probative weight as to the Veteran's disabilities. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

In consideration of the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's additional disability was caused by VA treatment, however the cause of such disability was not carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instances of fault, nor was the additional disability the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable or the lack of informed consent. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a).

To begin, the Veteran's diagnoses of bladder, bowel, and erectile dysfunction have each been confirmed. The RO also made favorable findings that these three disabilities were additional, in that they arose during a period of VA hospital treatment and were thus a progression from treatment of the prostate cancer. Again, the Board is bound by those favorable findings.

Having said that, the VA opinion obtained regarding the Veteran's 38 U.S.C. § 1151 claim in July 2019 found that these disabilities are "well-established" consequences of treatment for prostate cancer, and that the catheter placement was standard practice following treatment to avoid urinary dysfunction. The examiner opined that bowel incontinence, to include chronic diarrhea and radiation colitis, were common developments, and that the Veteran had given informed consent to these side effects prior to the radiation treatment for prostate cancer. Importantly, the examiner had reviewed the claims file, and found that there was no evidence of those additional disabilities being due to carelessness, negligence, lack of skill, or similar incidence of fault on the part of VA. On the contrary, as these risks are well-documented, and because the Veteran consented to the procedure, they were reasonably foreseeable. 38 U.S.C. § 1151(a).

While the Board has also found that the private opinion from Dr. K. W. is afforded probative weight, the opinion offered was not that the VA provided treatment was careless, negligent, unskilled, an error in judgment, or due to similar fault on the part of the VA. The opinion indicates that the private doctor would have chosen "a different treatment modality," due to "high complication risks." However, a difference in medical opinion on treatment options is not sufficient for a finding of VA culpability under 38 U.S.C. § 1151.

The Board further acknowledges that the private doctor stated that he "would not expect brachytherapy to be the appropriate management option," citing to the Veteran's prostate volume and age. The Board has considered whether this statement is an allegation that VA deviated from the standard of care. The Board notes that one of the Veteran's treating doctors indicated in a May 2011 note that the Veteran was a "potential candidate for brachytherapy although his total prostatic volume is at the high range for consideration of this approach." The May 2011 note indicates that multiple other approaches and the pros and cons of each were discussed with the Veteran. Thus, it appears the Veteran's treating doctors considered the particulars of the Veteran's circumstances in deciding on brachytherapy as the treatment option to pursue. The Veteran himself noted in a January 2019 statement that he was given multiple options and chose the seed implant, which is supported by a June 2011 VA treatment record indicating the Veteran had a verbal discussion with a VA oncologist about his treatment options, including brachytherapy. Thus, the evidence reflects that the Veteran's treating doctors considered multiple options in consultation with the Veteran. The Board finds that the private doctor's statement suggests that that doctor might have chosen a different treatment option but does not reflect that the VA made an error in judgement with proceeding with brachytherapy based on the evidence and circumstances, including the Veteran's own preference, as known at that time. 

To the extent that the private doctor's statement is an allegation that the VA deviated from the standard of care, the Board finds it is insufficient on which to find that VA failed to exercise the degree of care that would be expected of a reasonable health care provider under 38 U.S.C. § 1151. The private doctor's statement has limited rationale as to why he "would not expect" the treatment option to have been the one chosen and falls short of a clear assertion that the VA did not meet the standard of care of a reasonable health care provider. As such, the Board finds that the probative value of the opinion is limited with respect to the specific issue of whether the VA deviated from the standard of care expected of a reasonable health care provider. 

Furthermore, while the Board finds the Veteran's additional disabilities of bowel and bladder incontinence and erectile dysfunction unfortunate, a procedure having alternative options, or having "high complication risks," is not grounds for a finding of VA fault in conducting that procedure. In this regard, the Board recognizes the Veteran's representative's argument that brachytherapy should not have been administered, and the supporting evidence provided. Nonetheless, this amounts to the same argument of a difference of opinion on the course of treatment options, and the representative does not refute that the options were discussed with the Veteran as shown by the record. This is especially the case when considering that these risks were, as noted by the April 2019 VA physician, well-established, and that the Veteran provided his informed consent to the radiation treatment. 

All evidence, including the opinions of the VA and private doctor and records reflecting informed consent discussions, supports that the erectile, bowel, and bladder complications were reasonably foreseeable complications from the treatment of the Veteran's prostate cancer. 

Finally, there has been no allegation that the Veteran did not provide informed consent for the radiation treatment for his prostate cancer, nor the placement of the catheter. The record reflects that written informed consent was provided in July 2011 and VA treatment notes reflect that a VA oncologist had a discussion "at length" with the Veteran in June 2011 about the side effects of brachytherapy, including urinary, bowel, and sexual dysfunction.

In reaching these conclusions, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively stands against finding in favor of the claims in that it is not in approximate balance or nearly equal to the evidence that supports the claims. Here, the most probative evidence of record shows that an additional disability did not result from carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA, or an event not reasonably foreseeable or the lack of informed consent. As such, the benefit of the doubt rule is not for application, and the Veteran's claims for compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 must each be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021). 

 

J.M. ESTES

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Christensen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.