Citation Nr: A25030201
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-452138
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an effective date prior to October 25, 2017, for the grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depressive disorder with anxious distress and/or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded. 

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1968 to September 1970.  He passed away in January 2019 while his appeal was pending.  The appellant is his surviving spouse and has been properly substituted for all appeals pending before VA at the time of his death.

By way of history, the issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder was previously before the Board in August 2022, whereupon it decided to reopen a previously denied claim of service connection for the condition and then remand the matter to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development.  In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder effective October 25, 2017, and assigned a 30 percent rating for the condition from that date.  Thereafter, the appellant submitted a November 2023 request for higher-level review of the November 2022 rating decision, contesting both the rating assigned as well as the effective date established for the grant of service connection.  In a March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ affirmed both the 30 percent rating for the condition as well as the establishment of October 25, 2017, for the grant of service connection.  

The appellant then appealed the March 2024 decision via submission of a timely June 2024 notice of disagreement on VA Form 10182 and elected direct review of the evidence.  As such, the Board is restricted to consideration of the evidence of record at the time of the underlying November 2022 rating decision.  With this in mind, the Board notes that no evidence has been added to the claims file outside this evidentiary review period. 

As indicated above, the Board finds that the appellant's claim of entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder as well as an increased initial rating for the condition encompasses a more comprehensive claim that includes PTSD in addition to a depressive disorder with anxious distress.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  Specifically, the appellant's representative in the June 2024 notice of disagreement contends that the current grant of service connection is predicated solely on a secondary basis as attributable to the prostate cancer for which the Veteran was separately service connected, and that there is also a basis for service connection on a direct basis from the date of the filing of the initial request to reopen the claim of service connection, that is, from April 22, 2015.  

With this in mind, the Board highlights that in a November 2022 medical opinion report, a VA examiner found that the record supports a determination that the Veteran had diagnosable PTSD at the time of the filing of the initial request to reopen the claim of service connection.  However, the November 2022 examiner neglected to offer any opinion as to the likelihood that any diagnosable psychiatric disorder that had manifested prior to October 25, 2017, was directly attributable to service, as would be necessary to establish entitlement to service connection on a direct basis.  

Accordingly, a remand is necessary in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in neglecting to secure an opinion as to whether service connection is warranted for an acquired psychiatric disorder on a direct basis, to specifically include during the period from the filing of the initial request to reopen the claim of service connection through to the current effective date for the grant of service connection, that is, from April 22, 2015, to October 25, 2017.  

Additionally, as the results of any determination regarding whether service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder prior to October 25, 2017, will bear on the evaluation of the severity of service-connected psychiatric disorder, the increased rating claim is remanded as intertwined with the earlier effective date claim.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?180 (1991)  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a psychiatrist or psychologist for an opinion as to the etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder., to include PTSD and/or major depressive disorder. The claims file must be made available to the designated individual, and the medical opinion report should include discussion of the Veteran's documented history and lay assertions. 

Based upon a review of the relevant evidence of record and history provided by the Veteran and the appellant, the VA examiner should identify all acquired psychiatric diagnoses applicable at any time during the appeal period, to specifically include the period from April 22, 2015, to October 25, 2017.  The examiner must explicitly discuss all documented psychiatric symptomatology and ensure that all symptomatology is encompassed by those disorders that are endorsed in the report.  The VA examiner should, if needed, reconcile his or her opinion with any conflicting medical opinions of record, to specifically include the determination by the November 2022 VA examiner that the Veteran met the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD at the time of the May 2015 VA examination.  The examiner must also explicitly discuss whether a diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD is warranted prior to October 25, 2017.  

With respect to PTSD, the examiner should clearly identify the stressor(s) underlying the diagnosis, and fully explain how the diagnostic criteria are met, to include commenting upon the link, if any, between the stressor and the Veteran's symptoms, making sure to once again address the determinations of the November 2022 examiner in this regard.  

Regardless of whether the examiner makes an affirmative determination as to the PTSD diagnosis, the examiner must also consider whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any diagnosed psychiatric disorder (a) had its onset during service; (b) if a psychosis, was manifested to a compensable degree within the first post-service year; (c) is related to any of the Veteran's reported stressors in service; or (d) is otherwise medically related to the Veteran's service.

In addressing the above, the examiner must consider and discuss all relevant medical and other objective evidence of record and all lay assertions, to include the Veteran's assertions as to in-service psychiatric stressors.  Notably, the absence of evidence of a diagnosis of and/or treatment for psychiatric problems during service should not, alone, serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion.

In this regard, the examiner is advised that the Veteran was competent to report psychiatric stressors in service, his symptoms, and history, and that lay assertions in this regard must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, to include both the Veteran and the appellant, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why.

Moreover, if the examiner cannot provide the above-requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should state whether all procurable medical evidence had been considered, to specifically include the Veteran's description as to the severity, frequency, duration of the flare-ups and his description as to the extent of functional loss during a flare-up and after repetitive use over time. The examiner must also consider whether the inability is due to the limits of the medical community or of the examiner's medical knowledge, and whether there is additional evidence, which, if obtained, would allow an opinion.

A rationale must be provided for all conclusions.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher M. Collins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.