Citation Nr: A25030291
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448105
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder, general anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2013 to January 2016. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Because the February 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued after February 19, 2019, it is subject to the Appeals Modernization Act ("AMA"). 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400(a)(1); 19.2(a).

In the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board has recharacterized the Veteran's claim as a claim of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder, general anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, ADHD, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, to ensure that all diagnosed disorders are considered in adjudicating this claim. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder, general anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, ADHD, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded to correct pre-decisional errors to assist the Veteran in the development of her claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran contends that her anxiety began in service and that her depression is related to service. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. She recalls experiencing what she now realizes was an anxiety attack during service. Id. Additionally, she claims that she developed depression after service due to a loss of sense of self and passion for life after leaving the military, unsupportive leadership, the effects of misogyny, and chronic pain. Id.

Initially, the Board notes that the February 2024 rating decision made the favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder. 

The Veteran's service treatment records indicate that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of anxiety and depression in service. In September 2014, the Veteran's postnatal depression screening was positive. In October 2014, the Veteran declined behavioral health and medication for depression. In a September 2015 report of medical history, the Veteran endorsed "nervous trouble of any sort" and depression. The Veteran added that she experienced anxiety and excessive worry for one year. It was noted that the Veteran had not been evaluated for these symptoms and declined behavioral health. In November and December 2015, the Veteran endorsed minimal symptoms of anxiety and depression. 

After service, the Veteran's VA treatment records indicate that she sought treatment for anxiety and depression symptoms in February 2019. At that time, she reported that she had been seen by an outside doctor for anxiety for around one year and that she was on medication to treat the same.

Subsequently, the Veteran received several psychiatric diagnoses, including adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), major depressive disorder, and general anxiety disorder. See March 2021 VA treatment record; June 2023 VA treatment record; October 2023 VA treatment record. 

A VA examination was obtained in November 2023 for the Veteran's psychiatric condition. The examiner provided a diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder. The examiner noted that the Veteran presented with symptoms of anxious distress and some general fears. Additionally, the examiner stated that while the Veteran reported mild depressive symptoms, these were not significant to warrant diagnostic considerations. The Veteran reported experiencing symptoms of depressed mood and anxiety in service. She further reported that she was involved in online treatment but stated that she could no longer afford it and now treated with the VA. Additionally, she stated that she began taking antidepressants in 2016. The examiner noted symptoms of anxiety, suspiciousness, and disturbances of motivation and mood. As for the Veteran's claimed depression, the examiner opined that this condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran described current adjustment issues following becoming a mother again and balancing her relationships with her children, but did not endorse symptoms of depression associated with service. With regard to the diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder, the examiner opined that this condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran reported interpersonal and adjustment related issues that were not directly linked to her service. Specifically, the examiner noted that she described previous marital problems associated with her ex-husband and that her current anxious symptoms were described as related to stressors as a mother to an infant. The examiner stated that no connection of anxious symptoms to service was indicated. 

The Board finds there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain a medical opinion that is sufficient to make an informed decision on the claim. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103A(a), 5103A(d)(2)(C); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Once VA undertakes efforts to provide a VA examination, it must ensure that it is an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

The Board finds the November 2023 VA opinion insufficient for adjudication purposes for the following reasons. First, the examiner did not address all of the relevant evidence of record. Specifically, the examiner did not address the Veteran's symptoms of anxiety and depression in service, as documented in the service treatment records, nor did the examiner address the Veteran's psychiatric diagnoses post-service, including adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, ADHD, major depressive disorder, and general anxiety disorder. Furthermore, the examiner's conclusion that the Veteran's depressive symptoms were not significant enough to warrant a diagnosis conflicts with the evidence of record, which shows that the Veteran had a diagnosis of major depressive disorder as of September 2023. Additionally, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's lay statements that she experienced anxiety and depression symptoms in service, nor did the examiner consider the Veteran's lay statements contained in the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-60 (2020) (holding that unless the Board finds the lay statements not competent or not credible, an examiner's opinion must address the Veteran's relevant lay statements in order to include enough detail to inform the Board's decision. Failure to do so renders that opinion inadequate.). Finally, the examiner did not provide a sufficient rationale in support of the opinion. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (stating that a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can weigh, and a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision). While the examiner concluded that the Veteran's symptoms were related to interpersonal and adjustment related issues that were not linked to service, the examiner focused on the Veteran's more recent treatment records and did not consider whether the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms may have first manifested in service and continued since then. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain a new opinion concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.

Additionally, the Board finds there was a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist in obtaining evidence, as development has not been completed to obtain outstanding treatment records. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1). Specifically, a February 2019 VA treatment record indicated that the Veteran reported being seen by an outside doctor for anxiety for about one year and that she was prescribed medication by this provider to treat the same. Additionally, a June 2022 VA treatment record indicated that the Veteran was seen by a therapist "in the community" who diagnosed her with ADHD. However, the claims file does not contain any private psychiatric treatment records, and the RO did not attempt to obtain any such records. Accordingly, remand is warranted to attempt to obtain these outstanding private treatment records.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for the private providers who treated her psychiatric symptoms, as referenced in the February 2019 and June 2022 VA treatment records. Make two requests for the authorized records from the private providers, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

2. After completing the directives above, obtain a new medical opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified anxiety disorder, general anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, ADHD, and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician. It is up to the discretion of the reviewing clinician as to whether a new examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion. 

(a.) After record review and examination of the Veteran (if deemed necessary by the reviewing clinician), the reviewing clinician must opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder had onset during active service or is otherwise related to service. 

The examiner must acknowledge and address the September 2014, October 2014, September 2015, November 2015, and December 2015 service treatment records indicating that the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety and depression in service. Additionally, the examiner must address whether the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder is a continuation of the symptoms she experienced in service, as documented in the service treatment records. 

Additionally, the examiner must address the Veteran's lay statements of record, including the October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ and the statements she provided during the November 2023 VA examination, indicating that she began experiencing anxiety and depression symptoms in service. 

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history. Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the reviewing clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection. In forming the opinion, the examiner cannot rely on the absence of medical records corroborating disability.

A complete rationale must be offered for all opinions expressed, including a discussion of the evidence and medical principles which led to the conclusions reached.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Corcoran, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.