Citation Nr: A25030302
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210215-135836
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a revision of a December 2015 rating decision that denied service connection for a left hip condition based on clear and unmistakable error (CUE) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip condition is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record does not show that any error of fact or law manifestly changed the outcome of the December 2015 rating decision such that reasonable minds cannot differ as to whether service connection for left hip condition was warranted.

2. The evidence of record does not indicate the Veteran currently has a right hip condition for VA disability compensation purposes.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a revision of a December 2015 rating decision that denied service connection for a left hip condition based on CUE have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from April 2004 to April 2008.  

In January 2021, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ/Regional Office (RO)) issued a decision denying the Veteran's claims on appeal. 

In the February 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran requested the Direct Review. The Board notes that the evidentiary window based on the Veteran's selection is limited to the evidence of record as of the date the AOJ issued notice of the applicable decision. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that a review of the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement reveals disagreement with the February 2021 notification letter, which does not include a CUE claim. However, the Veteran did write "Left hip condition CUE" as one of the issues in disagreement. A review of the file reflects a January 2021 rating decision that denied a revision of a December 2015 rating decision for a left hip condition on the basis of CUE. Thus, based on the Veteran's specific notation of CUE within the NOD, the Board has liberally construed and recharacterized the Veteran's claim to add the issue of entitlement to a revision of the December 2015 rating decision for a left hip condition on the basis of CUE.

Clear and Unmistakable Error (CUE)

Prior VA decisions that are final and binding are accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). Where the evidence establishes CUE, the prior rating decision will be reversed or amended. Id. The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the following three-pronged test applies to determine whether CUE is present in a prior determination: (1) either the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were not before the adjudicator or the statutory or regulatory provisions in effect at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the error must be undebatable and of the sort which, had it not been made, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made; and (3) a determination that there was CUE must be based on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question. Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310 (1992); see also Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (to prove the existence of CUE as set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a), the claimant must show that an outcome-determinative error occurred).

The Court has explained that CUE is a very specific and rare kind of error. It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993). CUE "are errors that are undebatable, so that it can be said that reasonable minds could only conclude that the original decision was fatally flawed at the time it was made." Russell, 3 Vet. App. At 313. "[E]ven where the premise of error is accepted, if it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued, the error complained of cannot be, ipso facto, clear and unmistakable." Fugo, 6 Vet. App. At 43-44. In other words, when there is evidence both supporting and against a previous determination, it is impossible for the claimant to succeed in showing that the result would have been manifestly different. Simmons v. West, 14 Vet. App. 84, 88 (2000).

Where evidence establishes CUE, the prior decision will be reversed or amended. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).

CUE is established when either the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied. The alleged error must be undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated. The commission of the alleged error must have manifestly changed the outcome of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was made. Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180 (2014); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310 (1992).

The error must be of a type that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision. Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999). A manifest change in the outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset. King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433 (2014). The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different. King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433 (2014).

Additionally, allegations that a previous adjudication improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence of record can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE. The claimant must assert more than a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated. Russell, 3 Vet. App. at 313-14. Similarly, broad brush allegations of "failure to follow regulations" or "failure to give due process," or any other general, nonspecific claim of error cannot constitute a valid claim for CUE. Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44. The Court has further noted that a breach of VA's duty to assist cannot form a basis for a claim of CUE. Caffrey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1994). Thus, as a threshold matter, a claimant must plead CUE with sufficient particularity. Only if this threshold requirement is met does the Board have any obligation to address the merits of the CUE claim. See Phillips v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 25 (1997).

Entitlement to a revision of a December 2015 rating decision that denied service connection for a left hip condition based on CUE.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a revision of the December 2015 rating decision based on CUE, thus, awarding him service connection for his left hip condition. 

Here, the Board finds that the Veteran has pled CUE with specificity, therefore, the Board will address the contention herein. 

Pertinent to this claim, the Veteran filed an original claim for service connection for his bilateral hips in October 2012, which was denied by the RO in an October 2013 rating decision. A few days later, the Veteran filed a claim to reopen, which the RO continued the denial of the claim in September 2014. The Veteran did not appeal this decision, but instead, filed another claim to reopen in August 2015, which the RO reopened, but continued the denial of service connection on the merits. The Veteran did not appeal this decision, nor submit new and material evidence within one year of notification of the decision. The Veteran did not assert otherwise. Therefore, this decision became final. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a), 20.1103. This decision is the basis for CUE in this instance. 

The Veteran specifically asserts that CUE was committed in the December 2015 rating decision as it pertains to the Veteran's left hip condition due to the RO's reliance on inaccurate facts by noting there was no link between the Veteran's diagnosed medical condition and his service-connected back disability.

The relevant evidence at the time of the December 2015 rating decision consisted of service treatment records (STRs), medical treatment records, and an October 2015 VA examination and medical opinion.

The October 2015 VA examination revealed a diagnosis of IVDS Lumbar Spine. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was at least as likely as not secondary to a service-connected condition, rationalizing that medical records indicate a diagnosis in 2014 with noted left sided radicular symptoms in the sciatic distribution. Sciatica refers to pain that radiates along the path of the sciatic nerve, which branches from the lower back through the hips and buttocks and down each leg.

Based on review of the record, the Board finds that CUE was not shown in the December 2015 rating decision that failed to grant service connection for left hip condition. 

Here, the Board finds that the RO's action in the December 2015 rating decision in denying service condition for a left hip condition was proper. While the RO did, in fact, incorrectly notate that the VA medical opinion found no link between your diagnosed medical condition and back disability, the Board does not find this error, which is undebatable, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made. Specifically, the October 2015 VA examination does not show that a diagnosed left hip condition was actually given, as the examiner provided a diagnosis related to the Veteran's back condition, and not of his left hip. Moreover, the medical opinion relies on a notation that medical records indicate a diagnosis in 2014, however, the file is void of any such medical records to that effect. In fact, medical records are silent for any complaints, treatments, or diagnosis related to a left hip condition. Further, the examiner's rationalization to support a positive etiology seems to be in relation to a left-sided radicular condition (neurological), and not of a left hip condition (musculoskeletal). Essentially, the evidence at the time did not establish that the Veteran has a left hip condition that was related to service on a direct or secondary basis.

Thus, to reiterate, the Board finds that CUE is not shown in the December 2015 rating decision that failed to grant service connection for a left hip condition. The RO reviewed and considered the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision, and essentially found no link to service, which is in the RO's discretion in evaluating and weighing the evidence. To the extent the Veteran argues that then the RO had a duty to obtain a new VA examination and/or medical opinion, the Board notes that this is a contention that amounts to a theory of a duty to assist violation, which cannot form the basis of CUE. See Evans, 27 Vet. App. at 195 (citing Cook v. Principi, 318 F.3d 1334, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2002)).

Ultimately, the Veteran is disagreeing with how evidence was weighed or evaluated by the adjudicator regarding whether there a diagnosed left hip condition related to service. However, "[i]t is the prerogative of the factfinder... to interpret the evidence and drew reasonable inferences from it." Evans, 27 Vet. App. at 187 (citing Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 52 (1990)). A disagreement as to how facts were weighed or interpreted does not support a finding of CUE. Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43-44.

Accordingly, the Board finds that there was no CUE shown in the December 2015 rating decision, based on the Veteran's contentions, that would result in a manifest change in the outcome. Therefore, the Board finds that revision of the December 2015 rating decision, based on CUE, is not warranted.  

Service Connection

Generally, to prevail on a direct service connection claim, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to have been incurred during service if manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip condition.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right hip condition, claimed to be due to his military service, or otherwise caused or aggravated by his service-connected back disability.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Veteran does not have a current right hip condition for VA purposes.

The requirement for a current disability is satisfied if the disability is present at any point proximate to the claim, during the claim, or to the appeal period. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2014). If there is no evidence of a present disability, there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Additionally, there must be a demonstration of symptoms proximate to, or since, the time the application is filed. Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1110, there must be a disability due to an identified personal injury suffered or disease or injury, contracted in-service. Where pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability. However, subjective pain in and of itself will not establish a current disability. Consideration should be given to the impact, or lack thereof, from pain, focusing on evidence of functional limitation caused by pain. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir., 2018). Herein, even if the Board considered the Veteran's claim of current symptomatology (symptoms that have not been specifically identified by the Veteran), there is no evidence of functional limitation. Further, not all pain results in a disability, as in here, or rises to the level of impairment of working ability.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right hip condition, or any symptoms related to the Veteran's right hip. Post-service medical treatment records reflect a singular complaint that his right hip sometimes locks up, however, no diagnosis is given. 

In October 2015, the Veteran underwent a VA examination where the examiner did not find a diagnosis related to the Veteran's right hip, and thus, provided an unfavorable medical nexus opinion as to any alleged right hip condition being secondary to his service-connected back disability, noting there is no diagnosis within the record.

Based on the above, the Board finds that in the absence of a confirmed diagnosis of a right hip disability, shown by objective evidence or symptoms arising to the level of functional impairment related to the Veteran's right hip, either during or post service, service connection for that disability cannot be established. There is no objective medical evidence of a current right hip disability since the Veteran filed his claim. The record is essentially devoid of competent and credible medical evidence of any current disability. 

While the Veteran believes he has a current right hip disability, he has not shown to have the requisite medical knowledge and expertise to be deemed competent to provide any diagnoses in this case. The issue of providing a diagnosis is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). He has not provided, nor does the claims file include, evidence of a current disability upon which to grant the claim.

As such, the Board concludes that the persuasive evidence of record is against service connection, is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Therefore, the appeal is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip condition is remanded.

After review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a duty to assist error, when the AOJ failed to obtain an adequate VA medical examination and VA medical opinion assessing the Veteran's claimed condition.

In October 2015, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess his left hip condition, where the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with IVDS lumbar spine, and provided a positive link to the Veteran's service-connected back disability on the basis that medical records indicate a diagnosis in 2014 with noted left-sided radicular symptoms in the sciatic distribution. 

The Board finds this VA examination and medical opinion to be inadequate, as it is unclear whether the examiner intended to provide a diagnosis of a left hip condition, and if so, failed to specify the condition. Moreover, the examiner inaccurately relied upon medical records indicating a diagnosis in 2014, however, the file is void of any such evidence. 

Therefore, the Board finds that a VA medical examination and addendum VA medical opinion is needed that adequately address the Veteran's claim.

As this medical examination and opinion was of record prior to the applicable decision on appeal, the RO's failure to provide the Veteran an adequate VA examination and medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran with a VA examination and addendum VA medical opinion to ascertain the nature and etiology of his claimed left hip condition. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiners, who must note review of the record in the examination report. All pertinent medical complaints, symptoms, and clinical findings must be reported in detail. Should the examiner(s) determine that new examinations are warranted, all indicated tests or studies should be performed, and all relevant evidence should be discussed.

Following complete review of the record, the examiner must address the following:

(a) Clarify whether the Veteran during any point of the appeal period has had, or currently has, a diagnosed left hip condition.

In the requested opinion, the examiner must reconcile the October 2015 VA examination, and medical opinion notating a diagnosis in 2014. 

(b) If, and only if, the Veteran has a diagnosed left hip condition, opine whether the condition had its onset during active service, or is otherwise related to service.

(c) If, and only if, the Veteran has a diagnosed left hip condition, opine whether the condition was caused or aggravated by his service-connected back disability.

In the requested opinion, the examiner must address causation and aggravation.

The rationale for all opinions must be provided and must reflect consideration of the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and progression of the claimed disorder.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carter, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.