Citation Nr: A25030686
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240618-448882
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Prior to November 22, 2022, entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for chronic active cervical strain with myositis is remanded.

From November 22, 2022, entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for chronic active cervical strain with myositis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1996 to August 2000. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) sincerely thanks the Veteran for his service.

This appeal to the Board arose from a July 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

However, as the Board is remanding the current appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that in the July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ continued the 20 percent rating assigned for cervical spine disability. It also assigned a new effective date of November 22, 2022, for the assignment of the 20 percent rating. Based on the procedural history, the Board has characterized the issues in this appeal accordingly. 

After a thorough review of the evidence at the time of the July 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error was made. Therefore, a remand is necessary to cure such error.

The Veteran was provided VA examinations in March 2021, September 2022, and November 2022. The Board notes that on the September 2022 VA examination report, while it appears that range of motion (ROM) testing was conducted, the findings, in terms of degrees, were not recorded.

Furthermore, the VA examination reports on record do not clearly indicate at which point the Veteran experiences pain (where pain begins) during ROM testing in terms of degrees. Furthermore, on the March 2021 and September 2022 VA examination reports, the examination reports did not provide ROM findings for passive motion, weightbearing, and non-weightbearing. Additionally, on the November 2022 VA examination report, while ROM findings were provided for passive motion, they were not provided for weightbearing and non-weightbearing. See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). 

As failure to obtain an adequate examination for rating purposes is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, on remand, the AOJ must obtain an adequate examination that includes the necessary testing and thoroughly explains the findings. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for the appropriate VA examination to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected cervical spine disability. The examiner must conduct all indicated tests and studies, to include range of motion studies, as indicated below.

a) Estimation of range of motion (ROM) measurements for cervical spine in active and passive motion, in both weightbearing and non-weightbearing.

The examiner must discuss pain for ROM movements on active, passive, and repetitive use testing. The examiner is asked to address the following questions:

(i) Are any ROM movements painful on active, passive, and repetitive use testing? If yes, identify whether active, passive, and repetitive use.

(ii) If yes (there are painful movements), does the pain contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM? Please further describe the functional loss or additional limitation of ROM.

(iii) If no (the pain does not contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM), explain why the pain does not contribute.

In addition, for the cervical spine the examiner must discuss pain when used in weightbearing or in non-weightbearing. The examiner is asked to address the following questions:

(i) Is there pain when the joint is used in weightbearing or non-weightbearing? If yes, identify whether weight-bearing or non-weightbearing.

(ii) If yes (there is pain when used in weightbearing or non-weightbearing), does the pain contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM? Please further describe these limitations.

(iii) If no (the pain does not contribute to functional loss or additional limitation of ROM), explain why the pain does not contribute.

For all ranges and planes of motion where pain is noted, the examiner should identify at what point during the range of motion that pain sets in, i.e., the exact point (in terms of degrees) at which pain starts.

Additionally, the examiner is asked to review the prior VA examination reports, and if possible, provide ROM estimates (in degrees) for the cervical spine for the following:

(i) Active motion during the September 2022 VA examination.

(ii) Passive motion during the March 2021 and September VA examinations

(iii) Weightbearing and non-weightbearing during all prior examinations.

If pain was present during all examinations, the examiner should identify or estimate where, in degrees of ROM, this pain began for active motion, passive motion, weightbearing, and non-weightbearing. This should be done based on the findings noted or estimated in each examination report. 

The examiner is advised that if the Veteran takes medication for the cervical spine disability, the examiner must explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motion would be without the medication due to a recent holding from the U. S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. Appl. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (March 12, 2025).  

If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or estimation, or concludes that the required testing or estimation, is not necessary in this case, an explanation as to why must be provided.

b) The examiner must describe any pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, instability of station and incoordination present.

c) The examiner must ask the Veteran to describe the flare-ups he experiences, including frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, severity and/or extent of functional impairment he experiences during a flare-up of symptoms and/or after repeated use over time.

Based on the Veteran's lay statements and the other evidence of record, the examiner must provide an opinion estimating any additional degrees of limited motion caused by functional loss during a flare-up or after repeated use over time. If the examiner cannot estimate the degrees of additional range of motion loss during flare-ups or after repetitive use without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training).

d) The examiner is requested to identify the presence, or absence of ankylosis of cervical spine. If the presence of ankylosis is identified, this determination should be expressed in terms of whether the ankylosis is favorable or unfavorable; and, if feasible, in terms of the degrees of flexion or extension in which the cervical spine is ankylosed.

In rendering these opinions, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms/history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

A fully articulated medical rationale for each opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report. The examiner should discuss the particulars of this Veteran's medical history, pertinent lay evidence, and the relevant medical literature or studies as applicable to this case, which may reasonably explain the medical analysis in the study of this case.

					(Continued on next page)

?

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, a complete explanation stating why this is so should be provided. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question have been exhausted.  

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Middleton, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.