Citation Nr: A25030913
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240623-450694
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that the symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD resulted in total occupational and social impairment at any time during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2006 to June 2010. 

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an August 2023 rating decision. In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial August 2023 rating decision. 

In his timely filed June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

The Board notes that the issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus was listed on the Veteran's June 2024 NOD. However, the rating decision which denied that claim was issued in March 2014, and was not timely appealed so it is not pending before the Board for adjudication. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is deciding the claim of entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for PTSD, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board also notes that the medical evidence of record suggests that the Veteran may have suffered a traumatic brain injury (TBI) during active duty.  However, the Veteran has not filed a claim for service connection for such disability.  The Veteran is encouraged to file a new claim of entitlement to service connection for TBI or any other current disability he believes is related to service, on VA Form 21-526 EZ Fully Developed Claim for Disability Compensation, if he wishes VA to evaluate it. 

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records.  Required notice and information were provided in the claim form which the Veteran signed, certifying to the fact that such notice was received and further than they have included or identified relevant evidence. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release and/or adequately identified. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If the Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

Increased Rating Claims

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time, based on the facts found, are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as "staging the ratings." See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The Board must also analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994). Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while credibility is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).

1. Entitlement to a rating greater than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

The Veteran contends that the symptoms of his PTSD are more severe than the rating currently assigned. He seeks an increase.

As an initial matter, the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim for a rating increase since filing for a rating increase on June 8, 2023. Therefore, the period on appeal spans from June 8, 2023, plus one year prior to the date VA received the increased rating claim known as the look back period. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Legal Criteria

The Veteran's PTSD is currently rated 70 percent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

Under these criteria, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit explained that the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating. Id. at 117. Significantly, however, the list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21 (2016); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443, see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Factual Background

The Veteran was afforded a September 2022 VA PTSD examination via telehealth. The diagnosis assigned was PTSD. The Veteran reported he was single and lived alone. He tries to date but his emotional numbness does not allow him to connect with anyone, The Veteran reported seeing his family occasionally and speaking with Veterans that he served with. He also stated that he was employed as a surgical technician for the past two years which triggered him when he saw blood or burns on his patients. Symptoms noted on examination included depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, nightmares, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, mild memory loss, flattened affect, circumstantial circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work and work like settings. The Veteran's thought process was preoccupied and distracted. He was restless and walked around his home for the entirety of the examination. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas consistent with a 70 percent rating. The Veteran denied any suicidal ideation. Treatment for his PTSD included prescription sertraline and gabapentin. 

The Veteran was afforded an in - person VA PTSD examination in July 2023. The diagnosis assigned was PTSD. The Veteran reported he was single and had no children. He recently got into playing video games with friends and speaks to his father regularly. He continues his employment as a surgical technician. The Veteran denied mental health treatment since 2020 but continued prescription sertraline and gabapentin. Symptoms noted on examination included depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, nightmares, anxiety, suspiciousness, flattened affect, circumstantial circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work and work like settings, and suicidal ideation without specific intent or plan. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas consistent with a 70 percent rating.

VA treatment records documented chronic PTSD and are otherwise consistent with the findings of the VA examiners.

Merits

After considering the medical and lay evidence of record pursuant to the legal criteria set forth above, the Board finds that the criteria for a 100 percent schedular rating are not met. In that regard, the totality of the Veteran's disability picture does not demonstrate that his psychiatric symptoms are productive of total occupational and social impairment. Significantly, the Veteran has reported meaningful relationships with military buddies and immediate family members. In addition, he is employed as a surgical technician full time. The Board notes that the Veteran has expressed suicidal ideation. However, this symptom has been described without plan or intent and, while it persisted throughout the appeal period, it was episodic. Accordingly, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation did not rise to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). Moreover, the Veteran has not been shown to exhibit gross impairment in thought processes or communication; grossly inappropriate behavior; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or other symptoms approximating the criteria for a higher 100 percent schedular rating.

While the Board does not deny that the Veteran's PTSD impacted his ability to work, the evidence does not show that the Veteran has suffered symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational and social impairment equivalent to a 100 percent disability rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443. He is employed full time. The Board emphasizes that a 100 percent rating also requires total social impairment in addition to total occupational impairment. Throughout the entirety of the appeal period, this is also not shown. In pertinent part, while the evidence indicates that the Veteran isolates himself and experiences mood swings, and anxiety and depression both in and outside of his home, the record reflects that he has been able to maintain some familial relationships and friendships with other Veterans. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology is not adequately described in terms of total social impairment.

The Board also finds that the medical and lay evidence of record does not establish that the increased severity in the Veteran's PTSD symptoms occurred within the year prior to the filing a claim on June 8, 2023. Rather as noted above, the examination results as outlined above indicated that the Veteran did not demonstrate any appreciable change from in any area of functioning. There is no evidence supporting a finding that the Veteran's PTSD increased in severity during the one year prior to the date of claim and the look back period does not apply. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Accordingly, for the entirety of the appeals period, the Board finds that the criteria for the assignment of a 100 percent rating are not met and the Veteran's increased rating claim on appeal must be denied. As the evidence is persuasively against a higher rating at any time during the appeals period, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Alexander

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.