Citation Nr: A25030191
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240820-469056
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the Army from September 1996 to September 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2023 decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for OSA. Specifically, he contends that this disability is caused or aggravated by obesity that is, in turn, due to weight gain caused by his service-connected left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome.

One competent medical source has opined that the Veteran's OSA is caused or aggravated by his service-connected disability. In April 2023, Dr. Z.M. opined that the Veteran's left knee disability led to weight gain, and that the Veteran's subsequent obesity led to, caused, and/or aggravated sleep apnea. Unfortunately, the Board is unable to grant that opinion persuasive weight at this time, as Z.M. did not provide a rationale to support a crucial portion of their opinion. 

The most probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008). In this case, Z.M. explained that the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability "can" lead to pain, painful motion, sleep disturbance, diminished motivation, and/or comfort eating, which in turn "can" lead to diminished activity with less calorie expenditure, leading to weight gain. However, Z.M. did not provide any reasoning grounded in the facts of this case for concluding that the Veteran's service-connected disability did cause weight gain. 

Thus, on the current record, no competent medical source has provided a persuasive opinion that the Veteran's OSA is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. And the determination of whether a nexus exists requires medical expertise that the Board may not exercise in the first instance. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991). OSA is also not a chronic disease listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), and so service connection cannot be granted based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology.

That said, remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, the Veteran has not received an adequate VA medical opinion.

When VA undertakes to obtain an examination, it must ensure that the examination is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). In this case, the Veteran has received one VA medical opinion regarding secondary service connection for OSA, in August 2023. Unfortunately, that opinion is not adequate, as it discussed solely whether the Veteran's service-connected left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome caused his OSA through the intermediate step of obesity. The examiner did not offer any opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome aggravated his OSA. An opinion for secondary service connection must address possible aggravation; otherwise, it is inadequate to support a VA decision. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

The AOJ did not obtain an adequate medical opinion, which constitutes a pre-decisional error in the duty to assist. Remand is required to obtain such an opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file to a qualified medical professional to obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). If the examiner determines that an examination is necessary, such an examination should be scheduled. 

The examiner should then provide an opinion as to the following.

(a.) Did the Veteran's left knee aggravate the Veteran's obesity?

(b.) If so, was the aggravated obesity a substantial factor in causing him to develop sleep apnea?

(c.) If so, would the sleep apnea not have occurred but for the aggravated obesity stemming from the service-connected left knee disability?

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed. If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should explain why this is so, specifically addressing whether the inability to provide an opinion stem from not having sufficient information/evidence or the limits of medical knowledge. 

2. Re-adjudicate the claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Mansfield, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.