Citation Nr: A25030020
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240520-441528
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral kidney condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that he has bilateral shin splints which were incurred in or caused by active military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 2015 to December 2016, November 2020 to November 2021, and December 2021 to December 2022.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 RO decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral kidney condition, a bilateral knee disability, and a right ankle disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that in the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), besides appealing the above noted issues, the Veteran also included one additional issue to be appealed which is increased rating claim for the service-connected hypertension from a March 2023 rating decision. The Board notes that the March 2023 rating decision was issued more than one year prior to the filing of the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). Rating decisions older than one year cannot be appealed to the Board.

The Board shall not entertain an application for review on appeal unless it conforms to the law. 38 U.S.C. § 7108. Under the framework of the modernized review system, also known as the AMA, an appeal consists of a properly completed VA Form 10182, which should be submitted to the Board within one year from the date that the RO mails the notice of decision. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202, 20.203.

The RO mailed the notice of decision on March 29, 2023, which granted service connection for hypertension with a non-compensable (zero percent) disability rating from December 17, 2022. The Veteran filed the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in May 2024 which is more than one year from the issuance of the March 2023 rating decision. Additionally, the Veteran or his representative did not request an extension for the untimely VA Form 10182. Accordingly, the Board will not address the increased rating claim for the service-connected hypertension in this decision. If the Veteran believes that his service-connected hypertension has increased in severity, he may file a supplemental claim for increased rating.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is granted.

The Veteran's asserts that he has bilateral shin splints and it is directly related to his active military service.

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Thus, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran has the current diagnosis of bilateral shin splints that began during his active service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

Regarding the current diagnosis of bilateral shin splints, the Board notes that in the April 2023 VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the examiner did not note the diagnosis of bilateral shin splints. However, the Board observes that VA treatment records have noted bilateral shin pain. A February 2023 VA treatment record noted chronic bilateral leg pain. Also, in a March 2023 VA Primary Care Note, the examiner noted bilateral shin pain, and a history of chronic bilateral leg pain and arthritis. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has current diagnosis of bilateral shin splints.

Regarding in-service manifestation or diagnosis of shin splints, the Board notes that an August 2016 in-service bone scan report noted bilateral shin splints. Also, there are several service treatment records that noted bilateral lower leg and shin pain.

Regarding a relationship between the Veteran's shin splints and active military service, in the April 2023 VA medical opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's claimed bilateral shin splints was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the bilateral shin splints during service. As a supporting rationale, the examiner merely stated that bilateral shin splints have resolved with no chronicity of care for bilateral shin splints.

The Board finds the April 2023 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's claimed bilateral shin splints inadequate because the examiner did not address several service treatment records and post-service treatment records noting bilateral lower leg and shin pain, and the examiner provided a conclusory supporting rationale without sufficient explanation and supporting data. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (a medical opinion "must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). 

On the contrary, the Board finds that there are several service and post-service treatment records that noted chronic bilateral shin splints, which establishes the chronicity of the Veteran's bilateral shin splints since the active military service. A July 2016 service treatment record noted left lower leg pain, and strain of unspecified muscle(s) and tendons at lower leg level.

An August 2016 service treatment record noted that in July 2016, the Veteran performed an 8-mile road march with a 56-pound pack. He began experiencing pain afterwards to the distal tibia. He had no symptoms prior to this. The clinician also noted that the Veteran had left interior leg pain along distal tibia.

An August 2016 in-service bone scan report noted bilateral shin splints.

Another August 2016 service treatment record noted bilateral shin splints and anterior tibial tendonitis for two weeks.

A September 2016 service treatment record noted pain in the Veteran's bilateral lower leg and shins.

Another September 2016 service treatment record noted left shin pain.

An August 2021 service treatment record noted the Veteran had bilateral shin pain for 5 years.

An October 2021 service treatment record noted the Veteran had bilateral lower leg pain located over the shin.

A February 2023 post-service VA treatment record noted the Veteran had bilateral leg pain.

In a March 2023 VA Primary Care Note, the examiner noted bilateral shin pain, and a history of chronic bilateral leg pain and arthritis.

Thus, upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current bilateral shin splints incurred in or related to his active military service.

Accordingly, after resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Consequently, entitlement to service connection for bilateral shin splints is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral kidney condition is remanded.

The Veteran claims that he has a bilateral kidney condition, and it is directly related to active military service.

The RO afforded the Veteran an in-person examination for kidney conditions in April 2023. In the April 2023 VA DBQ for kidney conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran's reports of onset of a kidney condition in 2022, when he went to the doctors for kidneys tests. The examiner also noted the Veteran's reports of stabbing pain and frequent urination. However, the examiner did not note the diagnosis of a kidney condition.

The Board finds the April 2023 VA DBQ for kidney conditions inadequate because it contains internal inconsistencies as the examiner noted no diagnosis of bilateral kidney condition, but at the same time in section 9D of the DBQ, the examiner noted the Veteran has albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) greater than or equal to 30mg/g. However, the examiner did not explain whether this indicates existence of a kidney condition. Furthermore, the examiner did not explain as to whether the Veteran's reported symptoms of stabbing pain and frequent urination are related to a kidney condition. Finally, the examiner did not address an August 2022 service treatment record noting abnormal value of albumin.

Additionally, the examiner completed the DBQ for kidney conditions, but did not provide a medical opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral kidney condition.

Accordingly, the Board finds that failure to provide the Veteran an adequate examination and obtain a medical opinion on the nature and etiology of the claimed bilateral kidney condition is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand to correct this error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

The Veteran claims that he has bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities, which are directly related to active military service.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for knee conditions and ankle conditions in April 2023. In the April 2023 VA DBQ for knee and lower leg conditions, the examiner did not note the diagnosis of a knee condition. However, the examiner noted the Veteran's reports of symptoms of popping sensation, grinding sensation, and stabbing pain. As a functional impairment, the Veteran reported that he has the sensation of pins and needles.

In the April 2023 VA DBQ for ankle conditions, the examiner did not note the diagnosis of an ankle condition. However, the examiner noted the Veteran's reports of popping sensation, sharp stabbing pain, stiffness, and tightness.

The Board finds the April 2023 VA DBQs for knee and ankle conditions inadequate because the examiner merely checked the box "No" for functional impairment, but did not explain whether the Veteran's reported pain, stiffness, and other symptoms of bilateral knee and right ankle reached the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity. In this regard, the Board notes that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1367-69 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

In the accompanying April 2023 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities, the examiner stated that the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities were less likely than not incurred in or caused by active service. As a supporting rationale, the examiner merely stated that there is no chronicity of care for bilateral knee and right ankle pain.

The Board finds the April 2023 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities inadequate because the examiner provided a conclusory supporting rationale without sufficient explanation and supporting data. See Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124 (a medical opinion "must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). Furthermore, the examiner did not opine as to whether the Veteran's currently claimed right ankle disability is related to the in-service sprain of deltoid ligament of right ankle with bruising and swelling that incurred while the Veteran was running on post. Additionally, the examiner did not address an August 2016 bone scan report that noted stress changes of the knees, ankles, and feet. Finally, the examiner did not address an October 2021 service treatment record noting a bilateral knee pain with the onset in the previous two months.

Accordingly, the Board finds that failure to provide the Veteran adequate examinations and obtain adequate medical opinions on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand to correct this error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran a new examination for his claimed bilateral kidney condition. All required testing should be done. Also, forward the claims file and copy of this remand to the examiner to obtain a medical opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral kidney condition.

After reviewing the claims file and copy of this remand, the examiner should address the following:

(a)	Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran currently has a bilateral kidney condition.

In providing the above requested opinion, the examiner should specifically review and address the April 2023 VA DBQ for kidney conditions in which the examiner did not find a diagnosis of a kidney condition, but noted the Veteran's reported symptoms of stabbing pain and frequent urination, and that the Veteran had albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) greater than or equal to 30mg/g. However, the examiner did not explain whether these indicate the presence of a kidney condition. See the document associated with the claims file with entry dated 06/15/2023, titled "C&P Exam" that contains the April 2023 VA DBQ for kidney conditions.

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed bilateral kidney condition had its onset during his period of active service, or related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the abnormal value of albumin noted in the August 2022 service treatment record. See the document associated with the claims file with entry dated 11/16/2022, titled "STR - Medical" page 44 of 108.

2. Afford the Veteran a new examination for his claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities. Thereafter, forward the claims file and copy of this remand to the examiner to obtain new medical opinions on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities.

After reviewing the claims file and copy of this remand, the examiner should address the following:

(a)	Provide all of the diagnoses of the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities. Regarding the existence of a current disability for the purposes of a claim for service connection, the examiner is advised that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee and right ankle disabilities had their onset during his period of active service, or related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the in-service sprain of deltoid ligament of right ankle, in-service knee pain, and stress changes of the knees, ankles, and feet noted on bone scan.

In providing the above requested opinions, besides reviewing the claims file in general, the examiner should specifically review and address the evidence of record associated with the claims file with entries dated:

(i) 11/16/2022, titled "STR - Medical" page 1 of 87 that contains the September 2016 service treatment record noting soreness in ankle during running; page 3 of 87 that contains an August 2016 service treatment record noting stress changes of the knees, ankles, and feet on bone scan; page 39 of 87 that contains a November 2015 service treatment record noting the Veteran sprained deltoid ligament of right ankle while running, and the Veteran had right ankle bruising and swelling;

(ii) 11/16/2022, titled "STR - Medical" page 61 of 95 that contains an October 2021 service treatment record that noted the Veteran had bilateral knee pain for two months; page 81 of 95 that contains an August 2021 service treatment record noting stiffness of right and left knee.

Clear supporting rationales must be provided for all the opinions rendered. If the examiner determines that it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, then the examiner must provide an explanation of why that is so and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, a deficiency in the record, or a deficiency in the examiner's knowledge.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tariq, Nadeem

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.