Citation Nr: A25030946
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240405-431381
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for left ankle strain is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased rating for right knee strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2012 to July 2019.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2023 decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2023 decision. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for left ankle strain is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for right knee strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to increased ratings for his service-connected left ankle and right knee. See April 2024 VA Form 10182.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

While the record contains June 2023 VA examinations regarding the Veteran's left ankle and right knee, the examinations do not comply with the requirements in Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). The examinations do not contain weightbearing measurements or non-weightbearing measurements. The ankle examination only provides passive ROM measurements for the Veteran's right ankle and does not include passive ROM measurements for the Veteran's left ankle. No explanation is provided as to why passive ROM measurements were not obtained for the left ankle. 

Further, the June 2023 knee examination indicates that the Veteran denies current treatment. This is inconsistent with a subsequent August 2023 VA treatment record that indicates that the Veteran had been taking pain medication for his knee pain since at least 2022. There is also an earlier December 2022 VA treatment record that shows that the Veteran takes the same medicine for wrist pain. Therefore, it appears that the Veteran may have been taking pain medication that could have affected his June 2023 VA examination findings. As such, it is unclear whether the examination's findings reflect any beneficial effects of that medication, which must be discounted when assigning the evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327.

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds the VA examinations inadequate. The AOJ's reliance on inadequate examinations is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand under the AMA. As such, the Board finds that new examinations, inclusive of retrospective medical opinions, are necessary.

The Board notes that consideration of a total disability based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is moot as the Veteran has already been awarded TDIU since January 17, 2022. Here, the Veteran's relevant VA Form 20-0995 was filed on January 31, 2023, with a one-year look back to January 31, 2022. Therefore, the Veteran already has a TDIU for the entire appellate period. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for examinations by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected left ankle and right knee. The claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.

(a)	The examiner should provide a full description of the current severity of the Veteran's left ankle and right knee and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disabilities under the rating criteria. 

(b)	Additionally, the VA examiner is asked to provide retrospective opinions concerning the severity of the Veteran's left ankle and right knee at the June 2023 VA ankle and knee examinations. 

The examiner must keep the following in mind: 

(1)	The examiner must report on the symptoms as they are without the ameliorative effects of medication and note that this was done.

(2)	The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(3)	The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

As noted above, the examiner must review the claims file (including this remand) and note that such review was conducted. The examiner should review all medical evidence and all lay evidence.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. The VA clinician is advised that medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the VA clinician must so indicate and discuss why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Veljic, Erica A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.