Citation Nr: A25030705
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240920-476499
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDERS

Entitlement to an increased rating of 100 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (also claimed cannabis use disorder and alcohol abuse disorder) to include depression is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is dismissed as moot.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The severity of the Veteran's PTSD with TBI and depression, during the period on appeal, most closely approximates total occupational and social impairment.

2. As a 100 percent schedular rating for PTSD with TBI and depression has been assigned for the appellate period, there remain no questions of law or fact to be decided regarding entitlement to a TDIU for this period.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a 100 percent rating for PTSD with TBI and depression are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.326, 3.655, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411 (2023).

2. Entitlement to a TDIU is moot.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 4.16, 20.205 (2023).

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1966, to July 1969, to include service in Vietnam.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in January and February 2024 by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In both his September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) forms, he elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decisions on appeal (up to the January 2024 decision for PTSD, and up to the February 2024 decision for TDIU), as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, both VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) forms.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued each rating decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the NOD, or evidence submitted more than 90 days following receipt of the NOD.  Id.

In correspondence dated in February 2025, the Veteran waived any time remaining to select a different Board review option, and requested the Board proceed with the adjudication of his appeal.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

Legal Criteria-PTSD

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.  The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § § 4.1.  VA evaluates all psychiatric disorders under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders provided in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders:

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Id.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the evaluation, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific evaluation.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (explaining that the symptoms that could give rise to a given rating are those in like kind, i.e., of similar duration, severity, and frequency, to those provided in the non-exhaustive lists).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned only if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Analysis-PTSD

Through his appeal documents and statements, the Veteran contended that a disability rating greater than 70 percent is warranted for his service-connected psychiatric disorder as symptoms have caused him (among others) chronic anxiety, severe depression, sleep impairment, hypervigilance, inability to perform activities of daily living, memory loss, exaggerated startle response, and impaired impulse control.  So, too, did the Veteran's spouse contend.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements and those of his spouse, the relevant VA treatment records and VA examinations afforded in 2023 and 2024, as well as a private evaluation conducted in 2021 and re-submitted in 2023.  After engaging in a holistic analysis assessing the severity, frequency and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder throughout the appeal period, recognizing that the symptoms listed in the rating criteria are non-exhaustive examples and when looking at the effects determining the impairment level, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, during the period on appeal, has manifested in total occupational and social impairment.

Turning to the record, military service records for his period of service reflect that the Veteran served in Vietnam and, while in the Army, received a National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Campaign Medal, Combat Infantryman's Badge, Vietnam Service Medal, Army Commendation Medal, Bronze Star Medal, and an Air Medal Parachute Badge.  See DD Form 214; see also July 20024 Rating Decision.

In June 2023 correspondence, the Veteran detailed some of his harrowing experiences in Vietnam, concluding "[i]t was a nightmare and still is a nightmare" and "[d]ying or be killed is always in my head."

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a private Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) and a Psychological Evaluation report, completed by a psychologist, A.N., Psy.D., on June 24, 2021.  See VA examination, associated 6/10/2023.  On the DBQ, Dr. A.N. noted the Veteran's diagnoses as chronic PTSD and "severe" major depressive disorder (MDD), alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder.  Dr. A.N. noted the Veteran's symptoms, observed and self-reported, as:  depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss (i.e., forgetting names, directions); impairment of short and long term memory; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name; disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like setting; suicidal ideation without plan/intent; obsessive rituals which interfere with routines activities (i.e., cameras, checking doors); and impaired impulse control (i.e., unprovoked irritability with periods of violence).

In her Psychological Evaluation report, Dr. A.N. outlined the Veteran's reported background information, which included his experiences in Vietnam, concluding such experiences met the criterion for PTSD.  Dr. A.N. noted the Veteran's reports that his first marriage, which had been filled with violence, ended in divorce in the 1970s, and he married his current spouse in 1980.  The Veteran endorsed numerous symptoms of his psychiatric disorder, many of which were noted in the DBQ, but also included recurrent distressing memories/dreams, flashbacks, indecisiveness, persistent self-isolation, social withdrawal, and emotional detachment, exaggerated guilt, hypervigilance, and exaggerated startle responses.  He reported that VA prescribed him an antidepressant years ago, but he hadn't taken out of fear of the side effects.  He endorsed daily use of alcohol and marijuana to help him calm down and sleep.  Dr. A.N. also interviewed the Veteran's spouse who reported that the Veteran mostly stays in the basement, drinks and smokes a lot, has poor memory that has worsened, a "nasty, mean attitude" that has worsened, an exaggerated startle response (i.e., loud noise-induced stress, anxiety) that has worsened, many sleepless nights, and shows her no affection.  Dr. A.N. concluded that the Veteran's PTSD relates to his time in Vietnam, his depression resulted from years of dealing with severe PTSD without diagnosis or treatment, and his alcohol and cannabis use disorders were means the Veteran used to cope with his PTSD symptoms.

VA treatment records during the appeal period reflect ongoing treatment for his PTSD and depression symptoms, including fluctuating mood levels and occasional thoughts of harming himself without actual intent/plans.

On VA examination in November 2023, the examiner noted the Veteran's current diagnoses as PTSD, MDD, and alcohol and cannabis use disorder, also noting that the Veteran had been diagnosed with TBI.  The examiner indicated that it was not possible to differentiate what symptoms were attributable to which mental health diagnosis as the symptoms overlapped between the disorders in chronic sleep impairment, emotional dysregulation, poor concentration, isolation behaviors, poor behavioral controls, irritability reactions around others, moodiness, loss of interest in life, and detachment reactions.  The examiner further noted that the symptoms of anxiety, depression, and PTSD mutually reinforced and intensified each other, thus impacting the Veteran's overall well-being and quality of life.  The examiner noted the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included recurrent intrusive memories of traumatic events, flashbacks, severe emotional distress, and hypervigilance, and he exhibited symptoms of MDD such as persistent sadness, loss of interest in activities, changes in appetite and sleep patterns, and difficulty concentrating, which exacerbated each other, and adversely affected the Veteran's mental health.

Regarding the Veteran's social/marital history, the examiner detailed the current relationship the Veteran had with his spouse as characterized by mood difficulties, frequent arguments, displayed irritability, lack of intimacy, apathetic responses, and isolative behavior.  Regarding the Veteran's work history, the examiner noted that the Veteran earned a high school diploma, worked in a restaurant for a year after service, and then worked a lengthy 30-year career for a city in computers from which he retired.  However, during that tenure the Veteran faced reprimands for sexual harassment and other forms of harassment.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's admitted bad temper and agitation at work suggested a pattern of behavior that might have contributed to the challenges he faced in the workplace.

The examiner noted the Veteran's symptoms were characterized by re-experiencing trauma, avoidance behaviors, hyperarousal, a high startle response, hypervigilance, disrupted sleep patterns, trouble concentrating, pessimism, a heightened sense of danger in the world, low moods, low energy, lack of motivation, daytime tiredness, social isolation, and withdrawal.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran struggles to control mood swings and often finds himself in arguments and conflicts with others at home, work, and in social settings.  Behaviorally, the Veteran was cooperative, had normal speech, an agitated affect, no evidence of psychotic thinking, intact thought content, and fair insight.  He denied having any current suicidal/homicidal ideations.  The examiner concluded the Veteran's symptoms, when taken together, resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, indicating that his PTSD prevents him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation.  He also indicated he had not left his last job (in December 2006) because of his disability but instead retired, and that he had not tried to obtain employment since.  On request for employment information, the Veteran's former employer noted the Veteran had last worked in December 2009 as manager of Job Control and Configuration Management until he voluntarily retired.  See February 2024 Rating Decision Narrative. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination for his PTSD in January 2024.  The examiner noted the Veteran's current diagnoses as PTSD and cannibis use disorder.  The examiner noted that, since the Veteran's most recent Review PTSD (in November 2023), the Veteran reported no changes.  The examiner listed the Veteran's symptoms as:  depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short/long term memory, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work and work-like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability and periods of violence, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  The examiner concluded the Veteran's symptoms, when taken together, resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination in January 2024 to assess residuals of his TBI.  The examiner noted the Veteran had a diagnosis of TBI (date of diagnosis, 1968) resulting in memory and concentration deficits, anxiety, dizziness, irritability, moodiness, and verbal aggression since service.  At the exam, the Veteran reported having continued memory loss, concentration deficits, anxiety, blurry vision, and occasional difficulty with comprehension.  On assessment, the examiner noted mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment.  The Veteran showed occasional disorientation to one of the four aspects (i.e., person, time, place, situation).  Visual spatial orientation tested as mildly impaired.  The Veteran reported he experienced moderate levels of anxiety.  His comprehension or expression of either spoken language or written language was indicated occasionally impaired.  The examiner concluded there was no change in the Veteran's diagnosis, further noting that the confirmed/documented mental health disorder of PTSD included overlapping symptoms despite PTSD and TBI being two distinct conditions.  Such symptoms included: flashbacks/intrusive memories; nightmares; avoidance/numbing; hyperarousal; negative changes in cognition and mood; TBI-induced physical manifestations; cognitive impairments; emotional and behavioral changes; fatigue; and sleep disturbances. 

After evaluating the medical and lay evidence of record, together, the Board finds that the weight of competent, credible, and probative evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities most closely approximate a total social and occupational impairment.

Socially, the evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's social impairment was nearly complete during the period on appeal.  While married over 40 years, his marital relationship was plagued with arguments, irritability, lack of intimacy, apathetic responses, isolative withdrawal to the basement, and a "nasty, mean attitude."  His persistent displays of anxiety, suspiciousness of others, deficits in memory, unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, obsessive rituals in checking cameras/doors, isolative behaviors, lack of emotional response, and exaggerated startle reactions to loud noises would make any type of social interaction difficult, if not impossible.  The Board therefore concludes that his psychiatric symptoms approximate total social impairment  

Occupationally, while the Veteran indicated in his VA Form 21-8940 application that he had not tried to obtain employment since his retirement in December 2006 (later confirmed as December 2009), it is reasonably clear from the evidence of record that he was completely unable to work during the period on appeal.  His overlapping psychiatric disorder symptoms noted on private evaluation, in VA treatment records, and on VA examinations certainly could negatively impact his ability to work.  For instance, his memory impairment and poor concentration could negatively impact his ability to perform or complete assigned tasks.  His difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances in a work like setting and unprovoked irritability with periods of violence could pose a safety risk in a labor environment, putting himself or others in jeopardy.  As the November 2023 VA examiner opined, the Veteran's admitted bad temper and agitation at work suggested a pattern of behavior that might have contributed to the challenges he faced in the workplace, which included investigations of harassment and sexual harassment. 

The Board notes that, although the 2023 and 2024 VA examiners categorized the Veteran's psychiatric disability as an "occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas," in evaluating the medical and lay evidence of record, together, they paint a picture of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities which severely limited his ability to maintain effective social and occupational relationships, and foster a safe environment for himself and his co-workers.

In this case, the Veteran's consistent reports to private and VA examiners, and treatment providers, with regard to his symptoms of his psychiatric disorders reasonably suggest that he was unable to work during the period of appeal.  The Board finds that the Veteran's statements and that of his spouse are credible and that they are competent to make them.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 & n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The limitations that the Veteran experienced would prevent him from adjusting to difficulties encountered in the workplace, pose a safety risk in a labor environment, and prevent him from maintaining effective working relationships with co-workers, supervisors, and/or customers.  As such, he would have required substantial accomodation by a potential employer. The Board is not persuaded that such a job would be available, and that the Veteran would have been able to maintain it given his symptomology.  The Board therefore concludes his psychiatric symptoms approximate total occupational impairment.

Upon careful consideration of the evidence of record, when comparing all the Veteran's reported and documented psychiatric symptoms to the rating schedule, the Veteran most closely approximated the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating due to his PTSD with TBI and depression and its associated symptoms.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Legal Criteria-TDIU & SMC

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total.  A separate TDIU rating predicated on a veteran's 100 percent rated disability, however, would be impermissible pyramiding.  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008).

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has recognized that a 100 percent rating under the Schedule for Rating Disabilities means that a veteran is totally disabled.  Holland v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 443, 446 (1994) (citing Swan v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 20, 22 (1990)).

Thus, if VA has found a veteran to be totally disabled because of a particular service-connected disability or combination of disabilities pursuant to the Rating Schedule, there is no need, and no authority, to otherwise rate that veteran totally disabled on any other basis.  See Locklear v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 311, 318 n.2 (2011); Herlehy v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 33, 35 (2001) (finding a request for TDIU moot where a 100 percent schedular rating was awarded for the same period).

However, the Board must still consider whether special monthly compensation (or SMC) is available to maximize a veteran's benefits.

SMC is available when, as the result of service-connected disabilities, a veteran suffers additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by VA's schedule for rating disabilities.  Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64, 68 (2011) (citing 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (k)-(s)).  The rate of special monthly compensation varies according to the nature of the veteran's service-connected disabilities.

A veteran shall be considered to be in need of a regular aid and attendance if he or she has the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, one hand and one foot, or is so helpless or blind or permanently bedridden as to need or require the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (b).  In determining whether there is helplessness such as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person, the following circumstances (among others not applicable here) will be considered: inability to dress or undress self, or to keep self ordinarily clean and presentable; inability of the veteran to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or, incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the veteran from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

The particular personal functions which the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, and not that there is a constant need for aid and attendance.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a); see Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).  The particular personal functions that the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  Id.  Decisions must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

Analysis-TDIU & SMC

Because the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability is now rated at 100 percent disabling, on a schedular basis, a separate TDIU rating predicated on the Veteran's psychiatric disability would be impermissible pyramiding.  Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 294.  Since there is no need or authority to rate the Veteran totally disabled on any other basis, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU is moot and is dismissed.  Locklear, 24 Vet. App. at 318 n.2; Herlehy, 15 Vet. App. at 35.

However, VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether his disabilities establish entitlement to special monthly compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114.  See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008).  Regarding the applicability of special monthly compensation, the Veteran does not have a single disability rated at 100 percent with additional disabilities rated at 60 percent or more. See February 2024 Rating Decision Codesheet.  In addition, the record does not contain lay or medical evidence indicating that the Veteran was housebound or permanently bedridden as to require regular aid and attendance.

(continued on next page)

?

The Veteran did not present with the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, one hand and one foot, or was not so helpless or blind or permanently bedridden as to need or require the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against a finding of entitlement to SMC.

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Picard

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.