Citation Nr: A25030483
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240617-448239
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1979 to November 1980.

As an initial matter, on August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law, which went into effect in February 2019, creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review.

In a January 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was denied an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only. In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) where he selected the Direct Review lane. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework. 

The Veteran appeals the denial of an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or for adaptive equipment only. 

Financial assistance may be provided to an "eligible person" in acquiring an automobile or other conveyance and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only. See 38 U.S.C. § 3902(a), (b). Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted where one of the following exists as the result of injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active service: (1) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet; (2) loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands; (3) permanent impairment of vision of both eyes, meaning central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual acuity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than 20 degrees in the better eye; (4) severe burn injury precluding effective operation of an automobile; (5) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); or, (6) for adaptive equipment only, ankylosis of one or both knees or one or both hips. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 3901, 3902; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.808, 17.156.

The Veteran is service-connected for left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy, left and right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy, degenerative arthritis left knee, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), posttraumatic migraine headaches, cholelithiasis, residuals facial scars, macular scar right eye, residuals of solar/actinic keratosis (painful scars), anosmia (loss of smell), dermatoheliosis, tendonitis left quadriceps with hip strain (impairment), traumatic deviated nasal septum, degenerative disc disease L5-S1, residual scar status post cholecystectomy, residual scar right shoulder, tendonitis left quadriceps with hip strain (extension) and hypertension. 

The Board notes that subsequent to the January 2024 rating decision that denied entitlement to an allowance for an automobile or other conveyance, and adaptive equipment, or adaptive equipment only, a November 2024 rating decision granted service connection for chronic kidney disease and myocardial infarct. However, even though the Board, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) can consider subsequent rating decisions, since the effective date for chronic kidney disease and myocardial infarct are outside the period of appeal for consideration for this claim, further discussion of their impact is not necessary.

In his February 2020 VA Form 21-4502, Application for Automobile or Other Conveyance, and Adaptive Equipment, or for Adaptive Equipment, the Veteran noted that his qualifying disability was permanent impairment of vision. Although the Veteran did not specify his qualifying disabilities in the current VA Form 21-4502 submitted in November 2023, the Board notes that he is service-connected for disabilities of the left and right lower extremities, eye scar, left hip and left knee. 

In an April 2023 outpatient treatment record, the Veteran reported numbness from the waist down which caused him to be unable to walk because his legs and feet get so swollen that he could not feel his feet on the ground. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the nerves in July 2023. At that time, his symptoms were reported as numbness, pain and paresthesia both lower extremities. The Veteran's April 2023 complaints were not addressed in the examination. 

In the July 2023 VA hip examination, the Veteran reported recurrent hip pain. He reported difficulty with climbing, walking up and down the stairs, and squatting. There was left hip flexion to 85 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, abduction to 25 degrees, adduction to 15 degrees, external rotation to 30 degrees and internal rotation to 20 degrees. The examiner found that there was no ankylosis of the left hip and/or thigh. 

In November 2023, the Veteran reported that he was "still with back pain; can still ambulate sometimes i have to sit down,"  and "still with thigh and hip pains - they sting when i do the treadmills." He also reported "the ball of the foot is painful something wrong with the nerves."

Eligibility for assistance to purchase a vehicle and adaptive equipment is warranted when there is ankylosis of one or both hips, or for loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet. Here, the record shows that the Veteran is service-connected for tendonitis left quadriceps with hip strain (impairment and extension), left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy, left and right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy and degenerative arthritis left knee. Although the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in July 2023, the examination does not address the Veteran's complaints of numbness causing an inability to stand and/or walk at times or whether these reports are analogous to a functional loss or permanent loss of use of one or both feet during the times of a flare. 

As the VA examination reports are inadequate in addressing the claim, the Board finds that the AOJs failure to obtain another examination constitutes a pre-decisional error which requires a remand under the AMA. Accordingly, a remand is warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to determine the nature and extent of the Veteran's tendonitis left quadriceps with hip strain (impairment and extension), left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy, left and right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy and degenerative arthritis left knee. The examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's electronic claims file. 

After reviewing the evidence of record, the Veteran's lay statements, and the results of any testing performed at the examination, the examiner should opine whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone result in a functional loss of use of one or both feet such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair. The examiner should ask the Veteran to provide details regarding his episodes of loss of function to include the frequency and duration. The examiner should also address whether the Veteran is able to use his leg to drive to include having the ability to feel the brake pedal.

The examiner should specifically opine as to whether, during the flares of disability, effective function of the feet remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below elbow or knee with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. 

In so doing, the examiner should consider: (a) the Veteran's April 2023 report of numbness from the waist down which causes him not to be able to walk because his legs and feet get so swollen that he cannot feel his feet on the ground (b) although it is with difficulty, the Veteran reports climbing, walking up and down the stairs, and squatting, and (c) the November 2023 treatment record showing that the Veteran had pain but was still able to ambulate and his reports of pain when using the treadmill. 

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered. If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T.S. Willie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.