Citation Nr: A25030751
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240606-449028
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left ankle sprain is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence shows a current diagnosis of left ankle sprain.

2. Symptoms of the left ankle disability began during service and have been present since service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for a left ankle sprain disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, who is the Appellant, served on active duty from October 2003 to October 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision from the Regional Office (RO).  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The Board finds that the duties to notify and assist the appellant in this case have been rendered moot by the grant of service connection for a left ankle disability, which is a full grant of the benefits sought on appeal.

Service Connection for a Left Ankle Disability

The Veteran appeals for service connection for a left ankle disability.  The Veteran contends that he experienced a gradual onset of joint pain in the left ankle around 2007 to 2008 while deployed to Iraq due to carrying heavy ruck sacks, wearing armored vests, and lifting heavy equipment weighing 50 to 100 pounds while on during deployment.  The Veteran reports that symptoms of ankle pain have continued since service separation, coming and going over the years, and that he has seen a medical provider for left ankle pain, but has generally managed the condition with over-the-counter medications.  See September 2023 VA Examination Report.

Under the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Generally, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.

The evidence in this case shows a current diagnosis of left ankle sprain, as reflected in the July 2016 VA treatment record and September 2023VA Examination Report.  The current disability requirement is met.

After a review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in relative equipoise on the question of whether there was an onset of symptoms of a left ankle pain in service that continued after service separation, and were later diagnosed as left ankle sprain, that is, whether the current left ankle sprain was directly "incurred in" service.  The Veteran has provided credible lay reports of a gradual onset of symptoms of left ankle joint pain during service.  The May 2003 service enlistment Reports of Medical Examination and Medical History reflects that clinical evaluation of the lower extremities was normal and the Veteran reported being in good health, denying any problems or history of swollen or painful joints; bone, joint, other deformity; or arthritis, rheumatism, bursitis.  A review of the January 2008 post-deployment assessment reflects the Veteran's report of experiencing swollen, stiff, and painful joints during deployment and at the time of the post-deployment assessment.  While the June 2008 service separation Report of Medical Examination indicates that the lower extremities were normal on clinical evaluation, the corresponding separation Report of Medical History, if one was provided, is not available for review. 

Post-service records from July 2016 reflect the Veteran's lay reports of ongoing chronic left ankle pain, despite no recent injuries.  The Veteran reported that he may have sprained the ankle initially during high school, but he also sprained the ankle on other occasions since then.  The treating VA physician diagnosed left ankle strain in the past and presumptive lax tendons holding the joint in place, which maybe causing the chronic ache of the joint.  See July 2016 VA Treatment Records.     

A VA ankle examination and medical opinion was provided in September 2023.  The VA examiner diagnosed left ankle sprain.  The examiner noted that an x-ray of the left ankle also showed plantar and calcaneal spurs that are unrelated to the left ankle sprain.  The VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the left ankle sprain is related to active service.  The VA examiner reasoned that service treatment records are negative for complaints of bilateral ankle pain.  This factual assumption is partially inaccurate because, even though the service separation examination dated 2008 did not indicate any ankle complaints, a January 2008 post-deployment assessment reflects the Veteran's contemporaneous lay report of an onset of joint pain and swelling during deployment and that symptoms that had continued.  As this is contemporaneous service treatment record evidence of ankle symptoms, the examiner's factual assumption that service treatment records were negative for ankle pain is an inaccurate assumption that is contrary to the evidence.

Post-service records in 2016 indicate ongoing ankle pain from high school.  While the examiner notes that the post-service record indicated possible onset of left ankle strain in high school, the Veteran also reported that he had strained the ankle since high school.  As noted above, the 2003 service enlistment examination and report of medical history shows that the lower extremities were clinically normal upon examination, and the Veteran reported being in good health and denied any problems with swollen or painful joints, as well as bone, joint, or other deformity.  Therefore, the Veteran is presumed to have been in sound medical condition upon entrance into service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  

The service treatment records reflect that the January 2008 post-deployment assessment reflects the Veteran's contemporaneous lay report of an onset of joint pain and swelling during deployment and that symptoms had continued, which is consistent with the Veteran's post-service lay report of straining the left ankle on other occasions since any possible initial strain in high school.  While the 2008 service separation report indicates that the lower extremities were normal upon examination; the corresponding separation report of medical history is not available for review, so it cannot be said that there were no left ankle complaints at service separation in the absence of the separation report of medical history.  Moreover, the Veteran has made credible lay reports of a gradual onset of left ankle joint pain during service, and that the joint pain has continued intermittently since service.  As such, the VA examiner's assertion that 2008 separation report did not reflect any ankle complaints is based on an inaccurate factual history, and therefore, renders the opinion less probative.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that the Board may reject a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual basis but cannot reject the opinion solely because the history was from the veteran).

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that symptoms of left ankle joint pain began during service and continued since service separation, which symptoms were later diagnosed as left ankle sprain, thus tending to show direct service onset or incurrence.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).  The Board is granting the service connection claim based on evidence, including that pertinent to service, which establishes that symptoms of a left ankle disability (later diagnosed as left ankle sprain) began in service, so was "incurred in" service.  The grant of direct service connection renders all other theories of service connection moot.

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.