Citation Nr: A25030207
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240507-439207
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) to include unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder from November 1, 2022, to April 18, 2023, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

1. From November 1, 2022, to April 17, 2023, the Veteran's PTSD did not manifest with total social and occupational impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) to include unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder from November 1, 2022, to April 18, 2023. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 2005 to August 2011.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an October 2023 and April 2024 Supplemental Claim rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The October 2023 decision increased the Veteran's PTSD rating from 70 percent to 100 percent from April 18, 2023. The April 2024 decision continued this 100 percent rating. In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which he elected the Direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ Supplemental Claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another rating decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes the Veteran attempted to appeal rating decisions concerning the disability rating for his PTSD from January 2023, December 2022, and November 2022. A VA Form 10182 must be submitted within one year of the rating decision it wishes to appeal. 38 CFR § 20.203(b). Because these decisions were issued more than one year before the filing of the VA form 10182 in May 2024, these decisions were not timely appealed and will not be addressed. 

PTSD

The Veteran has requested an earlier effective date for his 100 percent disability rating for PTSD, effective April 18, 2023. The current effective date has been assigned based on the date of medical evidence showing an increase in disability. Therefore, the Board's review of the effective date will be based on the severity of the Veteran's disability throughout the claim's review period. 

The Veteran's psychiatric disorder is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. Psychiatric impairment is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

A 70 percent rating applies if the veteran has occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

A 100 percent rating applies if the veteran has total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a), an evaluation of a mental disorder must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The assigned rating should be based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. While the evaluation should consider the extent of social impairment, a rating should not be assigned based solely on social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b). The list of symptoms within the criteria is not exhaustive, so the impact of other symptoms particular to a veteran or a disorder on occupational and social functioning should also be considered. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

For increased rating claims, 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2) potentially allow for an increase in disability compensation of up to one year prior to the date of claim, if it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred. See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (referencing the "'one-year look-back period'"). The increase in disability must have occurred during the one-year look-back period for any earlier increased rating to be assigned. In this case, the Board has considered whether an increased rating is warranted from the one-year-look-back period prior to the Veteran's initial November 2022 filing, specifically from November 1, 2021.

In this case, the Board has reviewed all of the evidence of record but does not find that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms from November 1, 2022 to April 17, 2023 more closely approximated the criteria required for a higher 100 percent rating. 

From February to August 2022, the Veteran's VA treatment records showed consistent symptoms of depression, mood swings, irritability, and anxiety. However, the Veteran consistently denied suicidal ideation and showed motivation and desire to seek psychiatric treatment. He also showed appropriate judgment and insight, was properly attired, and complied with prescribed medication. 

In December 2022, the Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the severity of his PTSD. The Veteran appeared alert and oriented with appropriate attire and normal speech patterns. He reported good relationships with his wife and family, various hobbies, and consistent employment. The examiner found symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances in motivation or mood, difficulty establishing or maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran also reported passive suicidal ideation in August 2022, but denied any such ideation during this particular exam and reported safety measures in his home, such as securing firearms and having the VA crisis phone number. The Veteran also denied auditory and visual hallucinations and reported that he had been attending VA group therapy since March 2022. 

In a January 2023 Higher Level Review informal conference, the Veteran reported severe distress due to flashbacks. He reported suicidal ideation, nightmares, panic attacks, and severe depression. He described being "on guard all the time" and reported calling out of work due to his symptoms. 

After reviewing all of the evidence, the Board finds that while the Veteran demonstrated severe symptoms associated with PTSD, overall, the evidence is not reflective of total occupational and social impairment. The evidence shows that the Veteran suffered from depression, nightmares, flashbacks, sleep impairment, irritability, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty establishing or maintaining effective work and social relationships, and intermittent suicidal ideation. However, the evidence does not show that it has caused him total functional impairment.

While the Veteran was often depressed or anxious, and he reported having problems with anxiety, including having anxiety attacks several times a week, he always presented essentially normally, with normal speech, adequate judgment and insight, and with logical thought processes. His VA examinations and VA treatment records always found him to present and speak appropriately. He was always dressed appropriately, with grooming within normal limits. The Veteran was never found to ever have any psychosis, hallucinations, or delusions. He also was never found to have illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech, or to be unable to follow basic instructions or to effectively communicate.

While these symptoms are serious, they are consistent with the 70 percent rating already assigned, and are not of the severity that they indicate a higher rating is warranted. To assign a 100 percent rating would require a finding of extremely severe impairment in function and communication, such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, or grossly inappropriate behavior. The Veteran was not found to demonstrate any grossly inappropriate behavior, and he was able to care for himself and to perform all activities of daily living. The Veteran maintained family relationships and hobbies and regularly attended group therapy. While he did report calling out of work due to his symptoms, the Veteran was still able to maintain employment and there is no indication he was unable to work during this time period due to his symptoms. Overall, there is no indication he was ever unable to perform activities of daily living due to his PTSD

The Veteran reported frequent problems with irritability, social interactions, adapting to stressful circumstances, and isolation, and these symptoms affected his ability to hold employment or to socialize with other people. However, he was able to maintain a positive relationship with his wife, child, and extended family, and he reported that his family was a support to him. While he reported periodic passive suicidal ideation, the Veteran had safety measures in place and was not determined to be a harm to himself or others. The Board finds that this level of impairment in social interaction and behavior does not rise to the severity of 100 percent social impairment.

The Veteran was competent to report on his symptomatology as he observed it, and the Veteran's reported symptoms throughout his treatment records and examinations are consistent with the already assigned 70 percent evaluation. The Board has also considered the Veteran's symptoms which are not included in the rating criteria listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 and whether they constitute symptoms that would be comparable in type and degree (frequency, severity, and duration) to the criteria for a 100 percent rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). The Veteran has been noted to have sleep impairment, nightmares, and flashbacks. Although these symptoms are significant, the Board does not find that they are of a comparable severity to the very extreme symptomatology required for a rating of 100 percent. Simply, the severity, frequency, and duration of these symptoms did not result in total occupational and social impairment, as explained above.

In sum, the Board finds that a 100 percent rating is not warranted for any part of the appeal period. In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for a higher rating, and this doctrine does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Signature on the next page 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.