Citation Nr: A25030371
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-455123
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right leg radiculopathy as secondary to low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left leg radiculopathy as secondary to low back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1977 to September 1979.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for low back disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right leg radiculopathy as secondary to low back disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left leg radiculopathy as secondary to low back disability is remanded.

The Veteran's claims must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors, to include obtaining reasonably identified outstanding treatment records and obtaining an addendum VA medical opinion.

With regard to treatment records, at the time of the January 2024 rating decision, the Veteran reported private primary care treatment for her back disability.  See July 2023 VA Treatment Record.  No efforts, however, were made to obtain said records, a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  As such, remand is appropriate.

Although the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2024 related to her low back disability claim, the opinion is insufficient to render a decision, and the AOJ should have obtained an addendum opinion. The examiner found a nexus to service unlikely finding the Veteran's conditions more likely due to congenital spinal stenosis and aging.

The supporting rationale, however, appears to be on the incorrect factual premise that the Veteran did not have any treatment for low back pain from 1979 until 2023.  Indeed, the examiner primarily relied on the lack of records for this time period notwithstanding the Veteran's 2019 private treatment records showing acute lumbar myofascial strain and a 2019 pelvic x-ray showing mild to moderate degenerative change in the lower lumbar spine.  These 2019 private treatment records are not mentioned at all in the examination report and given the timing of the receipt of these private records, which was just before the January 2024 examination, it seems the VA examiner likely did not have the opportunity to consider them.  At a minimum, as the January 2024 opinion appears based on inaccurate facts, an addendum opinion should have been obtained to clarify this opinion with consideration of the accurate facts.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Accordingly, a remand is warranted to obtain additional VA medical opinion, and correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

As the Veteran's claims for service connection for right and left leg radiculopathy as secondary to low back disability are intertwined with the claim for service connection for low back disability, remand is warranted on this basis as well.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).

While the Board is remanding for further development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After securing any necessary authorization, obtain any private treatment records as the Veteran may identify relevant to her claims, specifically including any treatment records for low back/ radiculopathy disability from her private primary care physician as noted in her July 2023 VA treatment records.  If the Veteran provides a signed authorization form, make two requests for the authorized records unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

2. After outstanding records are obtained to the extent possible, ask an appropriate examiner to review the Veteran's file.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should identify any back disability the Veteran has experienced at any time during the claims period, even if resolved.

-	For any congenital back disability identified, the examiner should opine whether the disability first became evident during service or was aggravated (i.e., permanently worsened beyond the normal progression of that disease) during service.

-	For any disability that is not opined as congenital, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability had an onset in service, within a year of service, or is otherwise attributable to service, to include the Veteran's in-service responsibilities during service.

The examiner should consider all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including the Veteran's reports regarding in-service activities and symptoms.

If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a rationale for doing so (e.g., whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject her contentions).

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed.

(Continued on the next page)

?

3. After the above development, and any other development deemed necessary, readjudicate the claims, to include the inextricably intertwined issues.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Purcell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.