Citation Nr: A25030817
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240505-439235
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 20 percent for left chest wall muscle/tendon injury/pain, previously rated as left pectoral muscle tear (muscle group (MG) XXI), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran is a member of the Florida Army National Guard, with periods of active federal service from January 2016 to March 2017 and November 2021 to November 2022, as well as periods of active and inactive duty training (ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA). This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023 (headaches) and January 2024 (chest muscle pain) rating decisions by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 decision as to the claim for headaches and the January 2024 decision as to the claim for chest muscle pain. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Remand is permitted only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, or for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Increased Rating - Left Pectoral Muscle Condition 

At a November 2022 VA examination, the Veteran was noted to be right-handed. A diagnosis of a surgically repaired left pectoral muscle tear was made. The Veteran tore the muscle during a deployment to Saudi Arabia in February 2022, and underwent surgery in March 2022, followed by six months of physical therapy.  He complained of weakness in rhe left pectoral muscle. The examiner indicated there was no injury to the muscles of the shoulder girdle and arm. There was injury to MG XXI, identified as the thoracic MG, muscles of respiration. Visible or measurable atrophy of the muscle was noted; the left was 1cm smaller than the normal side. Consistent weakness and fatigue or pain of MG XXI were noted as cardinal signs of the injury.  Strength of MG XXI was not measured, but there was 4/5 weakness of MG III, for left shoulder abduction.  Weakness and limitation of the ability to lift were the identified functional limitations; the Veteran was still on military medical leave.  

At a November 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had torn the left pectoral muscle when bench pressing a heavy weight.  His repair surgery was "not...very successful" as he now has decreased function and significant pain.  He reported pain in the shoulder, deltoid, and biceps, and there was pain lifting his arm above the head or abduct. Although he examiner noted the diagnosis of MG XXI injury, he disagreed, and indicated the injury was of MG II, the muscles of the shoulder girdle; no injury of MG XXI was listed. Impaired muscle tone and loss of substance was seen. Consistent, severe loss of power, weakness, and fatigue and/or pain on the left were noted. There was no muscle atrophy, but only 4/5 muscle strength in left shoulder abduction (MG III) was found.  Pain severely limited motion of the left shoulder, and he "struggles" to abduct or rotate the left shoulder internally or externally.

The disability is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 5321, for injuries to MG XXI. The highest available schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 5321 is 20 percent for severe or moderately severe muscle injuries.

The rating criteria for injury to MG II, the extrinsic muscles of the shoulder girdle, to include the pectoralis major II and pectoralis minor muscles, is found in Diagnostic Code 5302, wherein, for the nondominant side, a 20 percent evaluation is assigned for moderate to moderately severe muscle injury, and 30 percent, the highest schedular rating, is assigned to severe muscle injury. This MG controls depression of the arm and rotation of the scapula; with MG III they help swing the arm forward and backward.

Finally, MG III under Code 5303 for the intrinsic muscles of the shoulder girdle, to include the pectoralis major I, responsible for elevation and abduction of the arm to shoulder level and for assisting with swinging the arm forward and backward, a 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate or moderately sever impairment.  A severe impairment is rated 30 percent disabling.

A review of the service treatment records (STRs), medical treatment records, and the VA examinations indicate the Veteran's left pectoral injury affected the function of his left shoulder and arm movement, which are not addressed under the currently assigned Diagnostic Code 5321. 

The AOJ committed a duty to assist error by not reconciling the clear discrepancies between the two VA examinations.  Further, there is a failure of the regulatory duty to address all manifestations of the service-connected injury. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261 (1994).

 Thus, a clarifying VA examination is required to clearly identify the muscle group or groups affected, determine the severity of impairment for the muscle group(s) affected, address inconsistencies between the November 2022 and November 2023 VA examinations, as well as resolve any conflicting diagnoses between the treatment records and the VA examinations. 

Service Connection - Headache

The Veteran asserts his headache condition began while on deployment from 2021 to 2022. 

The available STRs provide some references to headaches. In June 2020, the Veteran reported he was not bothered at all by headaches. In a dental related STR from July 2020, the Veteran reported frequent headaches. The Board notes that at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision, the record lacked STRs or any other medical record for the period between April 2021 and April 2023, with the exception of a Veteran-submitted STR relating to his chest injury and a single VA treatment record relating to mental health. Failure to obtain the STRs and relevant medical records is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

In the April 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with tension headaches. The Veteran reported frequent headaches that are mild in the morning which worsened throughout the day. The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion as to whether the Veteran's headache condition was related to conceded toxic exposure risk activities; however, the examiner failed to provide an opinion on a direct basis, or on a secondary basis to a service connected disability. 

The Board finds the April 2023 VA examination inadequate as the examiner failed to provide medical opinions that address all raised theories of entitlement to service connection. Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (when determining service connection, all theories of entitlement must be considered if raised by the evidence of record). Failure to provide an adequate VA examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Accordingly, a remand is required to obtain outstanding treatment records, including STRs, and to provide the Veteran with a VA examination and medical opinion addressing direct service connection and service connection on a secondary basis to a service-connected disability.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate steps to secure complete service treatment records for the Veteran, to include requesting he supply any records in his possession and contacting the custodian of the Florida National Guard records.

All efforts must be documented; if records are determined to be unavailable, the Veteran must be notified.  Unavailability must be certified in writing.

2. Associate with the claims file complete VA treatment records for the period prior to April 2023.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current severity of the service-connected left chest muscle injury, including the residuals thereof. The claims file must be reviewed in conjunction with the VA examination. 

The examiner must clearly specify all involved MGs and identify their functional impacts, including limitations on range of motion for the left shoulder, neck, chest, as well as any impact on breathing/respiration. 

A full and complete rationale must be provided for all opinions presented.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for headache conditions. The claims file must be reviewed in conjunction with the VA examination.

The examiner must identify any current headache disability. For each, the examiner must opine as to whether such is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by service, or any service-connected disability. 

The Veteran's lay statements regarding onset and symptoms must be addressed. A full and complete rationale must be provided for all opinions presented.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Lyons

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.