Citation Nr: A25030369
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-434549
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for acne is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a bladder disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Acne is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service. 

2. A bladder disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service. 

3. A headache disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and migraines did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from active duty.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for acne have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1131, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for service connection for a bladder disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1131, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for service connection for a headache disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1112, 1131, 1137, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2021 to February 2021. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in December 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In April 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for acne.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bladder disorder.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Where a veteran served for at least 90 days during a period of war or after December 31, 1946, and manifests certain chronic diseases, such as organic diseases of the nervous system, which includes migraine headaches, to a degree of 10 percent within one year, from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Veteran contends he has acne, a bladder and headache disorder that are directly related to his military service. Specifically, he asserts that his acne was the result of the soap he was required to use during service. In the alternative that his acne was the result of the stress and anxiety that he experienced during his period of active duty. Additionally, the Veteran asserts that his bladder disorder is the result of urinary retention during boot camp and that his headache disorder is the result of loud banging on lockers and screaming that occurred during active-duty service. 

However, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to acne, a bladder or headache disorder and he was not diagnosed with migraine headaches within his first post-service year.

The Board also considered the Veteran's assertions as to onset and etiology of his acne, bladder, and headache disorders; however, as a lay person, he does not have the requisite training and experience necessary to address such complex medical matters. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis). In this regard, the diagnosis and etiology of acne, a bladder or headache disorder involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and, thus, may not be competently addressed by lay statements. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (explaining that while the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions).

Accordingly, the Veteran's opinions as to the onset and etiology of his acne, bladder and headache disorder are not competent evidence and, consequently, are afforded no probative weight.

Therefore, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that acne, bladder and headache disorder are not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service and he was not diagnosed with migraine headaches within his first post-service year. Thus, service connection for such disorders is not warranted.

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim for service connection for acne, a bladder and headache disorder. As such, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and his claim must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder.

The Veteran claims that he has a current acquired psychiatric disorder, as a result of his in-service complaints, treatment, and diagnoses of psychiatric disorders to include anxiety and depression. Furthermore, the Veteran claims that he has a current diagnosis of tinnitus that is the result of excessive noise exposure, to include the banging of lockers and screaming during service. Additionally, the Veteran contends that his current gastrointestinal disorder had its onset during service, to include weight loss, diarrhea, vomiting and stomach pain. 

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect that, in January 2021 he was seen for acute stress, and it was noted that the Veteran was experiencing problems of adjustment to lifecycle.  An additional January 2021 STR reflects that he was assigned to medical hold due to possible panic attacks and stress. Additionally, the Veteran's separation examination, conducted in February 2021, reflects that he was diagnosed with adjustment disorder, with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, with a positive depression screen. It was noted that the Veteran's symptomatology had its onset in-service. Furthermore, the records reflect that the Veteran reported that he visited the emergency room four times since training to address his anxiety symptoms. Thus, it was determined that it was best to separate the Veteran from service.  

Additionally, a January 2021 STR reflects that the Veteran reported to the clinic for a follow-up for nausea. He stated that for the past week he had been experiencing diarrhea, vomiting, and stomach pain, which he stated he believed was the result of his stress due to service. A February 2021, STR reflects that the Veteran endorsed poor appetite which resulted in weight loss of 7-10 pounds. 

Based on the foregoing, in October 2023, the AOJ scheduled the Veteran for VA examinations for the aforementioned contentions in November 2023; however, he failed to report to the examinations scheduled in connection with his claim. Furthermore, a December 2023, attempt to contact the Veteran to reschedule his examination noted that his phone number on file was no longer in service. In this regard, the Board notes that in his April 2024, Notice of Disagreement he reported that he was experiencing homelessness at the time he was scheduled for his examinations and that he was continuing to experience homelessness. In September 2024, the Board granted his motion to advance the appeal on the Board's docket as a result. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's reports of homelessness were received subsequent to the rating decision on appeal, and thus such cannot support a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. However, such evidence does support the Veteran's assertion that he was experiencing homelessness. 

Therefore, as the evidence supports the finding that the Veteran was experiencing homelessness at the time his VA examinations were scheduled, the Board finds that it is unclear whether the Veteran was properly notified of the scheduled examination. See Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (reversing Kyhn v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 335 (2010) which involved the presumption of regularity in notification of VA examinations.) Additionally, in light of the Veteran's argument, the Board finds that the Veteran has presented good cause for his failure to attend the scheduled VA examinations.

Thus, to ensure that the Veteran is afforded full due process, the Board finds that he should be provided with a final opportunity to report to a new VA examination. If he fails to appear for it, a copy of the notification letter advising him of the time, date, and location of the scheduled examination must be included in the file.

The Veteran is advised that any findings reported during the VA examination will be critical to his claim, and VA's duty to assist is not a one-way street. He also has an obligation to cooperate with VA in ensuring that duty is satisfied. See Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171 (2005); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Further, any failure to report for any scheduled examination without good cause may result in an adverse determination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Consequently, a remand is necessary to cure the aforementioned pre-decisional errors by obtaining an examination addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, tinnitus, and gastrointestinal disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his acquired psychiatric disorder. The record should be provided to the examiner. Thereafter, the examiner should address the following inquiries:

(A) Identify all current acquired psychiatric disorders, to include anxiety disorder and depressive disorder.

(B) For each diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that such had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service, from January to February 2021, to include the January 2021 STR reflecting treatment for acute stress, with a diagnosis of possible anxiety, the January 2021, STR reflecting that he was assigned to medical hold due to possible panic attacks and stress, the February 2021, STR reflecting that he was diagnosed with adjustment disorder, with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, with a positive depression screen. 

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's report that his psychiatric symptomatology had its onset in service and that he has continued to experience psychiatric symptomatology since such time. 

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

Afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his tinnitus. The record should be provided to the examiner. Thereafter, the examiner should address the following inquiries:

Following a review of the record, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that such had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service, from January to February 2021, as a basic enlisted airman, to include his reports of noise exposure from banging of lockers and screaming.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

3. Afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the current nature and etiology of his claimed gastrointestinal disorder. The record must be made available for review in connection with the examination, and all indicated tests and studies should be undertaken. Thereafter, the examiner should address the below inquiries:

(A) Identify all current gastrointestinal disorders.

(B) For each current gastrointestinal disorder found to be present, offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that such disorder, had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, his military service, from January to February 2021, to include his January 2021 STR, reflecting that he reported to the clinic for a follow-up for nausea, at which time he reported  experiencing diarrhea, vomiting, and stomach pain for the past week, and his February 2021, STR reflecting that he endorsed poor appetite which resulted in weight loss of 7-10 pounds.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Sharrocks-Marchione

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.