Citation Nr: A25030430
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241122-496804
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent rating for right shoulder limitation of motion is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent rating for left shoulder limitation of motion is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1969 to May 1970.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2024 AOJ decision. In November 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior June 2024 decision. 

In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. Because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent rating for right shoulder limitation of motion is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 20 percent rating for left shoulder limitation of motion is remanded.

These issues are remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the decision on appeal. The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. VA's duty to assist includes securing an adequate medical examination and/or opinion when necessary to decide a claim. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). For increased rating claims, an adequate examination report is one that contains all findings necessary to rate the disability. 

Here, the examination reports of record are not adequate to decide the claim because they contain inadequate information and/or conflicting information.  

The Veteran first underwent a VA shoulder examination in July 2017. That examiner stated they were unable to say whether pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time or during flares without resort to mere speculation. The only justification advanced was that the Veteran's functioning may vary with activity and weather conditions. The examination report does not otherwise document the Veteran's testimony regarding functional impairment with repetitive use over time and during flares. In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that examiners must offer opinions with respect to additional limitation of motion during flareups based on estimates derived from information procured from relevant sources, including a veteran's lay statements. The Court noted that an examiner must do all that reasonably can be done in order to become informed before concluding that a requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation. Id. at 35 (citing Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382 (2010)). The Court further noted that, where it is unclear from the record whether the examiner obtained sufficient information before concluding an opinion could not be provided without speculation, the Board must remand for further development. Id. at 35-36. Here, the examiner appears to have failed to obtain sufficient information prior to forming their opinion, and their opinion is not adequate. 

The Veteran underwent a VA shoulder and arm conditions examination on March 21, 2024, but that report contains inadequate and conflicting findings. The examiner commented that the Veteran was largely functioning at the wheelchair level and walking short distances with a walker. The examiner relayed the Veteran had difficulty with all activities of daily living because he relied on his arms for transfers and to walk short distances with a walker. On initial active range of motion testing of both shoulders, the Veteran was able to flex to 60 degrees and abduct to 55 degrees. Pain was noted in both ranges of motion and passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion. Pain was also noted in passive range of motion, in weight-bearing, and on rest. The examiner commented that all lifting was extremely difficult. The examiner then reported the Veteran was unable to perform repetitive use testing with 3 repetitions. The examiner explained that was because the Veteran had to refrain from overusing his shoulders at all because he had limited use, and he had to conserve it to retain his ability to transfer. Then, in seeming contradiction to the prior finding, the examiner stated the Veteran did not have significantly limited functional ability of the shoulders with repetitive use over time. The examiner reported the Veteran relied on his arms, hands, and shoulders to transfer, stand, walk, do bed mobility, and dress, and all those functions were impaired by his poor shoulder movement, pain, and weakness. The examiner then commented that the current functioning capability of both arms was so limited that a well-healed below elbow amputation bilaterally with appropriate prosthetic fitting would cause him to have higher functioning than he currently had. It is unclear from the totality of the examiner's findings how the Veteran would be better served with a prosthesis below the elbow because that would reasonably be expected to impair the finer hand movements he would require for the activities such as transfers. Further, it is unclear from the examiner's statements how the shoulder disability would approximate loss of use of the hands/arm below the elbow. Prior to the decision on appeal the AOJ should have sought clarification as to the additional degree of impairment with repetitive use over time, and whether the bilateral shoulder disability more nearly approximated amputation below the elbow. Similarly, the examiner should have elaborated on whether the Veteran's limitation of function of the shoulders approximated the functional equivalent of ankylosis. See Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 12-13 (2021).

Remand is required to obtain a new VA examination to correct these duty to assist errors.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected bilateral shoulder disabilities. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(a)	The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

(b)	The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(c)	The examiner is also asked to specifically address whether the effect of pain or other factors, to include during flare-ups and repetitive use over time, results in limitation of motion that is the functional equivalent of ankylosis.

(d)	The examiner is asked to review the findings of the March 2024 examiner and clarify whether the Veteran's shoulder disabilities are, or were at any point during the claim period, so severe that well-healed below elbow amputations with appropriate prosthetic fitting would create higher functioning than he currently possesses. If the examiner disagrees with the conclusions of the March 2024 examiner, an explanation as to why the examiner disagrees with those conclusions must be provided. 

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.