Citation Nr: A25030209
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-442541
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disorder, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a temporary total evaluation following a surgical procedure is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active-duty service from March to November 1996.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August and November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disorder, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder, including as secondary to another service-connected disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to a temporary total evaluation following a surgical procedure is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders. He also seeks the assignment of a temporary total evaluation following hip surgery in September 2022. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the claims must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 

At issue for the service connection claims are the opinions provided by the VA examiners in August 2023, September 2023, and October 2023. For the reasons set for the below, the Board finds that the AOJ's reliance on these examinations and opinions is pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Regarding the hip disorders, the August 2023 examiner concluded that they were less likely than not related to his knee disabilities while at the same time concluding that the knee disabilities impact the hips without adequate additional detail as to the degree. Given the contradictory nature of this opinion and the lack of explanation by the examiner, the Board finds that the AOJ failed in its duty to the Veteran by not seeking clarification.

For the Veteran's diabetes and hypertension claims, part of the theory of entitlement is that the Veteran's knee disabilities have contributed to obesity which has served as an intermediate step between diabetes and hypertension, and the service-connected knee disabilities. The opinions provided by the examiner, who performed both examinations, are lacking sufficient explanation and rationale. They are wholly inadequate for the purposes of adjudicating the Veteran's claims and the failure of the AOJ to obtain proper examination opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Finally, as the Veteran's claim seeking a temporary total examination is inextricably intertwined with his claims seeking service connection for hip disorders, the Board finds that it must be remanded alongside the other claims. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for new examinations, with an appropriate clinician, to determine the nature, extent, onset, and etiology of his diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders. 

The complete claims file should be made available to the examiner(s).  The examiner(s) should provide opinions as to whether it is at least as likely as not that his diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders are etiologically related to the Veteran's period of service, or to another diagnosed disorder, including via any prescribed medications.  

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

The examiner(s) is reminded that the secondary service connection opinions must discuss both causation and aggravation separately.

The examiner(s) is also asked to provide opinions regarding the Veteran's claimed diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders and their potential relationship with his service-connected disorders, to include consideration of obesity as an intermediate step between them. The examiner(s) is asked to respond to:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's other service-connected disabilities, or a combination of them caused the Veteran to become obese.

(b) If so, was the Veteran's obesity as a result of either or a combination of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders?

(c) Would the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II, hypertension, and right and left hip disorders, not have occurred but for obesity caused by either or a combination of his service-connected disabilities.

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so.

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Hernan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.