Citation Nr: A25030600
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231114-392680
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Marine Corps from July 2018 to July 2022.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR and requested review of a July 2023 decision. In November 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior July 2023 rating decision.  

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for a back disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his current back disability is due to in-service physical activity and training, including martial arts training and frequent hiking with heavy weights. He also reported that he had a back strain in service and fell on his back a couple of times. See his April 2023 claim, and his reported history at the June 2023 VA examination.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2023 rating decision. The AOJ obtained a VA examination of the back in June 2023, but the examiner did not provide a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's lumbar strain had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (When VA provides an examination, it must be adequate to evaluate the Veteran's condition).

2. Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

3. Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his current left and right knee disabilities are due to strenuous physical activity and wear and tear in service. He reported that during service, he had physical training, including frequent hiking with heavy weights, and running for ten miles or more while wearing boots, which put quite a bit of strain on his knees. See his April 2023 claim, and his reported history at the June 2023 VA examination. At the VA examination, he reported that his left knee pain began in 2022. 

Service treatment records reflect that the Veteran was treated for a right knee injury in August 2021, after he dropped an ammunition can on his knee during physical training. On examination, there was edema and effusion, pain, and an abrasion. The diagnostic assessment was right knee pain.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right knee disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2023 rating decision. The AOJ obtained a VA examination of the left knee in June 2023, but the examiner did not examine the right knee, or provide a medical opinion regarding whether any current left or right knee disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.  Barr, supra.

4. Service connection for a left wrist disability is remanded.

5. Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his current left and right wrist disabilities are due to pain in his wrists in service, that the pain began when he got a new inventory position that required him to use his wrists often, and that his bilateral wrist pain has continued and worsened since then. See his April 2023 claim, and his reported history at the June 2023 VA examination.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right wrist disabilities are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2023 rating decision. The AOJ obtained a VA examination of the wrists in June 2023, but the examiner did not provide a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's left or right wrist disability had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service.  Barr, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's back and wrist disabilities. No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary, unless the examiner determines otherwise.  Following review of the claims file the examiner should address the following:

(a)	For diagnosed lumbar strain (see June 2023 VA back examination), please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that such disorder had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include as a result of a cumulative impact injury from physical training (to include martial arts) and hiking with heavy weights therein. In addressing this question, please assume as true the Veteran's reports that he had a back strain in service and fell on his back a couple of times. Provide a discussion of whether a nexus between lumbar strain and service is "medically plausible" based on the same. Otherwise, the opinion will be rendered inadequate.

(b)	For diagnosed bilateral wrist strain (see June 2023 VA wrist examination, please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that such disorder had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, including reported wrist strains from writing and conducting inventory. In addressing this question, please assume as true the Veteran's reports that his bilateral wrist pain began when he got a new inventory position that required him to use his wrists often (causing him to write "almost 24/7"), and that his bilateral wrist pain has continued and worsened since that time. Provide a discussion of whether a nexus between a left and/or right wrist disability and service is "medically plausible" based on the same. Otherwise, the opinion will be rendered inadequate.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency.  If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional with the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the claimed left and right knee disabilities. The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's knee condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

For diagnosed left knee strain (see June 2023 VA knee examination), and any current right knee disability or right knee pain with functional impairment, please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that such disorder/pain with functional impairment had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include as a result of a cumulative impact injury from strenuous physical activity and wear and tear, frequent hiking with heavy weights and running for ten miles or more while wearing boots, and/or a right knee injury in August 2021.  In addressing this question, please assume as true the Veteran's reports that running long distances in boots put quite a bit of strain on his knees, and that his left knee pain began in 2022.  Provide a discussion of whether a nexus between a left and/or right knee disability and service is "medically plausible" based on the same. Otherwise, the opinion will be rendered inadequate.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions, citing to specific evidence of record and medical principles, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency.  If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional with the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.L. Wasser, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.