Citation Nr: A25030130
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240129-412822
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 60 percent disability rating from June 29, 2022, to February 20, 2023, for coronary artery disease is granted.

Entitlement to an initial 100 percent disability rating from February 21, 2023, forward, for coronary artery disease is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From June 29, 2022, to February 20, 2023, the Veteran's coronary artery disease manifested as a workload of 3.1-5.0 METs that results in heart failure symptoms.

2. From February 21, 2023, forward, the Veteran's coronary artery disease manifested as a workload of 3.0 METs or less that results in heart failure symptoms.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial 60 percent disability rating from June 29, 2022, to February 20, 2023, for coronary artery disease have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.21, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7005.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial 100 percent disability rating from February 21, 2023, forward, for coronary artery disease have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.21, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7005.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1973 to September 1979.  The Veteran also had a period of prior service in the United States Air Force Reserve.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2022 Rating Decision that denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran also submitted a September 2023 HLR and requested review of a May 2023 Rating Decision that granted service connection for coronary artery disease and assigned a 30 percent disability rating, effective June 29, 2022; granted service connection for GERD and assigned a noncompensable disability rating, effective June 29, 2022; and denied service connection for persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes.  In November 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2022 and May 2023 decisions. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 and May 2023 decisions, with respect to the claims decided therein.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after these AOJ decisions cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's attorney, in an attached written statement to the Veteran's January 2024 VA Form 10182, indicated that the Veteran wished to appeal all of the issues listed in the November 2023 Rating Decision.  However, the January 2024 VA Form 10182 does not include the issue of entitlement to an increased disability rating for service-connected hypertension, which was addressed in the November 2023 Rating Decision.  According to the AMA regulations, only the issues listed on VA Form 10182 are placed in appellate status before the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  As the attorney did not identify the issue of an increased disability rating for service-connection for hypertension on the January 2024 VA Form 10182, the issue is not on appeal.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for an increased disability rating for coronary artery disease, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, include persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, entitlement to an increased rating for GERD, and entitlement to a TDIU rating, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim; symptoms described; and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  In light of the Court's decision in Clemons and the psychiatric symptoms of record, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder.

During the course of the appeal, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating was raised by the record.  Of note, the Veteran's VA treatment records indicate that he has not been employed since 2017 and his service-connected coronary artery disease causes significant functional limitations.  The Veteran's attorney also maintains that a TDIU rating is warranted.  See February 2024 Memorandum of Law.  Thus, the Board has jurisdiction over the issue of a TDIU rating.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Increased Disability Ratings

VA has adopted a Schedule for Rating Disabilities to evaluate service-connected disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.321; see generally, 38 C.F.R., Part IV.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  The percentage ratings in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities represent, as far as practicably can be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from service-connected disabilities in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Diagnostic codes in the rating schedule identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.  If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  Id.  All reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Because the level of disability may have varied over the course of the claim, the rating may be "staged" higher or lower for segments of time during the period under review in accordance with such variations, to the extent the evidence shows distinct time periods where the service-connected disability has exhibited signs or symptoms that would warrant different ratings under the rating criteria.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  In initial-rating cases, where the appeal stems from a granted claim of service connection with respect to the initial evaluation assigned, VA assesses the level of disability from the effective date of service connection.  See Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126.  

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, which includes but is not limited to equipoise, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

1. Entitlement to an initial 60 percent disability rating from June 29, 2022, to February 20, 2023, for coronary artery disease is granted.

2. Entitlement to an initial 100 percent disability rating from February 21, 2023, forward, for coronary artery disease is granted.

A May 2023 Rating Decision granted service connection for coronary artery disease and assigned an initial 30 percent disability rating, effective June 29, 2022-the date the Veteran filed his claim for service connection.  The Veteran maintains that the severity of his disability warrants a higher rating.  In particular, the Veteran's attorney provided that the Veteran experienced heart failure symptoms at a lower level of exertion as documented in private treatment records than what was estimated during the January 2023 VA examination and as such, a higher disability rating based on the rating criteria is warranted.  See February 2024 Memorandum of Law.  

The Veteran's coronary artery disease has been rated under Diagnostic Code 7005.  The General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart is utilized to evaluate arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease) under Diagnostic Code 7005.  A 60 percent disability rating is warranted where a workload of 3.1-5.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms.  A 100 percent disability rating is warranted where a workload of 3.0 METs or less results in heart failure symptoms.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104.

One MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (2).  When the level of METs at which breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in those symptoms may be used.  Id.

For purposes of the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart, heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (3).

A February 2022 exercise stress echocardiogram completed a private medical provider indicates that the Veteran had a hypertensive response to exercise and showed below average functional capacity at 4.6 METs.

To evaluate the Veteran's coronary artery disease, he was afforded a January 2023 VA Heart Conditions (Including Ischemic and Non-Ischemic Heart Disease, Arrhythmias, Valvular Disease and Cardiac Surgery) Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The examination report indicates that the Veteran has diagnoses of coronary artery disease, hyperlipidemia, and junctional rhythm.  Regarding current symptoms, the Veteran advised of shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion, palpitations, fatigue, low endurance, decreased physical activity, and frequent rest breaks.  Continuous medication is required for control of the Veteran's heart condition.  The Veteran has not had a myocardial infarction.  His accelerated junctional rhythm does not require treatment.  

The January 2023 VA examination report states that the Veteran does not have a heart valve condition.  He has not had any infectious cardiac conditions, pericardial adhesions, non-surgical or surgical procedures for a heart condition, or any hospitalizations for the treatment of a heart condition.  On physical examination, the Veteran had a heart rate of 70 beats per minute and his blood pressure was 138/86.  Concerning diagnostic testing, the examination report provides that the Veteran has evidence of cardiac hypertrophy.  There is no evidence of cardiac dilatation.  A January 2023 echocardiogram showed accelerated junctional rhythm and T-wave abnormality.

The January 2023 VA examination report demonstrates that an interview-based METs test was conducted as exercise stress testing is not required as part of the Veteran's current treatment plan and this test is not without significant risk.  The interview-based METs test showed that the Veteran has breathlessness and fatigue at greater than 5 METs, but less than 7 METs, which is consistent with activities such as walking one flight of stairs, golfing without a cart, mowing lawn, and heavy yard work.  The METs level is due solely to the Veteran's heart condition per the examination report.  

The January 2023 VA examination report concludes that the Veteran's heart condition impacts his ability to work as he has difficulty with walking long periods, ascending and descending stairs, squatting, and kneeling and lifting heavy objects.  The Veteran has low endurance and is easy fatigued, which negatively impacts his quality of life and interferes with his normal activities, interaction with co-workers, and decreases productivity and efficiency.

Private treatment records from February 2023 provide that it was recommended that the Veteran undergo a Lexiscan Myoview stress test.  On February 21, 2023, the Veteran was stressed for a total of two minutes using the Lexiscan protocol.  He had a resting heart rate of 54 beats per minute and blood pressure of 145/71.  The Veteran's maximal heart rate was 69 beats per minute, which represents 45.39 percent of predicted target heart rate and a peak blood pressure of 145/78.  The Veteran's exercise capacity was measured as 1 METs.

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the evidence demonstrates that he is entitled to an initial 60 percent disability rating from June 29, 2022, to February 20, 2023.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.  The February 2022 echocardiogram demonstrates that the Veteran had a below average functional capacity at 4.6 METs, which satisfies the criteria of a 60 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7005.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104.  While the exercise stress echocardiogram was not performed during the period on appeal, it was very near in time to the Veteran's June 29, 2022, claim for service connection.  Further, the Board finds that the February 2022 exercise stress tests is more reliable in providing an accurate measure of the Veteran's cardiac workload capacity over the January 2023 interview-based METs test because it provides objective findings which can be analyzed, whereas the interview-based METs test is subjective as it is based on the Veteran's perception and opinion.  At no point during this period did the Veteran have a workload of 3.0 METs or less resulting in heart failure symptoms, thus necessitating a 100 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7005.  Id.

The record shows an ascertainable increase in disability for the Veteran's coronary artery disease on February 21, 2023, as he had a workload of 1 METs on that date.  See Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015) (holding that the effective date for an increased rating "is predicated on when the increase in the level of [disability] can be ascertained," and is governed by § 5110 of the statute and § 3.400 of the regulations, not the rating schedule, unless otherwise specifically noted).  As such, the persuasive evidence of record shows that the severity of the Veteran's coronary artery disease warrants a 100 percent disability rating from February 21, 2023, forward.  The evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the claimant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran maintains that his acquired psychiatric disorder is related to his active service.  In particular, a written statement from the Veteran's spouse advised that he attributes a depressive episode that he experienced in 2020, in part, to his service-connected tinnitus.  See December 2022 VA Form 21-10210, Lay/Witness Statement.

?

To determine the cause of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, he was afforded a January 2023 VA Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire and January 2023 VA medical opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  

The January 2023 VA examination report demonstrates that the Veteran has diagnoses of depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder.  The examination report states that the Veteran reported being depressed with decreased energy and motivation at least half the time for the past two years.  The Veteran has episodes of major depression and suicidal thoughts particularly around holidays, birthdays, and the anniversaries of the death of his mother and stepson. 

The corresponding January 2023 VA medical opinion concludes that the Veteran's depression is less likely than not the result of his service-connected tinnitus.  The medical opinion provides that the Veteran's treatment records indicated that his first treatment for depression occurred in 2020, which was attributed to grief and stress.  The medical opinion states that the Veteran was vague about the timing of the onset of his depressive symptoms, but reported significant depression episodes from 2020 through the present, mostly around holidays, death anniversaries, and birthdays.  The Veteran provided that when he dwells on his tinnitus, he becomes "wound up, anxious" but he did not associate tinnitus with symptoms of depression.

The Board finds that the January 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate and therefore a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  The examiner did not offer an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus aggravated his persistent depressive disorder beyond its natural progression.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2012) (medical opinions addressing secondary service connection must discuss both causation and aggravation).  An adequate opinions must be obtained on remand.

?

Further, private treatment records from March 2020 indicate that the Veteran reported witnessing combat or exposure to a war zone.  

The Veteran's service personnel records demonstrate that he had a Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of Security Specialist.  Additionally, several of the Veteran's TSGT, SSGT and SGT Performance Reports indicate that his duties required him to be in close proximity to aircraft and missiles.  He was assigned to the 89th Missile Security Squadron.  While stationed at Kadena Air Base in Okinawa, Japan, he was responsible for the security of the "Alert Aircraft."  It was noted that he displayed a high degree of proficiency "as roadblock guard and hazardous operations and sweep patrol during missile launches."  Further, while stationed in California, the Veteran participated in helicopter patrol during launch activities and was a member of the launch disaster control team.  

Thus, failure to obtain a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is related to his active service on a direct basis constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006) (reflecting that VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service, but the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim).  Such an opinion must be obtained on remand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran maintains that his obstructive sleep apnea is related to his active service as he experienced sleep apnea symptoms during his active service.  See June 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  

The Veteran has not been afforded a medical examination or medical opinion to determine the etiology of his obstructive sleep apnea.  However, as noted above the Veteran's service personnel records demonstrate that he had a Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of Security Specialist.  Additionally, several of the Veteran's TSGT, SSGT and SGT Performance Reports indicate that his duties required him to be in close proximity to aircraft and missile.  He was assigned to the 89th Missile Security Squadron.  He was chosen for a mobility exercise in Korea during service between November 1976 and November 1977.  He also served at Kadena Air Base in Okinawa, Japan, where he was responsible for the security of the "Alert Aircraft."  While stationed at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, the Veteran was a member of the launch disaster control team and performed duty as a primary and secondary launch control team member.  The Veteran's service treatment records further show that he had service in the Philippines.  Therefore, the Veteran was potentially exposed to rocket/missile propellant, jet fuels, and exhaust from aircraft.  As such, there is evidence that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) related to exposure to rocket/missile propellant, jet fuels, and exhaust from aircraft.

Therefore, a remand is warranted under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), which was enacted effective August 10, 2022.  That law provides that, where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA during active military service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion, unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

The rating decision on appeal was issued shortly after the enactment of the PACT Act and, thus, failure to obtain a TERA-specific examination or medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Also, remanding to fulfill a regulatory or statutory duty pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168 and 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 is a valid reason to remand under the AMA.  A TERA Memorandum was issued on February 14, 2023, but it does not appear to address the Veteran's potential exposures noted above.  As such, on remand, the AOJ must conduct any necessary development related to the PACT Act, to include preparing a new TERA memorandum and scheduling the Veteran for a TERA examination, if appropriate.?

3.  Entitlement to an initial, compensable disability rating for gastroesophageal reflux disease is remanded.

The AOJ has evaluated the Veteran's GERD as analogous to a hiatal hernia under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7346.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.20 (providing for analogous ratings for unlisted conditions).    

The Board notes that effective May 19, 2024, the rating schedule applicable to the digestive system, set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, was amended, to include by adding a DC specific to GERD, which is DC 7206.  See 89 Fed. Reg. 19735 (March 20, 2024).  As the period under review pre-dates the amendments, they do not apply to the current appeal.  Accordingly, for the purpose of this remand the Board will apply DC 7346 to the evaluation of the Veteran's GERD. 

Under Diagnostic Code 7346, a 10 percent rating is assigned with two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity; a 30 percent rating is assigned for persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; and, a 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

To evaluate the Veteran's GERD, he was afforded a January 2023 VA Esophageal Conditions (Including Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) Hiatal Hernia and Other Esophageal Disorders) Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The Veteran reported current symptoms off heartburn, acid reflux, indigestion, fatigue, and sore throat.  The examination report states that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking continuous medication, Pantoprazole, for his GERD.  

It is unclear to the Board whether the Veteran's GERD, were he not benefitting from the ameliorative effects of medication, would be manifested by additional symptoms or other symptom combinations.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012).  Accordingly, as the prior VA examination is inadequate as to this matter, on remand a new VA examination must be arranged.

4. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating is inextricably intertwined with the AOJ's implementation of the Board's grant of increased disability ratings for the Veteran's service-connected coronary artery disease, as well as with the claim for a higher rating for GERD which is being remanded.  Therefore, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating must be remanded.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both issues have been considered).  In this regard, 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) does not prohibit remanding claims as inextricably intertwined.  See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136 (2024) (remand for correction of an error by the AOJ in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty includes a remand of the issue of entitlement to a TDIU based on a Board decision granting service connection that impacts the issue of whether TDIU is warranted).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Considering the PACT Act, perform development to determine whether the Veteran participated in a "toxic exposure risk activity" (TERA) in his active service duties, specifically considering potential exposure to rocket/missile propellant, jet fuels, and exhaust from aircraft.  As noted above, the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was Security Specialist and performance reports contained in his service personnel records demonstrate that his security duties included the areas where aircraft flights and missile launches occurred.  He also had foreign service in Japan and the Philippines.

?

2. Then, issue a new TERA Memorandum and, if appropriate, schedule the Veteran for a TERA examination concerning his claim for service connection for sleep apnea.

3. Obtain a new VA medical opinion regarding service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder.

The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the medical examiner.

The examiner must address the following:

(a.) For each acquired psychiatric disorder found to be present, including persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, opine as to whether it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset during service or is related to any incident of service.  

In formulating this opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's statement that he witnessed combat or exposure to a war zone, as well as his service personnel records showing that he had a Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of Security Specialist and that his duties required him to be in close proximity to aircraft and missiles.  While stationed at Kadena Airbase in Okinawa, Japan, he was responsible for the security of the "Alert Aircraft."  It was noted that he displayed a high degree of proficiency "as roadblock guard and hazardous operations and sweep patrol during missile launches."  Further, while stationed in California, the Veteran participated in helicopter patrol during launch activities and was a member of the launch disaster control team.  

(b.) For each acquired psychiatric disorder found to be present, including persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by his service-connected tinnitus.  

(c.) For each acquired psychiatric disorder found to be present, including persistent depressive disorder with major depressive episodes and anxiety disorder, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least in approximate balance or nearly equal, if not greater) aggravated (any incremental increase in disability or any additional impairment of earning capacity regardless of its permanence) by his service-connected tinnitus.

Separate opinions and rationales should be provided for secondary causation and secondary aggravation.  

In providing any opinion concerning aggravation, the examiner is advised that a "permanent worsening" is not required to establish secondary service connection on the basis of aggravation; rather, aggravation may include temporary worsening, or flare-ups, of a disability.  

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed and to achieve this, the medical professional must explain the rationale for all opinions in detail, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature, as appropriate.

4.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner to determine the severity of his service-connected GERD.   The examiner must complete the corresponding VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), provide a full description of the disability, and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. 

The examiner must discuss the types, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's GERD symptoms and any resulting impairment of health, without consideration the ameliorative effects of medications.

Specifically, without consideration the ameliorative effects of medications, would the Veteran's GERD be manifested by persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, regurgitation, substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health; and/or symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health?

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed and to achieve this, the medical professional must explain the rationale for all opinions in detail, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature, as appropriate.

If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, the examiner must provide a thorough rationale explaining why.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mussey, Sean

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.