Citation Nr: A25030668
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241218-495589
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, due to exposure to warehouse chemicals and herbicide agents (to include Agent Orange), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1965 to November 1968, to include service in Thailand from September 1966 to July 1967.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, due to exposure to warehouse chemicals and herbicide agents (to include Agent Orange), is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran contends that his squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus was caused by exposure to warehouse chemicals and herbicide agents (to include Agent Orange) while stationed at the Royal Thai Base. See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

Initially, the Board observes the July 2024 rating decision which included favorable findings that evidence showed that the Veteran performed duties in Thailand. The Veteran's military personnel records document that he was deployed to Thailand on October 1, 1966, and was potentially exposed to herbicide agents such as Agent Orange during this deployment. Service in Thailand from January 9, 1962, to June 30, 1976, is associated with herbicide exposure under the PACT Act and the Veteran's claimed issue became manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more following his service. Medical evidence from the River Region Health System from May 2002 showed that the symptoms of the disability met the criteria for a compensable evaluation. Additionally, regarding the assertion that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents while he served in Thailand, service personnel records confirm that the Veteran served at the Royal Thai Base from September 1966 to July 1967. The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104.

The Board also observes the July 2024 rating decision which included favorable findings that the Veteran's participation in a TERA was conceded, and TERA was also conceded with the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of material facilities specialist. The Board is bound by this favorable finding absent clear and unmistakable error. Id. 

?

With respect as to whether the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus was caused by or related to his in-service exposure to herbicide agents, the Board observes that there are two VA medical opinions which address this issue.  See the July 2023 and April 2024 VA medical opinions; however, the Board finds both opinions to be inadequate for VA adjudication purposes.

In the July 2023 opinion, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The examiner noted in the rationale that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the TERA. Also, the Veteran is an older male with a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) which is a risk factors for esophageal cancer. The risk factors outside of military service (male, age, and GERD) far outweigh the factors identified in the TERA. The examiner, while addressing this question on a broad basis, failed to address the particular facts as they relate to this Veteran.  

In the April 2024 opinion, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The examiner noted in the rationale that until the update in 2006, VAO committees reviewed "gastrointestinal tract tumors" as a group consisting of stomach, colorectal, and pancreatic cancers; esophageal cancer was formally included in the 2004 update. With more evidence from occupational studies available, VAO updates now to address cancers of the digestive organs individually. Again, the examiner, while addressing this question on a broad basis, failed to address the particular facts as they relate to this Veteran.  In a separate TERA examination conducted in the same month, it was rationalized that "There is no research that indicated specifically for 

?

Viet Nam era vets that anything but herbicide and agent orange would be associated with the claimed condition." The condition claimed in this examination was GERD, but as reported in the above July 2023 examination report, GERD is a risk factor for esophageal cancer and the Veteran has a history of GERD.  

The Board finds both opinions to be inadequate for VA adjudication purposes. In that regard, the opinions provide inadequate rationales that are conclusory and contradictory as the examiners did not reconcile the opinions with other VA opinions of record.

This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, a new VA opinion should be obtained for entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion by a clinician with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.  The examiner should review the claims file and indicate that review in the report.  Any indicated studies should be performed.  The examiner should be sure to address the Veteran's contention that his exposure to warehouse chemicals and Agent Orange caused his disabilities. The examiner must also address the April 2024 TERA conclusion that GERD is a risk factor for esophageal cancer and the evidence that the Veteran has a history of GERD.

(Continued on next page)

?

Based upon any examination and a review of the record, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus was caused by or is related to his active service, to include GERD.  The examiner must also comment on whether the Veteran's diagnosed GERD 

The rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marchese, Angel N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.