Citation Nr: A25030700
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 190806-24390
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis did not manifest during service or for years thereafter and is not otherwise etiologically related to his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1968 to September 1971.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2019 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the August 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on September 18, 2023, and a transcript of the hearing is of record.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In a January 2024 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma to include left upper lobe lung metastasis.   The Veteran appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), which granted a December 2024 Joint Motion for Remand (JMR).  The Court's December 2024 Order vacated the Board's January 2024 decision and remanded the matter to the Board for readjudication consistent with the terms of the JMR.

Entitlement to service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for his rectal cancer with left upper lobe lung metastasis.  He asserts that his respiratory symptoms started before his rectal cancer symptoms, and thus, contends that his rectal cancer was caused by his lung cancer.  See September 2023 Board Hearing Transcript.  He also contends that his rectal cancer is related to his exposure to Agent Orange.  See December 2017 Statement in Support of Claim.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

In addition, service connection for certain chronic diseases may be established on a presumptive basis by showing that the condition manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  Such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  While the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time.

Additionally, for certain chronic diseases with potential onset during service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The continuity of symptomatology provision of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) has been interpreted as an alternative to service connection only for the specific chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A presumption of service connection has been established for certain diseases found to be associated with herbicide agent exposure.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Absent affirmative evidence to the contrary, such diseases will be service connected even if there is no evidence of the disease during service, provided that herbicide agent exposure is established.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(d), 3.309(e).  The term "herbicide agent" means a chemical in an herbicide used in support of the United States and allied military operations in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975 (the Vietnam Era).  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).  A veteran who, during active military service, served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam Era is presumed to have been exposed to such herbicide agents.  38 U.S.C. § 1116(f); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted and amended the law such that it expanded the diseases for presumption of herbicide agent exposure to include high blood pressure (hypertension) and monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS).  That expansion of the exposure presumptions to additional disabilities is not applicable under the facts of this case. 

In addition, the PACT Act directs that in certain circumstances, when a veteran is found to have been involved in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, VA must provide the veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing whether such toxic exposure caused a diagnosed disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.  

Notwithstanding the foregoing, regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); see also Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Turning to the case, the Veteran's DD 214 documents that he served in the Republic of Vietnam from August 1969 to August 1970.  Accordingly, he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents.  

His service treatment records (STRs) are silent for complaints, findings, or treatment for rectal or lung cancer.

Post-service, VA treatment records reflect that in February 2011, the Veteran was found to have dim breath sounds bilaterally which were consistent with his smoking history and early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  In May 2014, a rectal mass was found during a colonoscopy, and a biopsy showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma.  See May 2014 VA Gastroenterology Note, August 2014 VA History and Physical Surgery Note.  

In May 2015, a CT scan showed an isolated pulmonary nodule, and a biopsy performed in June 2015 showed this was consistent with recurrent colorectal cancer.  See August 2015 VA Oncology Pharmacy Note.  A June 2015 VA treatment record noted that the pulmonary nodule could represent metastasis of rectal cancer versus fungal mass or lymphoma, or primary lung cancer.  An additional June 2015 VA treatment record noted that the lung nodule biopsy preliminary read was adenocarcinoma with resulting pathology of rectal source, so this represented a recurrence of his previous rectal carcinoma.  A diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with colonic primary was noted.  Another June 2015 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran had dyspnea on exertion and with his smoking history he may have COPD.  Numerous VA treatment records documented that the Veteran had a 40 plus year history of smoking cigarettes.  See August 2009, August 2014, February 2016 VA Treatment Records.  

In November 2015, the Veteran underwent a VA respiratory disorders examination, and the examiner reported a diagnosis of rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis with a date of diagnosis of June 2015.  The examiner reported that the left upper lung metastasis was from the primary rectal adenocarcinoma.

A January 2016 VA thoracic surgery post operative note reported that the etiology of the metastatic adenocarcinoma was felt to be the colon.  An April 2016 VA hematology and oncology note reported that the Veteran was followed by oncology for recurrent rectal cancer and isolated lung nodule which was resected in February 2016.  A January 2017 VA hematology and oncology note reported that the Veteran had an isolated lung recurrence of rectal cancer in early 2015, which was resected, and there was no evidence of disease after resection.

A VA rectum disorders examination documented a diagnosis of rectal adenocarcinoma status post hemicolectomy with colostomy and chemoradiation therapy.  See August 2016 VA Rectum and Anus Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  During this examination, the Veteran reported his symptoms began in September 2014.

In a December 2017 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran asserted that his rectal cancer was due to exposure to Agent Orange.  He also submitted prior Board decisions, as well as an article titled, Gastrointestinal Tract Tumors, which concluded that it was "not possible for the committee to quantify the degree of risk likely to have been experienced by Vietnam veterans because of their exposure to herbicides in Vietnam."

During his September 2023 Board Hearing, the Veteran testified that his respiratory cancer symptoms started first, before his rectal cancer, and that the respiratory cancer was found when he underwent CT scans.  He testified that he noticed he was short of breath and could not do as much as he normally did before, and that is when he sought treatment and found out.  He testified that his symptoms began in 2015.  His local representative asserted that whether the lung cancer started separately from the rectal cancer or went from his lung to his rectal area was "hard to prove."  He stated that "one could presume that the lung cancer started separately with his rectal cancer given that he mentioned having symptoms of shortness of breath before he went and sought treatment for his rectal cancer" or that his lung cancer turned to rectal cancer.

As noted above, the Board previously denied the Veteran's claim for service connection in a January 2024 Board decision.  In the December 2024 JMR, the parties agreed that the Board's analysis erroneously focused on the origin of the Veteran's lung disability and whether it was a presumptive disability and did not adequately address whether the Veteran was entitled to service connection for his rectal adenocarcinoma.  The parties also agreed that the Board should address the Court's holding in Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127 (2024), regarding whether a remand was warranted for correction of an error, to include providing a TERA examination, pursuant to the second part of 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

After reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis is not warranted.  As explained above, certain disabilities associated with exposure to herbicide agents are considered to have been incurred in or aggravated by service.  However, rectal cancer is not included in the list of diseases entitled to presumptive service connection based on exposure to herbicide agents.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Although the Veteran's rectal cancer is not covered by 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), he is not precluded from establishing entitlement to service connection for the disability due to exposure to herbicide agents with proof of direct causation.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

However, upon review of the record, the evidence does not support a finding that his rectal cancer was incurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to his active service, to include his exposure to herbicide agents.  The Board recognizes that VA did not obtain a medical opinion in connection with the Veteran's claim.  Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in service connection claims, VA must provide a VA medical examination where there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  In this regard, the Board finds that the Veteran has not submitted sufficient evidence to indicate that his rectal cancer may be related to an event, injury, or disease that occurred in service.  Accordingly, the Board finds that no further development of the Veteran's claim is required, nor was there an error on the part of the AOJ in not obtaining a VA medical opinion.

First, the Veteran does not contend, nor does the evidence support that his rectal cancer was incurred during service.  His STRs are silent for complaints, findings, or treatment for rectal cancer, and the record indicates that he was diagnosed with rectal cancer in 2014, over four decades after his separation from service.  See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (the passage of many years between discharge from active service and the medical documentation of a claimed disability is one factor to consider as evidence against a claim of service connection).  As such, the evidence is against finding that his rectal cancer was incurred during service.

Additionally, the record does not demonstrate a nexus between the Veteran's rectal cancer and his active service, to include his herbicide agent exposure.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that his rectal cancer is related to his in-service exposure to Agent Orange.  However, as a layperson lacking in medical training and expertise, he cannot provide a competent opinion on matters as complex as the etiology of his rectal cancer.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The Board recognizes that the Veteran submitted prior Board decisions in support of his claim.  In this regard, the Board notes that prior Board decisions are not precedential and the decision as to one appellant can have no precedential weight in the decision for a different veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.  Board decisions must be made based on the facts and applicable legal authority specific to the case before it.  Id.  The Board has reviewed the prior decisions and finds that they are based on different facts than present in this appeal.  To the extent that the Veteran argues that service connection for his rectal cancer is established based on prior Board decisions, the Board finds this argument has no merit.

The Board also acknowledges the article submitted by the Veteran.  The Court has held that a medical article or treatise "can provide important support when combined with an opinion of a medical professional" if it discusses generic relationships with a degree of certainty such that, under the facts of a specific case, there is at least "plausible causality" based upon objective facts rather than on an unsubstantiated lay medical opinion.  Mattern v. West, 12 Vet. App. 222, 228 (1999).  However, the article submitted by the Veteran was not accompanied by the opinion of any medical expert referencing the article nor does the article discuss a relationship between rectal cancer and herbicide agent exposure with a degree of certainty such that there is a plausible causality between the two.  The article stated that it was "not possible for the committee to quantify the degree of risk likely to have been experienced by Vietnam veterans because of their exposure to herbicides in Vietnam."  The article is also too general in nature and not specific to the Veteran's circumstances.

Additionally, in the December 2024 JMR, the parties noted that in the January 2024 Board decision, the Board acknowledged that in April 2023, a VA Memorandum found that the Veteran participated in a TERA during his active military service.  The Board found that the Veteran was now presumed to be a toxic exposed veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1119(c), and the TERA examination requirements under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 were implicated.  The Board, however, found that a remand was not appropriate for the issue, as the AOJ did not commit a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not obtaining a TERA examination, because the Veteran was not identified as a toxic exposed veteran until after the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  The Board found that under the AMA, a remand in this case would only be appropriate to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The parties noted that after the Board issued the decision on appeal, the Court explained in Green v. McDonough, that under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), the Board's remand authority is not limited to the correction of duty-to-assist errors that occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal.  Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136 (2024).  The parties agreed that upon remand, the Board must address the Court's holding in Green regarding whether a remand was warranted for correction of an error, to include providing an examination, pursuant to the second part of 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127 (2024), the Court made clear that in addition to remanding appeals to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, the Board may also remand an AMA appeal for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim, under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

After the rating decision on appeal, a VA TERA Memorandum was associated with the Veteran's claims file in April 2023 and documented that the Veteran has participation in a TERA due to exposure to herbicide agents.  See April 2023 VA TERA Memorandum.  Although VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a TERA and of a disability, VA has identified several exceptions to this general obligation where there is no indication of an association between the disability and the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b).  Specifically, a TERA opinion is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure.  See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).  In this case, the Veteran's rectal cancer is a disability that has been shown to have no positive association with herbicide exposure.  As an exception to the TERA opinion requirements applies, the Board finds that there was no error by the AOJ in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty and there is no reasonable possibility obtaining a TERA opinion would aid in substantiating the claim, and that the AOJ did not commit a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not affording the Veteran a TERA opinion.  As such, remand for an examination and opinion on this basis is not warranted.

Next, the Board considered whether the Veteran's rectal cancer originated from his lung cancer.  Although rectal cancer is not included in the list of diseases entitled to presumptive service connection based on exposure to herbicide agents, respiratory cancers, including cancer of the lung, are entitled to presumptive service connection based on exposure to herbicide agents.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  However, the evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's rectal cancer was caused by lung cancer.  The medical clinicians who considered the etiology of the Veteran's lung cancer overwhelmingly found that the most likely cause of his lung cancer was his rectal cancer.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's testimony that his respiratory cancer symptoms, such as shortness of breath, started prior to his rectal cancer, and thus, his assertion that his rectal cancer originated from the lung cancer.  However, he is not competent to provide a medical etiology for such symptoms.  The record reflects that the Veteran has a lengthy smoking history for over 40 years as well as COPD.  As a layperson lacking in the requisite medical training and expertise, he is not competent to determine whether his respiratory symptoms were due to COPD, a smoking history, or a sign of respiratory cancer.  

Finally, the Board considered whether presumptive service connection is warranted for a chronic disease.  However, there is no probative evidence that the Veteran's rectal cancer manifested during service or within one year of his separation from service, or that there was a continuity of symptomatology.  As noted above, his STRs are silent for findings, treatment, or a diagnosis of rectal cancer, and post-service medical records document that he was diagnosed with rectal cancer in 2014 with recurrence in his lung in 2015, over 40 years after his separation from service.  There is no evidence, lay or medical, that indicates the Veteran's rectal cancer manifested during service or within one year of service or that there is a continuity of symptomatology.

(Continued on the next page)

For the reasons and bases stated above, the Board finds that service connection for rectal adenocarcinoma with left upper lobe lung metastasis is not warranted.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not nearly in balance, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Accordingly, the claim is denied.

 

 

KELLI A. KORDICH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Bruce, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.