Citation Nr: A25030610
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240907-471225
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the right upper extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the left upper extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for peripheral vascular disease of the right lower extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for peripheral vascular disease of the left lower extremity is denied.

A disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for neuropathy of the right upper extremity is granted.

A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the left upper extremity is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 60 percent for peripheral vascular disease of the right lower extremity is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 60 percent for peripheral vascular disease of the left lower extremity is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On April 15, 2013, the Veteran filed claims for service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities.  Entitlement to service connection for these disabilities arose on August 3, 2021, subsequent to the filing of the claim.

2. The Veteran's neuropathy of the right arm is manifested by moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.

3. The Veteran's neuropathy of the left arm is not manifested by severe incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.

4. The Veteran's neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities is not manifested by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

5. The Veteran's peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities is not manifested by ischemic limb pain at rest, deep ischemic ulcers, an ankle/brachial index of 0.4 or less, ankle pressure less than 50 mm Hg, toe pressure less than 30 mm Hg, or transcutaneous oxygen tension less than 30 mm Hg.

6. On April 15, 2013, the Veteran filed an informal claim for a TDIU.  Entitlement to service connection for a TDIU arose on August 3, 2021, subsequent to the filing of the claim.

7. The Veteran was not eligible for DEA benefits prior to August 3, 2021, when he was awarded a TDIU.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the awards of service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities,   have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5103, 5103A, 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1, 3.102, 3.155, 3.159, 3.310, 3.400.

2. The criteria for a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for neuropathy of the right upper extremity are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8514.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the left upper extremity are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8514.

4. The criteria for disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremities are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

5. The criteria for disability ratings in excess of 60 percent for peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7114 (prior to and since November 14, 2021).

6. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of a TDIU have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

7. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for DEA benefits under Chapter 35, Title 38, of the United States Code have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3501, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1968 to March 1970 in the United States Army.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In September 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on December 12, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Earlier Effective Dates for the Awards of Service Connection

Generally, the effective date for the grant of service connection based upon an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase is either the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise it will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b). 

A claim is a formal or informal communication, in writing, requesting a determination of entitlement, or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1 (p).  VA amended its regulations on March 24, 2015, to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 57660 (Sept. 25, 2014).  

Any communication or action, indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, from a claimant, his duly authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of a claimant who is not sui juris, may be considered an informal claim.  Such an informal claim must identify the benefit sought.  Upon receipt of an informal claim, if a formal claim has not been filed, an application form will be forwarded to the claimant for execution.  If received within one year after the date it was sent to the claimant, it will be considered filed as of the date of receipt of the informal claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155; Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413 (1999). 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  Evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the right upper extremity is denied.

2. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the left upper extremity is denied.

3. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

4. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

5. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for peripheral vascular disease of the right lower extremity is denied.

6. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for peripheral vascular disease of the left lower extremity is denied.

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the awards of service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities. At the December 2024 hearing, he reported that he has continuously prosecuted his claim for these disabilities since it was originally filed in the Legacy appeals system.  

The Veteran separated from service in March 1970.  Claims for service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, were not received within one year of the date of discharge.  

On April 15, 2013, VA received an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ), in which the Veteran sought service connection for neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities.  In a March 2014 rating decision, the VA Regional Office denied the claims.  The Veteran perfected an appeal of the denials, and thereafter continuously pursued his claim.

In December 2019, June 2021, May 2022, and December 2022, the Board remanded the claims for further development.

In an August 2023 decision, the Board granted service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, as caused by the Veteran's diabetes mellitus.  In a separate August 2023 decision, the Board simultaneously granted service connection for diabetes mellitus.

In a September 2023 rating decision, the VA Regional Office, in turn, awarded service connection for diabetes mellitus, effective August 3, 2021.  In the separate September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the VA Regional Office also awarded service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, effective August 3, 2021.

In September 2024, within one year of the rating decision, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, in which he disagreed with both the ratings assigned and the effective date of August 3, 2021, for the awards of service connection.

The Veteran additionally filed a timely VA Form 10182, in which he disagreed with the August 3, 2021, effective date for the award of service connection for diabetes mellitus.  However, as explained in a separate decision being issued simultaneously as that here, at the December 2024 hearing he withdrew from appeal the claim for an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for diabetes mellitus.  As such, that appeal must be dismissed, and the Board is not permitted to review or amend the effective date of August 3, 2021, for the award of service connection for diabetes. 

Service connection is in effect for the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, as secondary to his diabetes mellitus.  Because the effective date for an award of service connection on a secondary basis cannot precede the effective date for the primary condition on which the secondary condition is based, the effective date for the associated neurological abnormalities and peripheral vascular disease can be no earlier than that for his diabetes, which is August 3, 2021.  See Ellington v. Peake, 541 F.3d 1364, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (noting that effective dates for primary and secondary disabilities are afforded the same treatment under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 and that secondary disabilities arise at the same time or after primary disabilities); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).  In other words, entitlement to service connection for the secondary disabilities (neurological abnormalities and peripheral vascular disease) did not arise until service connection was granted for the primary disability (diabetes).  

In light of the underlying April 2013 claim, however, the Board has considered whether entitlement to service connection for these disabilities may have previously arisen on a basis other than as secondary to diabetes mellitus.  Numerous VA medical examinations and opinions were obtained in this regard, pursuant to prior Board remands.  See VA examination reports of January 2020, December 2020, August 2021, October 2021, March 2022, October 2022, and May 2023.  

As for presumptive service connection based on herbicide agent exposure in connection with the Veteran's Vietnam service, these VA examination reports show that Veteran does not have early onset peripheral neuropathy as contemplated by applicable VA regulations, and peripheral vascular disease is not included among the diseases for which such presumptive service connection may be established.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  As for direct service connection, the VA examination reports of January 2020, December 2020, August 2021, October 2021, March 2022, October 2022, and May 2023 each contain negative nexus opinions.  The probative evidence does not show that the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, are related to his active military service, including directly to any exposures therein, or that a chronic disability was incurred in service.  There is no evidence to the contrary of the above-cited VA examination reports, and the Veteran himself does not have the requisite medical knowledge, training, or experience to be able to render a competent medical opinion regarding the cause of such medically complex disabilities as peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 437 (2011).  

38 C.F.R. § 3.400 provides that the proper effective date for an award of service connection "will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later."  Here, the underlying claim for service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, was received on April 15, 2013.  The date "entitlement arose" for service connection for these disabilities, however, was August 3, 2021, the date on which the Veteran became service-connected for diabetes mellitus and an award of secondary service connection could be made.

As such, August 3, 2021, serves the appropriate date for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities, as this is the later date between the date of claim and the date entitlement arose.  There is simply no legal entitlement to an earlier effective date for the awards of service connection for these disabilities, and the claims must be denied.

Higher Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  The percentage ratings represent, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  

Generally, the degree of disability specified is considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. 

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  Evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  

The Board's analysis will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim, and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claims.  See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000); Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  

7. A disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for neuropathy of the right upper extremity is granted.

8. A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the left upper extremity is denied.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the VA Regional Office granted service connection for the Veteran's neuropathy of the right and left arms, and awarded separate 20 percent ratings.

The Veteran's neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8514, pertaining to paralysis of the musculospiral nerve (radial nerve).  Under this code, ratings are assigned depending upon which extremity is involved, the dominant or "major" side, or the "minor" side.  The evidence shows that the Veteran is right-hand dominant.  As such, for the right arm, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 30 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 50 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis is rated as 70 percent disabling.  For the left arm, mild and moderate incomplete paralysis are both rated as 20 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis is rated as 60 percent disabling.  

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than that for complete paralysis, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).  

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Thus, the Board turns to dictionary definitions for assistance.  See Nielson v. Shinseki, 607 F.3d 802, 805-06 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (noting that absent an express definition, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words using their ordinary dictionary meanings).  "Mild" is generally defined as "not being or involving what is extreme" or "not severe."  "Moderate," as an adjective, is defined as "not violent, severe, or intense" or "limited in scope or effect."  "Severe" is generally defined as "of a great degree" or "serious."  See Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 787, 1140 (11th ed. 2003); Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate, Definitions 3 and 5 (last visited March 26, 2025). 

Turning to the evidence, on VA examination in January 2020, the Veteran reported that the weakness in the hands causes him to frequently drops objects such as cups.  He reported no constant pain, mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and no numbness in the bilateral upper extremities.  Strength was normal in the bilateral elbows, and wrists.  Grip strength was reduced in the right hand.  Reflexes were normal in the biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis bilaterally.  Light touch testing was normal in the shoulders, inner and outer forearms, and hands/fingers bilaterally.  The examiner opined that the severity of the Veteran's incomplete paralysis was mild in the ulnar nerves bilaterally.  

On VA examination in August 2021, the Veteran reported a worsening of his symptoms.  He reported no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in the bilateral upper extremities.  Strength was normal in the bilateral elbows, wrists, and hands.  Reflexes were abnormal (hypoactive) in the biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis bilaterally.  Light touch testing was normal in the shoulders, inner and outer forearms, and hands/fingers bilaterally.  The examiner opined that the severity of the Veteran's incomplete paralysis was moderate in the ulnar nerves bilaterally.  

On VA examination in October 2022, the Veteran reported no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness in the bilateral upper extremities.  Strength was abnormal (4/5) in the bilateral elbow flexion, wrists, and hands.  Strength was abnormal (3/5) in bilateral elbow extension and in the fingers. Reflexes were abnormal (hypoactive) in the biceps and triceps bilaterally, and normal in the brachioradialis bilaterally.  Light touch testing was normal in the shoulders, inner and outer forearms, and hands/fingers bilaterally.  The examiner opined that the severity of the Veteran's incomplete paralysis was mild in both the radial and ulnar nerves bilaterally.

On VA examination in May 2023, the examiner found the Veteran did not have a peripheral nerve condition or peripheral neuropathy, despite the prior medical record.  The examiner documented no constant pain, intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, or numbness in the bilateral upper extremities.  The examiner indicated that strength, reflexes, and sensation were normal, and rendered no diagnoses regarding any impairment of the nerves. 

At the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran and his spouse testified that he has weakness in his arms, causing difficulties with tasks such as pulling a turkey out of the oven at Thanksgiving, grabbing a glass, or writing his name with a pen.  He had limitations in movement, and a reduction in his grip strength bilaterally.

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the governing legal authority, the Board finds the evidence persuasively favors the assignment of a 30 percent disability rating for "moderate" incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve in the right arm.  As noted, grip strength was reduced on VA examination in January 2020.  On VA examination in August 2021, the examiner explicitly opined that the Veteran had "moderate" incomplete paralysis.  On VA examination in October 2022, the Veteran reported "moderate" intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness.  Strength was abnormal in all parameters, and reflexes were abnormal in the biceps and triceps.  At the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran and his spouse testified regarding his inability to perform such routine tasks as using a pen or grabbing a glass.  The Board thus finds that the Veteran's overall disability picture approximates moderate incomplete paralysis affecting the right upper extremity.

However, the persuasively is against the assignment of a rating in excess of 30 percent for the right arm, or in excess of 20 percent for the left arm.  As noted, for the right arm, the next higher rating of 50 percent requires evidence of "severe" incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.  For the left arm, a 20 percent rating is assigned for both mild and moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve, and the next higher rating of 40 percent requires evidence of "severe" incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.  

In this regard, during the course of the appeal, four VA examinations have been conducted and the Veteran has not reported "severe" symptoms affecting either arm.  Consistently, none of the VA examiners rendered such a finding.  Rather, the Veteran's disability has been characterized by himself and examiners as "moderate," at worst.  Moreover, January 2020 and October 2022 VA examiners characterized the severity of the disability as "mild," and the May 2023 VA examiner found no impairment of the peripheral nerves.  As such, the Board does not find that the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the criteria for higher ratings of 50 and 40 percent are warranted for the Veteran's neuropathy of the right and left arms, respectively.

In reaching these decisions, the Board can point to no other diagnostic code that would provide a basis for the assignment of higher ratings for the Veteran's neuropathy of the bilateral upper extremities.  When a disability is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule, as is impairment of the radial nerve, it is not to be rated by analogy.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015).  To the extent the VA examination reports have occasionally implicated impairment of both the ulnar and radial nerves, the assignment of separate disability evaluations in this regard would constitute impermissible pyramiding pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, as the rating criteria instructs that separate evaluations may not be assigned when evaluating upper extremity peripheral neuropathy. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8719, Note.  Further, to the extent Diagnostic Code 8513 contemplates impairment of "all radicular groups," such is not shown by the evidence and the code is inapplicable.

For all the foregoing reasons, the Board finds the evidence persuasively favors an award of a 30 percent rating for neuropathy of the right arm, and is against a rating higher than 20 percent for neuropathy of the left arm.  In reaching these decisions, the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt.

9. A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

10. A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the VA Regional Office granted service connection for neuropathy of both legs, and assigned separate 20 percent disability ratings for impairment of the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  

The Veteran's disabilities are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520, pertaining to impairment of the sciatic nerve.  Under that code, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.  

As discussed above, the term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than that for complete paralysis, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  See Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124(a).

Additionally, while the words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, the Board turns to dictionary definitions for assistance.  See Nielson, 607 F.3d at 805-06.  As above, "mild" is generally defined as "not being or involving what is extreme" or "not severe."  "Moderate," as an adjective, is defined as "not violent, severe, or intense" or "limited in scope or effect."  "Severe" is generally defined as "of a great degree" or "serious."  See Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 787, 1140 (11th ed. 2003); Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam webster.com/dictionary/ moderate, Definitions 3 and 5 (last visited March 26, 2025). 

Turning to the evidence, on VA examination in January 2020, the Veteran reported having no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and no numbness in the legs bilaterally.  Muscle strength testing was normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Deep tendon reflexes were hypoactive in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Light touch/sensation testing was normal in all parameters, including the upper anterior thigh, knee/thigh, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes bilaterally.  There were trophic changes involving a loss of extremity hair.  The Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner determined the Veteran had a normal sciatic nerve bilaterally with no incomplete or complete paralysis.  There was no impairment of any other nerve group affecting either lower extremity.  The Veteran did not require assistive devices.  

On VA examination in August 2021, the Veteran reported having no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness in the legs bilaterally.  Muscle strength testing was normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Deep tendon reflexes were hypoactive in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Light touch/sensation testing was normal in all parameters, including the upper anterior thigh, knee/thigh, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes bilaterally.  There were no trophic changes, and the Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner determined the Veteran had moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  There was no impairment of any other nerve group affecting either lower extremity.  The Veteran did not require assistive devices.  

On VA examination in October 2022, the Veteran reported having no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness in the legs bilaterally.  Muscle strength testing was 3/5 in the bilateral knees, and 4/5 in the bilateral ankles in flexion and dorsiflexion.  Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Light touch/sensation testing was normal in all parameters, including the upper anterior thigh, knee/thigh, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes bilaterally.  Trophic changes included a loss of hair on the legs.  The Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner determined the Veteran had a moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  There was no impairment of any other nerve group affecting either lower extremity.  The Veteran occasionally used a cane to assist with ambulation. 

On VA examination in May 2023, the Veteran reported having no pain constantly or intermittently, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in the legs bilaterally.  Muscle strength testing was normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Deep tendon reflexes were also normal in the bilateral knees and ankles.  Light touch/sensation testing was normal in all parameters, including the upper anterior thigh, knee/thigh, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes bilaterally.  Trophic changes involved a loss of leg hair, and the Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner determined the Veteran had no impairment of the sciatic nerve.  There was no impairment of any other nerve group affecting either lower extremity.  The Veteran occasionally used a cane for assistance.  

At the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran and his spouse reported that he experiences balance issues on the right side.  He requires a stool to prop his legs up while watching television.  The Veteran's spouse reported that he drags his feet when he walks, and requires cushioning inside of his shoes.  He reported having ongoing pain and difficulty with ambulation.

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the governing legal authority, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's diabetic neuropathy of the bilateral legs.  The August 2021 and October 2022 VA examiners explicitly characterized the neuropathy as "moderate," and the January 2020 and May 2023 VA examiner found no impairment of the sciatic nerve.  At worst, the Veteran has reported having "moderate" pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness.  Examiners consistently determined that his gait is normal, and light touch testing has been consistently normal.  The Veteran has intermittently reported requiring the use of a cane on an occasional basis.  There have been no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms of the disabilities.  As such, the Board finds that the disabilities have not been manifested by "moderately severe" incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve in either leg, as contemplated by the next higher rating of 40 percent under Diagnostic Code 8520.  

The Board has considered the Veteran's attorney argument at the December 2024 hearing that the neurological disabilities affecting the legs should be rated consistently with the peripheral vascular disease affecting the legs (60 percent disabling) because the symptomatology is indistinguishable to the Veteran.  This, however, is unsupported by the specific and reasoned findings of the trained medical professionals who conducted separate clinical examinations pertinent to the Veteran's neuropathy and peripheral vascular disease.  The VA examination reports indeed reflect differences in symptomatology and manifestations of the disabilities, and such findings outweigh the lay arguments to the contrary.

The Board can point to no other diagnostic code that would provide a basis for the assignment of a separate or higher rating for the Veteran's disabilities.  When a disability is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule, as is impairment of the sciatic nerve, it is not to be rated by analogy.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015).  

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of disability ratings in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's neuropathy of the bilateral legs.  In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt; however, the doctrine is not for application.

11. A disability rating in excess of 60 percent for peripheral vascular disease of the right lower extremity is denied.

12. A disability rating in excess of 60 percent for peripheral vascular disease of the left lower extremity is denied.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the VA Regional Office granted service connection for peripheral vascular disease of both legs, and assigned separate 60 percent disability ratings.  

The Veteran's disabilities are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7114.  During the pendency of the appeal, effective November 14, 2021, VA amended the rating criteria pertaining to diseases of the heart, to include Diagnostic Code 7114.  This amended regulation applies to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the agency of original jurisdiction on or after November 14, 2021.  Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both the pre- and post-amendment rating criteria, and whichever is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.  However, the Board may not apply the post-amendment rating criteria to a period prior to its effective date, unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise.  Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). Conversely, the Board is not precluded from applying the pre-amendment rating criteria to a period on or after the effective date of the post-amendment rating criteria so long as it was in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

The prior version of 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7114, pertained to arteriosclerosis obliterans.  It provided a 20 percent rating with evidence of claudication on walking more than 100 yards, and; diminished peripheral pulses or ankle/brachial index of 0.9 or less.  A 40 percent rating was assigned with evidence of claudication on walking between 25 and 100 yards on a level grade at 2 miles per hour, and; trophic changes (thin skin, absence of hair, dystrophic nails) or ankle/brachial index of 0.7 or less.  A 60 percent rating was assigned with evidence of claudication on walking less than 25 yards on a level grade at 2 miles per hour, and; either persistent coldness of the extremity or ankle/brachial index of 0.5 or less.  A 100 percent rating was assigned with evidence of ischemic limb pain at rest, and; either deep ischemic ulcers or ankle/brachial index of 0.4 or less.

The current version of 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7114, pertains to peripheral arterial disease.  It provides a 20 percent rating with evidence of at least one of the following: Ankle/brachial index of 0.67-0.79; ankle pressure of 84-99 mm Hg; toe pressure of 50-59 mm Hg; or transcutaneous oxygen tension of 50-59 mm Hg.  A 40 percent rating is assigned with evidence of at least one of the following: Ankle/brachial index of 0.54-0.66; ankle pressure of 66-83 mm Hg; toe pressure of 40-49 mm Hg; or transcutaneous oxygen tension of 40-49 mm Hg.  A 60 percent rating is assigned with evidence of at least one of the following: Ankle/brachial index of 0.40-0.53; ankle pressure of 50-65 mm Hg; toe pressure of 30-39 mm Hg; or transcutaneous oxygen tension of 30-39 mm Hg.  A 100 percent rating is assigned with evidence of at least one of the following: Ankle/brachial index less than or equal to 0.39; ankle pressure less than 50 mm Hg; toe pressure less than 30 mm Hg; or transcutaneous oxygen tension less than 30 mm Hg.

Note(2) accompanying the diagnostic code provides that if ankle pressure, toe pressure, and transcutaneous oxygen tension testing are not of record, the disability is to be evaluated based on the ankle/brachial index unless the examiner states that such testing is needed in a particular case because the ankle/brachial index does not sufficiently reflect the severity of the veteran's peripheral arterial disease.  In all other cases, the disability is to be evaluated based on the test that provides the highest impairment value.

Turning to the evidence, on VA examination in January 2020, the Veteran reported having aching and cramping in his legs, and that his symptoms were worsened with prolonged walking.  On clinical assessment, the examiner found that the disability was not manifested by ischemic limb pain at rest or deep ischemic ulcers.  On the right, the ankle/brachial index was 0.77, and on the left, the ankle/brachial index was 1.00.

In an April 2021 VA treatment record, the ankle/brachial index was 0.99, and on the left, the ankle/brachial index was 1.14.

On VA examination in August 2021, the Veteran reported having ongoing pain in the feet and legs that was worsened with weight-bearing.  On clinical assessment, the examiner found that the disability was not manifested by ischemic limb pain at rest or deep ischemic ulcers.  On the right, the ankle/brachial index was 0.83, and on the left, the ankle/brachial index was 1.01.

On VA examination in October 2022, the Veteran reported having constant leg pain with walking.  The examiner did not find evidence of ischemic limb pain at rest or deep ischemic ulcers.  On the right, the ankle/brachial index was 0.92, and on the left, the ankle/brachial index was 1.07.  The examiner stated that ankle/brachial index testing sufficiently reflected the severity of the disability.

At the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran and his spouse reported that he experiences balance issues on the right side.  He requires a stool to prop his legs up while watching television, and has ongoing swelling.  The Veteran's spouse reported that he drags his feet when he walks, and requires cushioning inside of his shoes.  He reported having ongoing pain and difficulty with ambulation. 

Considering the pertinent evidence in light of the governing legal authority, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of disability ratings in excess of 60 percent for the Veteran's peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral lower extremities under either version of the regulations.  As noted, a 100 percent disability rating under the prior version of the regulations requires evidence of ischemic limb pain at rest, and; either deep ischemic ulcers or ankle/brachial index of 0.4 or less.  Under the current version of the regulations, a 100 percent rating requires evidence of At least one of the following: Ankle/brachial index less than or equal to 0.39; ankle pressure less than 50 mm Hg; toe pressure less than 30 mm Hg; or transcutaneous oxygen tension less than 30 mm Hg.  Throughout the appeal period, examiners have determined that the Veteran does not have ischemic limb pain at rest, ischemic ulcers, and his ankle/brachial index, at worst, has been 0.77 on the right and 1.00 on the left.

The Board can point to no other diagnostic code that would provide a basis for the assignment of a separate or higher rating for the Veteran's disabilities.  When a disability is specifically listed in the Rating Schedule, as is impairment of the peripheral arterial disease, it is not to be rated by analogy.  See Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015).  

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of disability ratings in excess of 60 percent for the Veteran's peripheral vascular disease of the bilateral legs.  In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt; however, the doctrine is not for application.

Earlier Effective Dates for the Awards of a TDIU & DEA Benefits

A TDIU claim is a claim for increased compensation, and the effective date rules for increased compensation apply to a TDIU claim.  See Hurd v. West, 13 Vet. App. 449 (2000).  Under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a), the effective date of an increase in a veteran's disability compensation shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(2) provides an exception to this general rule: "The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if application is received within one year from such date."  Thus, "the plain language of [section] 5110(b)(2) . . . only permits an earlier effective date for increased disability compensation if that disability increased during the one-year period before the filing of the claim."

Thus, three possible dates may be assigned depending on the facts of an increased rating earlier effective date case:

(1) If an increase in disability occurs after the claim is filed, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (date entitlement arose) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(1));

(2) If an increase in disability precedes the claim by a year or less, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (factually ascertainable) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2)); or

(3) If an increase in disability precedes the claim by more than a year, the date that the claim is received (date of claim) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(2)).

See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982-84 (Fed. Cir. 2010); Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997).

"Claim" is defined broadly to include a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p); Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32, 34-5 (1998); Servello v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 196, 199 (1992). 

VA amended its regulations on March 24, 2015, to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on standard forms prescribed by the Secretary, regardless of the type of claim or posture in which the claim arises.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 57660 (Sept. 25, 2014). The amendments, however, are only effective for claims and appeals filed on or after March 24, 2015.  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  Evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

13. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of TDIU is denied.

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of a TDIU.  At the hearing, he reported that he has continuously prosecuted his claim since it was originally filed in the Legacy appeals system.  

On April 15, 2013, VA received an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ), in which the Veteran requested an award of a TDIU.  In a March 2014 rating decision, the VA Regional Office denied the claim.  The Veteran perfected an appeal of the denial, and thereafter continuously pursued his claim.

In December 2019, June 2021, May 2022, and December 2022, and August 2023 the Board remanded the claim for further development.

In a September 2023 rating decision, the VA Regional Office granted a TDIU, effective August 3, 2021.

In September 2024, within one year of the rating decision, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, in which he disagreed with the effective date assigned.  

As an initial inquest, the Board reviewed the record to determine the earliest possible informal or formal claim for a TDIU.  A TDIU may be raised by a formal claim, such as a VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability), or as part and parcel of an underlying claim for a higher rating for a service-connected disability.  Specifically, in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that when entitlement to a TDIU is raised during the adjudicatory process of the underlying disability or during the appeal of the initial rating assigned for that disability, it is part of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability.  Id. at 454.  See also Phillips v. McDonough, No. 22-2575, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims (July 30, 2024) (holding that a TDIU can be raised at various stages of the claims process and may need to be addressed as part of separate claim streams under the Appeals Modernization Act; the effective date of the award of TDIU benefits will depend on the specific claim VA is then adjudicating.)

Here, an informal application for a TDIU was received on April 15, 2013, and the claim was continuously pursued.  On review of the record, the Board can point to no communication dated prior to the April 15, 2013, claim that could be interpreted as a claim for a TDIU.  Neither a formal application for a TDIU via VA Form 21-8940, or a claim for a TDIU via Rice, was received prior to this.  Thus, April 15, 2013, serves as the earliest potential claim for a TDIU.  

The Board will next turn to the record to determine when entitlement to a TDIU arose.  In this regard, VA's rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The percentage ratings (generally from 0 to 100 percent) represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 

It is the policy of VA, however, to assign a total disability evaluation (100 percent) when the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities, from obtaining or maintaining "substantially gainful employment" consistent with his or her education and occupational experience.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341. 

A threshold requirement for eligibility for a TDIU under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) is that if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more; if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability must bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  

It is the established policy of the Department of Veterans Affairs, however, that all Veterans who are unable to secure a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities "shall be rated totally disabled."  Therefore, rating boards are to submit all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards set forth in § 4.16(a), to the Director, Compensation Service (Director), for extra-schedular consideration.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  The Court has held that the Board has no power to award a TDIU under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b) in the first instance without ensuring that the claim is referred to the Director for consideration of an "extraschedular rating."  Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 10 (2001).  

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) defined "substantially gainful employment," holding that there is both an economic and a noneconomic component; the economic component means "an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person," while the noneconomic component requires consideration of a veteran's ability to secure or follow that type of employment.  

The Court set forth a number of factors to consider in making the latter determination, including the following: the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; his or her physical abilities, including any audio or visual limitations, as well as limitations in lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching; and his or her mental ability, including limitations in memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment.  Marginal employment generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran's earned annual income does not exceed the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person.  Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts-found basis (includes but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.  Consideration shall be given in all claims to the nature of the employment and the reason for termination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a)(5).

In LaBruzza v. McDonough, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that "employment in a protected environment" means "a lower income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market."  LaBruzza v. McDonough, No. 21-4467 and No. 20-8562 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2024).  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  Evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Prior to August 3, 2021, the Veteran had four service-connected disabilities: prostate cancer residuals (10 percent disabling from February 1, 2012, and 40 percent disabling from August 14, 2019), tinnitus (10 percent disabling), erectile dysfunction (noncompensable), and bilateral hearing loss (noncompensable).  See November 2023 Rating Decision Codesheet (most recent codesheet).  His combined disability rating was 50 percent or less.  As such, and as none of the exceptions outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) are applicable, the combined schedular criteria for a TDIU were not met during this portion of the appeal.

The Board has considered that herein, a higher rating of 30 percent has been granted for the Veteran's neuropathy of the right upper extremity.  However, as service connection for this disability was not in effect until August 3, 2021, and the Board herein has also denied an earlier effective date in this regard, the award does not impact the matter of a TDIU prior to August 3, 2021.

Further, the Board notes that in June 2024, the Director, Compensation Service, denied an extraschedular TDIU.  Thus, with this procedural history, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded him from engaging in substantially gainful employment so as to warrant a TDIU on an extraschedular basis prior to August 3, 2021.  The Director's decision is not evidence, but, rather, a de facto Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision, and the Board must conduct a de novo review of this decision.  Wages v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 233, 238-39 (2015) (holding that the Board conducts de novo review of the Director's decision denying extraschedular consideration).  

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran completed high school and did not attend college.  In his VA Form 21-8940, he reported that last worked full-time in 2010 as a warehouseman.  He reported that he has not received any other education or training before or since becoming too disabled to work.  Id.

On VA general examination in April 2011, the examiner noted that the Veteran's service-connected prostate cancer residuals and erectile dysfunction had no impact on his usual occupation or usual daily activities.

On VA prostate examination in July 2011, the examiner opined that the Veteran had "minimal" residuals of prostate cancer, with no recurrence.

On VA prostate examination in February 2014, the examiner opined that the disability had no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

On VA audiological examination in February 2014, the Veteran's hearing loss impacted work to the extent he had difficulty hearing people, and his tinnitus impacted work to the extent that it was irritating.

On VA audiological examination in January 2020, the examiner stated she could not opine on the impact of the Veteran's disabilities on his ability to work as his hearing threshold measurements were invalid on testing.  The Veteran reported that his tinnitus impacted work to the extent he had to learn to get used to it.

On VA erectile dysfunction examination in January 2020, the examiner opined that the disability had no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.

On VA prostate examination in January 2020, the disability impacted work to the extent that the Veteran had to be close to a bathroom in order to use it frequently.  

In a September 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was awarded service connection for the following additional disabilities, each effective August 3, 2021: diabetes mellitus, neuropathy of the right upper extremity, neuropathy of the left upper extremity, neuropathy of the right lower extremity, neuropathy of the left lower extremity, peripheral vascular disease of the right lower extremity, and peripheral vascular disease of the left lower extremity.  He was additionally awarded service connection for hypertension, effective August 10, 2022.  The VA Regional Office granted a TDIU, effective August 3, 2021.

Prior August 3, 2021, the record consisted of seven VA examination reports containing no indication of any physical limitation contemplated by Ray, such as limitations in lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, or reaching.  He was not service-connected for any disability causing a visual limitation, and his audiological limitations were shown to be minimal.  He was not service-connected for any mental disability, and had no limitations in memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, or demonstrate reliability and productivity due to a service-connected disability, as also contemplated by Ray.  There is no evidence to the contrary.  In short, while the economic component of Ray was met because the Veteran was not working prior to August 3, 2021, the noneconomic component was not satisfied.  Rather, the evidence persuasively indicates that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities rendered him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as of the August 3, 2021, date that numerous other disabilities were found connected to service.

Where the increase in disability occurs after the claim is filed, the proper effective date is the date the increase is shown to have occurred (date entitlement arose).  38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o)(1)).  Here, as entitlement arose on August 3, 2021, after the filing of the April 15, 2013, claim, the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of an earlier effective date for the Veteran's award of a TDIU.

14. An effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for the award of DEA benefits denied.

DEA benefits under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 are available when a Veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable and has a permanent total service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a).  With certain exceptions not applicable here, the effective date for the grant of such award shall, to the extent feasible, correspond to effective date for awards of disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 5113(a).

The effective date assigned for eligibility for DEA benefits was based on a finding that the Veteran was totally disabled based on individual unemployability due to his service-connected disabilities.  The award of DEA benefits was thus predicated directly on a simultaneous finding of total disability, and the effective date of DEA eligibility cannot precede this date.  Accordingly, an effective date earlier than August 3, 2021, for entitlement to DEA benefits is denied.  The law is dispositive of the issue.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.