Citation Nr: A25030001
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240417-434146
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, is denied.

Entitlement to 20 percent rating for left knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is granted effective April 2, 2018.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is denied.

Entitlement to 20 percent rating for right knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is granted effective April 2, 2018.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence weighs persuasively against assigning a compensable rating for limited extension of the Veteran's left and right knees.

2. The Veteran's right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, is manifest by painful motion with extension limited to 5 degrees during flareups.

3. The Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, is manifest by painful motion with extension limited to 5 degrees during flareups.

4. The Veteran's right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is manifest by moderate medial and lateral instability. Severe instability, complete ligament tear, and surgical repair have not been shown.

5. The Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, is manifest by moderate medial and lateral instability. Severe instability, complete ligament tear, and surgical repair have not been shown.

6. The Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable rating for right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5003-5261

2. The criteria for a compensable rating for right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5003-5261.

3. The criteria for a 20 percent rating for Veteran's right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, but no higher, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

4. The criteria for a uniform 20 percent rating Veteran's left knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability, but no higher, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

5. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1975 to September 1977.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 15, 2023 rating decision that denied entitlement to a TDIU, a December 21, 2023 rating decision that partially increased the ratings for the Veteran's left and right knee instability disabilities and left and right knee extension disabilities, and a March 2024 rating decision that partially increased the ratings for the Veteran's left and right knee instability disabilities that was issued on both March 14, 2024 and March 18, 2024. 

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in April 2024 and elected the Direct Review docket. The Board may only consider the evidence of record when the rating decisions on appeal were issued and cannot consider any evidence received thereafter. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Agency of Original Jurisdiction also issued a Supplemental Statement of the Case in March 2024 that addressed the Veteran's left and right knee flexion disabilities. However, the Veteran and his attorney did not appeal the Supplemental Statement of the Case, which was issued on March 13, 2024. None of the rating decisions on appeal addressed the evaluations for the Veteran's bilateral knee flexion disabilities. The VA Form 10182 is clear that only rating decisions were being appealed, and the March 13, 2024 Supplemental Statement of the Case was not listed as a date of a decision being appealed. As such, the Veteran's left and right knee flexion disabilities, which are assigned separate 10 percent ratings, have not been appealed.

Disability Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

VA regulations set forth at 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 provide for consideration of functional impairment due to pain on motion when evaluating the severity of a musculoskeletal disability. If feasible, these determinations are to be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, or pain. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 84-5 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. Moreover, joint testing is to be conducted on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint. Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 170 (2016).

Where there is question as to which of the two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. If the evidence for and against a claim is an equipoise, the claim will be granted. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension.

2. Left knee osteoarthritis and patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension.

The Veteran seeks higher ratings for his service-connected left and right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome. Both disabilities are currently assigned noncompensable ratings for limitation of extension. Both ratings are effective November 15, 2023. 

The Veteran's right knee limitation of extension was originally rated 10 percent disabling. However, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued a rating decision in July 2024 reducing the rating for the right knee limitation of extension to 0 percent effective November 15, 2023, the entire appeals period. The reduction occurred after the Veteran filed his VA Form 10182 initiating this appeal. The Veteran has not appealed that rating reduction, nor is the propriety of the reduction part of this current appeal. Should the Veteran wish to appeal that reduction, he may do so by filing a VA Form 10182 within one year of the July 2024 rating decision. 

The ratings at issue have been assigned under hyphenated Diagnostic Code 5003- 5215. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. Diagnostic Code 5003 is for degenerative arthritis, and instructs that degenerative arthritis established by x-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate diagnostic codes for the specific joints involved.

Diagnostic Code 5261 pertains to limited extension of the leg. Extension limited to 5 degrees warrants a 0 percent rating, extension limited to 10 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating, extension limited to 15 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating, extension limited to 20 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating, extension limited to 30 degrees warrants a 40 percent rating, and extension limited to 45 degrees or more warrants a maximum 50 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

For rating purposes, normal range of motion in a knee joint is from 0 to 140 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II. To warrant a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5261, extension of the Veteran's knees must approximate the functional equivalent of extension limited to 10 degrees or more.

The ratings at issue in this appeal stem from an application for an increased rating for the Veteran's knee disabilities that was submitted following receipt of an intent to file a claim on April 2, 2018. 

The Veteran was provided a VA knee examination in July 2018. He reported residual weakness and pain with limited range of motion in both of his knees. Regarding flareups, the Veteran reported his knees would give out when using stairs or shifting his weight. Initial range of motion testing of the right knee showed flexion to 105 degrees and extension to 0 degrees, with pain on both flexion and extension. Left knee initial range of motion testing showed flexion to 100 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. After three repetitions, right knee flexion was limited to 90 degrees and left knee flexion was limited to 95 degrees, with 0 degrees of extension bilaterally. The examiner estimated that flareups would cause right knee flexion to decrease 80 degrees and left knee flexion to decrease to 75 degrees due to pain, weakness, and fatigue, but that extension would remain to 0 degrees bilaterally. Muscle strength was full, and no ankylosis or muscle atrophy was noted. No meniscus conditions were noted, and the Veteran had not had any knee surgeries.

The Veteran was provided another VA knee examination in February 2021. The Veteran reported knee pains when standing too long, and that he could only walk on flat surfaces and had difficulty using stairs. Initial range of motion testing of the right knee showed flexion to 90 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. Left knee initial range of motion testing showed flexion to 80 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. There was no additional loss of range of motion of either knee after three repetitions. The examiner estimated that repeated use over time would cause right knee flexion to decrease to 70 degrees and left knee flexion to decrease to 60 degrees due to pain and fatigability, but that extension would remain to 0 degrees bilaterally. Active and passive range of motion were noted as being the same for both knees, and the examiner found no pain on flexion, extension, weightbearing, non-weightbearing, or active and passive motion. Muscle strength was full, and no ankylosis or muscle atrophy was noted. No meniscus conditions were noted, and the Veteran had not had any knee surgeries.

The February 2021 examiner did indicate the Veteran had not reported any flareups during the examination. However, the Board remanded this matter in May 2023 to obtain a new VA knee examination in part because the Veteran had reported worsening flareups in a statement received in September 2021, including that he could not stand or walk for long periods due to increasing pain and weakness. In addition, the February 2021 examination report shows the Veteran did report he had increased pain when standing too long. The February 2021 examination does not fully address flareups.

The Veteran was provided another VA knee examination in November 2023. He reported bilateral knee pains with trouble bending his knees, and flareups consisting of worsening pain that occurred every month or two and lasted a couple of days. He also had trouble walking and standing for prolonged period due to pain, was unable to get up from a kneeling position with his knees alone and had trouble getting out of seats and using stairs. Initial range of motion testing during the November 2023 examination showed right knee flexion to 90 degrees and extension to 0 degrees, and left knee flexion to 90 degrees and extension to 0 degrees, with pain on both flexion and extension bilaterally. There was no additional loss of range of motion of either knee after three repetitions. The examiner estimated that pain would cause right and left knee flexion to decrease to 85 degrees, and right and left knee extension to drop to 5 degrees, with both repeated use over time and during flareups. Active and passive range of motion were noted as being the same for both knees, and the examiner noted pain on weightbearing, non-weightbearing, active range of motion, and at rest.

The Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued a rating decision in December 2023 that granted service connection for the Veteran's left and right knee limitation of extension effective November 15, 2023, the date of the examination.

Finally, the Veteran was provided a VA knee examination in February 2024. He reported bilateral knee pains with limited range of motion and that his knees gave out underneath him, and that going downstairs and squatting were difficult.  Regarding flareups, the Veteran reported sharp shooting pains when walking or sitting for too long and going up and downstairs. Flareups occurred every month and the sharp pain lasts a few hours, with dull pains for a few days afterward. He also reported difficulty doing normal everyday things during flareups, and that he could not walk, bend, or stand for too long due to the pain, with difficulty getting in and out of cars and bed, using stairs, and bending down.

Initial range of motion testing during the February 2024 examination showed right knee flexion to 110 degrees and extension to 0 degrees, and left knee flexion to 110 degrees and extension to 0 degrees, with pain on both flexion and extension bilaterally. There was no additional loss of range of motion of either knee after three repetitions. The examiner estimated that pain, weakness, and lack of endurance would cause right and left knee flexion to decrease to 90 degrees, and right and left knee extension to drop to 5 degrees, with both repeated use over time and during flareups. Active and passive range of motion were noted as being the same for both knees, and the examiner noted pain on weightbearing, non-weightbearing, active and passive range of motion, and at rest.

Considering the foregoing, the Board finds the VA examinations are highly probative evidence weighing against the claims for compensable ratings for the Veteran's left and right knee extension disabilities. As noted above, a noncompensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5261 contemplates painful extension limited to 5 degrees. The November 2023 and February 2024 VA examinations are adequate and highly probative evidence that extension of the Veteran's left and right knees would be limited to 5 degrees during flareups and with repeated use over time due to factors such as increased pain, weakness, and lack of endurance. 

The examiners interviewed the Veteran and considered his lay statements regarding his flareups and were sufficiently informed of and documented the additional increased symptoms and limitations experienced by the Veteran during his flareups and after use over time, and ascertained adequate information regarding the frequency, duration, characteristics, severity, and additional functional loss during flareups and with use over time. Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011); Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-5 (2017). Based on the physical examination of the Veteran's knees, initial range of motion measurements, and the Veteran's own reports of his impairment with flareups and use, the examiners estimated extension of both knees would be limited to 5 degrees.

The remaining evidence does not contradict these estimates. The examinations are generally consistent with the Veteran's lay reports that he cannot bend either knee "all the way out," indicating that he cannot fully extend his knees. While initial range of motion testing has shown full extension, his reports of increased pain and loss of range of motion during flareups is consistent with the examiners' findings that flareups and use over time cause extension to be limited to 5 degrees. The examinations are also consistent with the VA medical records associated with the file, which show complaints and treatments for chronic bilateral knee pains that worsen with kneeling, squatting, and walking. However, the VA treatment records during the appeals period do not include extension measurements showing greater than 5 degrees of extension.

A compensable rating for left and right knee extension is not warranted. A compensable rating based on extension requires knee extension be limited to 10 degrees or greater. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261. The most probative evidence does not demonstrate extension of the Veteran's knees has been limited to more than the 5 degrees estimates provided by the VA examiners for flareups and use over time. Initial range of motion measurements have consistently shown full extension of both knees to 0 degrees. Based on information provided by the Veteran regarding flareups and repeated use, the examiners have estimated 5 degrees of extension at the most. The evidence weighs against finding factors such as pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination result in extension being limited to 10 degrees or more. 

The additional impairment caused by flareups as described by the November 2023 and February 2024 examiners is explicitly contemplated by a 0 percent ratings for painful extension limited to 5 degrees. Furthermore, the examiners did consider factors such as pain, fatigue, weakness, and lack of endurance. De Luca, 8 Vet. App. at, 204-7; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59. Extension is shown to be limited to 5 degrees at worst, below the 10 degrees or more that is required for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5261. The examiners provided the estimates after reviewing the claims file and interviewing and examining the Veteran, and the estimates are highly probative evidence that the Veteran's painful right and left knee limitations of extension more nearly approximate the criteria of a noncompensable rating during flareups and with use over time.

The Veteran has not sought an earlier effective date for the noncompensable ratings for his left or right knee limitation of extension. The ratings at issue in this appeal stem from an application for an increased rating for the Veteran's knee disabilities that was submitted following receipt of an intent to file a claim on April 2, 2018. In addition, painful joints are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. Earlier VA knee examinations do reveal the Veteran experienced painful extension of both of his knees before the current November 15, 2023 effective dates for limited extension. However, the Veteran is already in receipt of at least the minimum compensable rating for his left and right knees for the entire appeals period. Since April 2, 2018, the Veteran has been in receipt of at least a 10 percent rating for limitations of flexion for his left and right knees under Diagnostic Code 5260 pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 are inapplicable where, as in this case, a joint disability is already being compensated at a compensable level based on actually painful motion. See Vilfranc v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 357, 361 (2017). In addition, and as explained above, the criteria for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5261 for limited extension have not otherwise been more nearly approximated. 

In reaching this decision, the Board acknowledges that the rating criteria for musculoskeletal disabilities does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medications. Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (Vet. App. March 12, 2025). However, the evidence indicates the Veteran does not take medications for his bilateral knee disabilities. In a September 2021 statement, the Veteran stated that he used to be prescribed medications for his knees but that his doctors had stopped prescribing those medications because they negatively impacted other health conditions. He also stated that he had noticed a difference in his pain levels since the medication was discontinued. VA treatment records corroborate the Veteran's statements. The records include extensive lists of the Veteran's active medications throughout the appeals period, and do not show the Veteran is currently prescribed medications for his knees. The VA knee examinations indicate the Veteran does not receive treatments specifically for his knees, and he did not report taking medications. Notably, the November 2023 and February 2024 VA knee examinations are the most complete and probative VA knee examinations available and were provided after the Veteran's medications were discontinued. The Veteran does not take medications for his knees, and the November 2023 and February 2024 examinations contemplate this lack of medication, including the range of motion estimates for flareups and use over time. As a result, the Board finds a remand to consider potentially ameliorative effects of medications is not warranted. 

The Board has considered whether separate evaluations, or a higher evaluation, may be warranted for the Veteran's knees under other Diagnostic Codes. Separate ratings may be assigned for knee disabilities when none of the symptomatology overlaps, and the separate rating is based on additional disabling symptomatology. The evaluation of the same disability under several Diagnostic Codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided. Nevertheless, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury so long as the symptomatology for one disorder is not duplicative of the symptomatology of the other disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

First, the Board finds the evidence does not show malunion or nonunion of the tibia and fibula or genu recurvatum, and separate disability ratings under Diagnostic Codes 5262 and 5263 are not warranted. Regarding ankylosis, the VA examinations show the Veteran does not have ankylosis. A rating based on ankylosis may be met by evidence demonstrating the functional equivalent of ankylosis. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 20 (2021). Diagnostic Code 5256 applies to ankylosis of the knee and provides the definition for knee ankylosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for a knee in flexion between 10 and 20 degrees, a 50 percent rating for a knee in flexion between 20 and 45 degrees, and a 60 percent rating for a knee fixed in flexion at an angle of 45 degrees or more. Diagnostic Code 5256 does not apply to the Veteran's left or right knees, as the knees have not been shown to be fixed in any degree of extension or flexion as defined in the code. The Veteran's knees have had flexion to 60 degrees at worst during the appeals period, higher than the requirements for a rating based on the functional equivalent of ankylosis.

The Veteran is in receipt of separate 10 percent ratings for his left and right knee under Diagnostic Code 5260 for knee patellofemoral syndrome, currently assigned under Diagnostic Code 5261 for limited flexion of the knees. Flexion limited to 60 degrees or greater warrants a 0 percent rating, flexion limited to 45 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating, flexion limited to 30 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating, and flexion limited to 15 degrees warrants the maximum 30 percent rating. The Veteran's 10 percent ratings were assigned pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, which allows at least the minimum compensable rating for a joint to be assigned for painful motion. 

This appeal does not include an increased rating for flexion of either the left or right knees. As explained above, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued a Supplemental Statement of the Case in March 2024 that continued the 10 percent ratings for Veteran's left and right knee flexion disabilities. The Veteran and his attorney did not appeal the Supplemental Statement of the Case, and none of the rating decisions on appeal addressed the evaluations for the Veteran's bilateral knee flexion disabilities. The Veteran has not otherwise indicated that he wishes to seek a rating in excess of 10 percent for the limited flexion of his left and right knees. As such, the separate ratings for limited flexion of the Veteran's left and right knees are not subject to this appeal. Regardless, the Board notes a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 is not currently warranted, as flexion of either the right or left knee has not been shown to be limited to 30 degrees or less. At worst, flexion of the right knee has been limited to 70 degrees and left knee flexion to 60 degrees, even additional impairment caused by flareups and use over time. 

Diagnostic Code 5258 provides a 20 percent evaluation for dislocated semilunar cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint. Here, there is little indication any of the Veteran's symptoms are related to dislocated semilunar cartilage of his left and right knees. The Veteran has not generally reported that his knee locks, and VA examinations are negative for effusion. Diagnostic Code 5259 provides a 10 percent evaluation for symptomatic removal of the semilunar cartilage. All VA examinations indicate the Veteran has not had surgery on either of his knees, including cartilage removal.

Finally, Diagnostic Code 5257 pertains to instability of the knee. The Veteran is in receipt of separate ratings for left and right knee instability, and the Board will address these ratings in greater detail below. 

In sum, the evidence weighs persuasively against assigning a compensable rating for limited extension of the Veteran's left and right knees. Moreover, the probative and persuasive evidence does not warrant a separate or higher rating under another Diagnostic Code. 

3. Right knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability.

4. Left knee osteoarthritis with patellofemoral pain syndrome, instability.

The Veteran also seeks increased ratings for his left and right knee instability disabilities. The Veteran's left knee instability has been rated 10 percent disabling from April 2, 2018, and 20 percent disabling since February 1, 2024. The Veteran's right knee instability has been rated 10 percent disabling since April 2, 2018, the entire appeals period. 

The ratings at issue have been assigned under hyphenated Diagnostic Code 5003-5257. As noted above, Diagnostic Code 5003 applies to degenerative arthritis. Diagnostic Code 5257 pertains to other impairment of the knee.

Diagnostic Code 5257 provided a 10, 20, or 30 percent ratings for slight, moderate, or severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability of the knee. 38 C.F.R. §4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257 (2020). The ratings for the Veteran's left and right knee instability disabilities have been assigned using this version of the diagnostic code. Descriptive words such as "slight," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence for "equitable and just decisions." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

Effective February 7, 2021, and while the Veteran's appeals for increased ratings were pending, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended, including Diagnostic Code 5257. Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the veteran will be applied. The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). The new version of 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a does not allow VA to apply the current version of Diagnostic Code 5257 before February 7, 2021. However, the Board is not precluded from applying prior versions of the applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective dates of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the appeal. Moreover, neither new nor the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257 is more beneficial to the Veteran. 

The current version of Diagnostic Code 5257 provides that for recurrent subluxation or instability of the knee, a 10 percent rating for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.

A 20 percent rating is assigned for one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; (b) Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  

A 30 percent rating is assigned for recurrent subluxation or instability when there is an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation. See 38 C.F.R. §4.71a,?Diagnostic Code 5257 (2022). 

Alternatively, the current version of?Diagnostic Code 5257?provides that for patellar instability, a 10 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.

A 20 percent rating is assigned for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker. Id.

These appeals stem from an application for an increased rating for the Veteran's knee disabilities that was submitted following receipt of an intent to file a claim on April 2, 2018. The Board has addressed range of motion above and will address evidence relating to instability as follows.

The Veteran was provided a VA knee examination in July 2018. He reported residual weakness and pain with limited range of motion in both of his knees, and that sometimes his knees would give out. He also reported his knees would give out when using stairs or shifting his weight during flareups. The examiner noted no history of recurrent subluxation or lateral instability. Joint stability testing showed normal anterior instability, posterior instability, medial instability, and lateral instability testing for both knees. The examiner noted the Veteran did currently use any assistive devices. 

The Veteran was provided another VA knee examination in February 2021, and reported both of his knees would give out and that he had unstable sensations with lateral movement. The examiner again found no history of recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, no history of recurrent patellar instability, and noted there had not been sprains or ligament tears. No history of knee surgeries was noted, and no current prescription for an assistive device was noted. No specific stability testing was documented in the February 2021 examination report.

The Board remanded this matter in May 2023 to obtain a new VA knee examination in part because the Veteran had reported worsening flareups in a statement received in September 2021. Regarding instability, the Veteran had stated that his knees were weak and would give out, and that he could not walk or stand for long periods of time or carry much weight or his knees would buckle.

The Veteran was provided another VA knee examination in November 2023, and he again reported that his knees gave out. The examiner noted recurrent subluxation and persistent instability, and recurrent patellar instability, in both of the Veteran's knees. No ligament tears or sprains were noted, and there were no knee surgeries, and the examiner found no currently prescribed assistive devices. Joint stability testing showed normal anterior instability, posterior instability, and lateral instability testing for both knees, and noted "1+" of medial instability for both knees, which coincided with 0-5 millimeters of movement. The examiner determined the Veteran had "slight" bilateral knee instability. 

Finally, the Veteran was provided a VA knee examination in February 2024. Regarding instability, the Veteran reported again that his knees were unstable and gave out underneath him, causing him to fall at times. The February 2024 examiner also noted recurrent subluxation, persistent instability, and recurrent patellar instability in both of the Veteran's knees. No ligament tears or sprains were noted, there were no knee surgeries, and the examiner found no currently prescribed assistive devices. Joint stability testing showed normal anterior and posterior stability for both knees. The examiner noted "1+" of medial instability and lateral instability for both knees, which coincided with 0-5 millimeters of movement. The examiner determined the Veteran had "moderate" bilateral knee instability.

The February 2024 examiner also explained that, as knee instability progresses over the years, it becomes slight to moderate, depending on the frequency and severity of the knees becoming unstable. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had reported that the frequency and severity of his knees feeling unstable nad increased over the years since service his in-service injury.

Considering the foregoing, the Board finds 20 percent ratings are warranted for the Veteran's left and right knee instability for more nearly approximating the criteria for "moderate" instability under the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257 for the entire appeals period. However, a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted. 

No left or right knee instability was found during the July 2018 and February 2021 VA knee examinations. The Board notes that neither the July 2018 nor the February 2021 examiners identified any history of left or right knee subluxation or lateral instability, despite the Veteran's bilateral knee instability being service connected since April 2013. In addition, the February 2021 examination report does not contain any stability testing results, suggesting that no stability testing was performed during the examination. 

The Veteran has consistently maintained that his left and right knees are unstable, buckle, and give way causing him to fall. He has also consistently reported that his symptoms have worsened steadily throughout the appeal period. The Board notes the Veteran has repeatedly reported that his knee instability causes him to fall, and that earlier VA knee examinations provided before the current appeals period do not indicate his instability previously caused falls. 

The November 2023 examiner finally noted the Veteran did have a history of recurrent subluxation, persistent instability, and recurrent patellar instability in both of his knees. Knee stability testing showed "1+" of medial instability for both knees, coinciding with 0-5 millimeters of movement, and the November 2023 examiner found "slight" bilateral knee instability. Approximately three months later, the February 2024 examiner also noted the Veteran's history of knee instability and noted "1+" of medial instability and lateral instability for both knees, showing 0-5 millimeters of movement. The February 2024 examiner then determined the Veteran had "moderate" bilateral knee instability and explained that knee instability progresses and worsens over the years. 

The February 2024 examiner also explained that, as knee instability progresses over the years, it becomes slight to moderate, depending on the frequency and severity of the knees becoming unstable. The examiner also noted that the Veteran had reported that the frequency and severity of his knees feeling unstable nad increased over the years since service his in-service injury.

The July 2018 and February 2021 examinations are less probative than the later November 2023 and February 2024 examinations regarding the presence and severity of the Veteran's knee instability. No history of any instability was noted, and no stability testing appears to have been performed in February 2021, despite the Veteran's history of service-connected left and right knee instability. Furthermore, objective medical evidence is not required to establish knee instability under Diagnostic Code 5257. See English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347, 352-53 (2018). The Board finds the Veteran's reports of his knee instability are credible and were confirmed by the later November 2023 and February 2024 examiners. VA treatment records also show complaints and treatments for knee instability. During an April 2019 VA orthopedic consultation, the Veteran reported intermittent spells where his knees give way and he falls to the ground, and he described these spells as occurring intermittently every several months. The Board also finds the Veteran's instability was worse than "slight." As explained by the February 2024 examiner, knee instability worsens with time. The Veteran has competently and credibly reported that his knee instability has worsened, and now results in occasional falls. Both medial and lateral instability was found during the February 2024 examination, and the examiner determined the Veteran's knee instability was "moderate" in severity, coinciding with a 20 percent rating under the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257. 

Considering the Veteran's lay reports and the most probative VA examinations, the Board finds that uniform 20 percent evaluations for moderate left and right knee instability are warranted under the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257 during the current appeals period. However, a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal under either the new or old versions of Diagnostic Code 5257.

The most probative, persuasive evidence weighs against finding that either the left or right knee instability has more nearly approximated been "severe" to allow for 30 percent rating under the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257. The Veteran's knees do buckle and are unstable, but the Veteran's lay statements indicate his knees become most unstable during intermittent flareups with increased pains. He has reported intermittent spells of instability during VA treatments. Notably, VA examinations have shown only "1+" instability in lateral and medial stability testing, coinciding with 0-5 millimeters of movement. No higher degree of lateral or medial motion has been shown during testing, and the remaining stability tests for anterior and posterior stability have been normal throughout the appeals period. The Veteran's knee instability also does not require assistive devices such as braces. None of the Veteran's treatment records or the VA examinations describe his knee instability as severe or show findings consistent with severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.

The Board acknowledges the term "severe" is not defined in 38 C.F.R. §4.71a or Diagnostic Code 5257. However, the Board finds that 0-5 millimeters of lateral and medial instability that intermittently makes the Veteran fall is consisting with "moderate" instability of the Veteran's knees. Stated another way, even considering the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements, objective maximum measurements of 0-5 millimeters of lateral and medial instability, with no documented anterior and posterior instability throughout the appeals period, is inconsistent with the greater level of impairment contemplated by a 30 percent rating for "severe" instability.  The frequency and severity of the Veteran's bilateral knee instability has not more nearly approximated the "severe" level contemplated by a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5257. 

Regarding the new version of Diagnostic Code 5257, the Veteran has left and right knee patellar instability, subluxation, and instability. However, the Veteran's disabilities and symptoms do not meet, or approximate, the criteria corresponding to a 30 percent rating under the new version of Diagnostic Code 5257. For recurrent subluxation or instability, a percent rating requires an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear and a current prescription of an assistive device and bracing for ambulation. VA treatment records and examinations do indicate the Veteran was previously prescribed bilateral knee braces in August 2014 for instability, but that he has not used any braces throughout the appeals period. There is also little indication in the record that the Veteran has an unrepaired complete ligament tear in either knee, and he has not had knee surgeries. In addition, the evidence does not indicate the Veteran has been prescribed both an assistive device and a knee brace during the appeals period. For patellar instability, a 30 percent rating under the new criteria requires surgical repair, and the Veteran has not had a left or right knee surgery. The evidence weighs persuasively against assigning a 30 percent rating for the Veteran's left and right knee instability under the new version of Diagnostic Code 5257.

In sum, the evidence weighs in favor of assigning a uniform 20 percent rating, but no higher, for moderate right and left knee instability under the old version of Diagnostic Code 5257 that was in effect when the Veteran filed these increased rating claims. The evidence weighs persuasively against assigning a 30 percent rating for either knee. 

5. TDIU.

Finally, the Veteran seeks a TDIU. It is established VA policy that Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. A finding of total disability is appropriate when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340 (a)(1), 4.15. 

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of either (1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is a sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16 (a). 

Here, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have met the schedular requirements for a TDIU since April 2, 2018, the entire appeals period. Throughout the appeals period, the Veteran has had one disability rated at 40 percent or more, and his overall disability rating has been 80 percent including the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a). 

The central inquiry in a TDIU claim is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability. Hatlestad v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; Van Hoose v. Brown, 4?Vet. App.?361, 363 (1993). "The sole fact that a claimant is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough. A high rating in itself is a recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment. The question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether the veteran can find employment." Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App.at 363. 

The Veteran has submitted multiple VA Form 21-8940 applications for a TDIU. In the May 2014 application, the reported that he had most recently worked in February 2010 as a phone technician, and reported prior jobs as a printer technician, validations technician, and a security officer. He reported two years of college and training courses which included training with printers, copiers, medical devices, and security. He also reported that the severity and frequency of his migraines had increased and had contributed to difficulties scheduling him to work due to his health issues. 

In a December 2014 application, the Veteran again reported that he had last worked in February 2010 and that his migraines had caused extensive loss of work due to their frequency and severity. He stated that it was normal for him to have 3 to 4 migraines per month that lasted 1 to 3 days per episode, and that the randomness and severity of the migraines make it impossible to be scheduled for any work shifts. He also reported that his knee pains were constant and worsened after standing more than 30 minutes, and that he needed to take short walks during prolonged sitting. The Veteran reported similar impairments in an April 2016 application and indicated he had last worked in technical support in August 2011. 

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940 in November 2020 while his increased rating claims for his knees were pending. He reported that he had last worked in technical support in February 2011 and had collectively lost 18 months of employment due to illness in less than 3 years while working this job. He reported three years of college, and that he had not had any additional education or training since becoming too disabled to work

Multiple VA examinations address the impact of the Veteran's knee disabilities on his ability to work. The July 2018 examination notes the Veteran's knees caused difficulty walking, using stairs, and that he felt unstable and afraid to fall. The February 2021 VA examination indicates the Veteran would have difficulty using stairs and with prolonged standing more than 30 minutes, but that his knee disabilities would have no impact on sedentary work. The November 2023 examiner noted the Veteran would have trouble with walking and prolonged standing due to pain. The Veteran was unable to get up from a kneeling position with his knees alone, had trouble getting out of cars and seats, and had trouble going up and down stairs. Finally, the February 2024 examiner again noted the Veteran's knees would impact his ability to work due to difficulties walking, standing, and sitting due to pain, an inability to squat, and difficulty using stairs.

VA headache examinations show the Veteran's migraines cause prostrating attacks of headache pain at least once per month that are capable of producing severe economic inadaptability. During VA headache examinations, the Veteran has reported that his migraines occurred 3 to 4 times per month, lasted at least 1 day per episode, and were physically incapacitating when they occurred. The Veteran has reported that he cannot move during a migraine and must be in a completely dark room, and his symptoms included nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound. He also reported missing significant amounts of work because of his migraines. The Veteran's service-connected hearing loss also interfered with his ability to hear tones on equipment he used for work.

Private records indicate the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevent him from working. The Veteran submitted a September 2012 letter form one of his physicians in connection with a previous increased rating claim and claim for a TDIU, which states the physician recommended the Veteran stop working in early 2010 due to his chronic migraine headaches, which the physician noted were the Veteran's main health issue and contributed to concentration and memory problems while working.

In statements submitted in support of his claim, the Veteran reported that his migraines had worsened and had impacted his work performance by causing problems with concentration and memory loss. He also reported poor attendance at work due to the migraines, and that the headaches were one of the main reasons he stopped working. His knees also caused problems with walking and standing for long periods of time due to pain, weakness, and instability.

The Veteran has also submitted a November 2020 vocational assessment completed by S.B., a vocational consultant. After reviewing the claims file, S.B. determined the Veteran is totally occupationally disabled due to his service-connected disabilities. S.B. highlighted multiple treatment records and VA examinations detailing the impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, in particular his migraines, knee disabilities, and hearing loss. S.B. also cited studies indicating that the Veteran's high rate of absences due to his service-connected disabilities, in particular his migraine headaches, would not be tolerated by most employers. S.B. explained that the Veteran's prostrating headaches had caused significant issues with his attendance before he stopped working, and that the Veteran's physical pain caused by his knees impaired his ability to focus on all work tasks. S.B. also explained the Veteran was now unable to perform his prior work as a technical support representative and security guard due to the physical limitations of his service-connected disabilities and noted that his jobs would have still required at least light physical exertion limited by his knee disabilities. In addition, S.B. explained the Veteran's migraine headaches would cause deficiencies in the Veteran's concentration, persistence, and pace in any occupation.

The Board considered the Veteran's lay statements submitted in support of his claim as they related to his inability to work. Lay persons are competent to provide evidence of that which he experiences, including his symptoms and medical history. Layno v. Brown,?6?Vet. App.?465, 469?(1994). The Veteran has consistently reported that his service-connected migraines and knee disabilities prevent him from working, and that his migraines were one of the main reasons he stopped working. His statements are supported by medical evidence, including the September 2012 letter from a physician indicating the Veteran was advised to stop working in mainly due to his migraines. VA examinations also show the Veteran's migraines are productive of severe economic inadaptability, demonstrating a significant impact on the Veteran's ability to work that is reflected in the time the Veteran lost from work due to the migraines. The Veteran's difficulties working his prior jobs caused by his migraines in particular are generally corroborated by the medical records. The Board finds the Veteran's reports are credible and probative evidence weighing in favor of the claim. 

For a medical opinion to be given weight, it must be based upon sufficient facts or data, the product of reliable principles and methods; and the result of principles and methods reliably applied to the facts.?Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake,?22?Vet. App.?295, 302?(2008). It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes probative value to a medical opinion.?Id. at 304. 

The November 2020 private vocational assessment is highly probative evidence weighing in favor of the claim. The vocational consultant reviewed the claims file and cited to multiple relevant treatment records, including VA examinations, highlighting the severity of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and their impact on his ability to work. After reviewing the record, and addressing the Veteran's credible lay statements, the vocational consultant concluded the concluded the Veteran's limitations caused by his migraines and the physical limitations caused by his knees where generally inconsistent with the exertional demands of the Veteran's prior jobs, including sedentary and light physical positions. The vocational consultant provided substantial rationales in support of their conclusions, including citations to studies suggesting the Veteran's high rate of absences required by his disabilities were inconsistent with competitive employment.

The Board considered the Veteran's history, education, skills, and training. He had some college education but does not appear to have finished a specific degree program. Most of his workplace training was provided for his technical support and security positions, which his service-connected disabilities significantly impact. The Veteran's job duties for each reported position have been a mix of physical and sedentary. While his knee disabilities do not appear to prohibit purely sedentary jobs, the Veteran's migraine headaches affect his ability to work any position and were the primary reason he stopped working.

Considering the foregoing, the evidence weighs in favor of the claim and a TDIU is warranted subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

 

 

SHAUN S. SPERANZA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Morse, Stenson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.