Citation Nr: A25030899
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 210604-163999
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

A rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD has been characterized by symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, but not total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent, and no higher, for the Veteran's PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2020 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied an increase in the 50 percent disability rating for PTSD and denied entitlement to a TDIU.

In the June 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held in December 2024 before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge. A transcript of the hearing is in the record.

In the VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that he was seeking review of the AOJ's June 2020 decision regarding the evaluation and effective date for PTSD. The AOJ did not assign an effective date in that decision, and at the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran through his representative, confirmed that the effective date for the 50 percent rating was not an issue in this appeal.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2020 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the Board hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. The issue of entitlement to a disability rating higher than 50 percent for PTSD.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the assigned rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Although the recorded history of a particular disability should be reviewed to make an accurate assessment under the applicable criteria, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted if there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has noted the "symptom-driven nature" of the General Rating Formula and that "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The Federal Circuit has explained that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Id. at 117.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the evaluation, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific evaluation. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). However, if the evidence shows that a Veteran has symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. at 443.

Mental Health Treatment

Historically, the Veteran received mental health treatment through VA in 2018 and 2019. Those notes show, generally, complaints such as diminished concentration, anxiety and irritability when in crowds, hypervigilance, panic attacks at times, recurring dreams, and intrusive memories. He was consistently noted to be alert and oriented for person, time, and place, with good dress and hygiene.  He was cooperative, with normal speech which was goal directed and with appropriate content. No deficiencies in insight, judgment, impulse control, cognition or memory were noted. The Veteran denied hallucinations and delusions, as well as thoughts of harming himself or others. The Veteran was using a service dog to help with his PTSD. 

At an April 2020 VA mental health telephone session (due to COVID-19 guidelines) the Veteran reported recurring dreams, intrusive memories, hypervigilance, and he denied panic attacks, suicidal or homicidal thoughts, or hallucinations.

Mental Health Evaluations

The Veteran had an April 2018 VA examination. The examiner noted a diagnosis of PTSD, and no other diagnosis for a mental disorder. The Veteran reported that he was married, had two grown children and two grandchildren, and enjoyed traveling, shooting his guns, and drinking coffee with his Veteran friends. The Veteran reported that he was engaged in VA behavioral medicine services since 2014, and was currently involved in medication management, and taking medication for migraine headaches, and sleep and mood issues. He reported that he did not have any mental health hospitalizations or suicide attempts. At the examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran was appropriately groomed and dressed. It was noted that the Veteran was polite and fully participated in the examination process. It was noted that the Veteran's mood was down, affect was flat, speech was normal, thought processes were logical and goal directed, attention and concentration were fair, and memory was poor. The examiner noted that the Veteran was alert and oriented to time, place, and person. Delusions were not noted, and hallucinations were not reported. The Veteran denied current suicidal ideation. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his PTSD as impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The Veteran had a May 2020 VA examination. The examiner noted a diagnosis of PTSD and no other diagnosed mental health disorder. At the examination, it was noted that the Veteran was cooperative and dressed and groomed appropriately. Speech was fluent with normal rate, thought process was well organized and goal directed, and insight, judgment and memory appeared to be within normal limits. The Veteran reported that his memory had improved. It was noted that his mood was euthymic, and his affect was flat. The examiner commented that the Veteran reported that his medication helped his symptoms and that he had a service dog which calmed him when he became angry. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms included suspiciousness, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported significant difficulty with anger management, that he once became so angry he destroyed a piece of furniture, and that he only felt comfortable around other veterans. The Veteran reported excessive suspiciousness about others, both in a work situation and at home. The examiner opined that based on the diagnosis and his anger management problems, it would be a problem for the Veteran to work in an office setting or with customers or coworkers. It was also noted that the Veteran had difficulty taking orders from others, such as bosses or supervisors. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his PTSD as impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

A Disability Benefits Questionnaire and narrative report were provided from a private psychologist, Dr. E.T., who evaluated the Veteran in June 2021. The psychologist noted the diagnosis of PTSD and reported that he had no other diagnosed mental disorder. He reported that he took medication to help him sleep, that he wakes up due to dreams and nightmares, and sometimes swinging as if in a fight. He reported that his wife said he was a restless sleeper. The Veteran reported that he had intermittent weekly intrusive thoughts and flashbacks and that he became extremely upset around places, people, and events that reminded him of the military. He reported that he felt emotionally numb, had difficulty trusting others, had few friends, felt alienated and separated from others, had a sense of doom and negativity, had suicidal thoughts on and off, lost interest in things he previously enjoyed, and had frequent bouts of irritability, and outbursts of anger with periods of violence. The Veteran reported that his concentration was impaired, and that he was hypervigilant, and kept his back to the wall and weapons and cameras around his property. At the examination Dr. E.T. observed that the Veteran was oriented to time, place, and person and was very upset when discussing his trauma. She opined that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often, near continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control. Dr. E.T. summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his PTSD as total occupational and social impairment. Dr. E. T. opined that the Veteran was unemployable due to his PTSD and noted that the Veteran would not be able to maintain or sustain gainful work activity due to his difficulty with sleep patterns, irritability, depression, and difficulty with concentration.

Board Testimony

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he has had problems with anger, particularly in his marriage. He related one incident in 2012 where he "tried to kill" his wife, and that he had outbursts of anger where he threw chairs and broke furniture. He stated that when he goes to a restaurant, he keeps his back at the door so he can see access to exit. The Veteran reported that he has been taking medication since 2012 including sleep medication, which helped with his symptoms. He stated that he had distressing memories, did not like being around people, his family, or a large group. He stated that he became very angry at people. The Veteran testify that his symptoms have been consistent throughout the filing of his claim. He stated that he has had a service dog since 2010. He stated that he enjoys traveling but has difficulty traveling on the interstate because of heavy traffic and his anger with other drivers. He stated that he takes medication for his PTSD which makes him dizzy and impaired to where he stays in bed and is unable to get on his tractor at his farm. 

Analysis

Based on the evidence of record, and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, a 70 percent disability rating is warranted. The evidence shows that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment in most areas such as work, family relations, thinking and mood. The May 2020 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms included difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The May 2020 VA examiner also explained that the Veteran had anger management problems because of his PTSD, which impaired his ability to work in an office setting, deal with customers, work with others, or take orders or direction from supervisors. The evidence shows that the Veteran had impaired impulse control to where he has needed a service dog to control his PTSD symptoms.

The June 2021 private DBQ and narrative report is evidence that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included near continuous depression that affected his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting). Although the psychologist identified suicidal ideation as a current symptom, the Board notes that mental health treatment records show that the Veteran denied suicidal ideation at mental health treatment sessions from 2018 to 2020, and the April 2018 and May 2020 VA examiners did not note suicidal ideation as a symptom. The private psychologist's report does not indicate that the Veteran's symptoms included gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for the names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, which would support a 100 percent disability rating. The Board finds that the examination report of Dr. E.T. supports a finding that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not total social and occupational impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In addition, the Veteran's December 2024 Board testimony is credible evidence that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included impaired impulse control which resulted in anger and periods of violence which caused social impairment.

During the appeal period, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's symptoms included gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger to hurting himself or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. There is no indication that the Veteran's symptoms have significantly interfered with the Veteran's social and occupational functioning to support the maximum 100 percent rating. The presence or absence of specific symptoms, which correspond to a particular rating, is not dispositive. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130; Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Overall, the current severity and frequency of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more nearly approximate a 70 percent disability rating.

Based on the foregoing evidence, a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's PTSD fully contemplates his PTSD symptoms, as his symptoms more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

REASONS FOR REMAND

In the June 2020 rating decision, the AOJ denied a TDIU. The Veteran did not then meet the schedular requirements for a TDIU. At that time the Veteran's only service-connected disability, PTSD, was rated 50 percent. In a separate decision being issued simultaneously with this one, under Docket No. 210720-173747, the Board is granting service connection for sleep apnea.

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the claim for service connection for sleep apnea, granted in a separate Board decision. The Court has held that a TDIU claim can be intertwined with a service connection claim, and, under the AMA, the Board has discretion to remand entitlement to a TDIU pending claims for service connection, despite the absence of any pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127 (2024). Therefore, the TDIU claim is not ripe for adjudication at this time and is remanded pending implementation of the Board's grant of service connection for sleep apnea. 

This matter is REMANDED for the following:

After implementing the Board's decision to grant service connection for sleep apnea, readjudicate the claim for a TDIU.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lawrence Hubert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.