Citation Nr: A25030441
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448117
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b) is granted.

Entitlement to SMC based on housebound status pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance by reason of service-connected disabilities.

2. The Veteran does not have a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and additional service-connected disability independently ratable at 60 percent and is not permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

2. The criteria for SMC based on housebound status have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1984 to March 1987.

This appeal comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for regular aid and attendance.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Special Monthly Compensation

Special monthly compensation (SMC) is a monetary benefit that is paid for service-connected disabilities which result in impairment of the senses, loss or loss of use (of the extremities, creative organ, breast, or buttocks), or which render the Veteran housebound or in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.  SMC is authorized under subsections (k) through (s), with the rate amounts increasing the later in the alphabet the letter appears (except for the "s" rate).  SMC at the "k" and "r" rates are paid in addition to any other SMC rates, with certain monetary limits.  Id.  The rate of SMC "varies according to the nature of the veteran's service-connected disabilities."  Moreira v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 522, 524 (1992).

While schedular rates of compensation are predicated on the average reduction in earning capacity, special monthly compensation benefits are meant to provide additional compensation based on noneconomic factors such as personal inconvenience, social inadaptability, or the profound nature of the disability.  VAOPGPREC 5-89 (Mar. 23, 1989).

At the time of the April 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was service-connected for major depressive disorder, rated as 70 percent disabling; lower back condition rated as 40 percent disabling; right hip degenerative arthritis with limitation of flexion rated as 30 percent disabling; left hip degenerative arthritis with limitation of flexion rated as 20 percent disabling; right hip degenerative arthritis with rotation, abduction and/or adduction impairment rated as 20 percent disabling; left hip degenerative arthritis with rotation, abduction and/or adduction impairment rated as 20 percent disabling; left hip degenerative arthritis with limitation of extension rated as 10 percent disabling; right hip degenerative arthritis with limitation of extension rated as 10 percent disabling; left knee degenerative arthritis with limitation of flexion rated as 10 percent disabling; right knee degenerative arthritis with limitation of flexion rated as 10 percent disabling; left knee degenerative arthritis with instability rated as 10 percent disabling; right knee degenerative arthritis with instability rated as 10 percent disabling; left knee degenerative arthritis with limitation of extension rated as noncompensable; and right knee degenerative arthritis with limitation of extension rated as noncompensable.  The combined disability rating was 100 percent from February 4, 2019.

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance.

The Veteran is seeking SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) which provides that SMC is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person to perform the personal functions required in everyday living.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b). 

A veteran considered in need of regular aid and attendance if he/she is: blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less, in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to five degrees or less; a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity; and/or establishes a factual need for aid and attendance under the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.351(c)(3).

These criteria include: inability to dress or undress, or to keep ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which, by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without such aid; inability to feed oneself through the loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or, incapacity (physical or mental) which requires care or assistance on a regular basis for protection from the hazards or dangers incident to daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

The Veteran need not show all of the disabling conditions identified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) to establish entitlement to aid and attendance; the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that it is logical to infer there is a threshold requirement that "at least one of the enumerated factors be present."  Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 224 (1996).

In the April 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran is in need for aid and attendance with activities of daily living because off his lower back pain, bilateral hip pain, and knee and shoulder disabilities.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.   38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

Turning to the evidence during the period on appeal, the Board notes that a VA Form 21-2680 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance was completed by a VA physician in May 2023.  The pertinent diagnoses were low back pain, degenerative arthritis of both hips with limitation of range of motion (ROM), and degenerative arthritis of both knees with limitation of ROM and right knee instability.  The examiner found that the Veteran was able to feed himself and did not require nursing home care or medication management.  However, it was also found that he was unable to prepare his own meals and required assistance in bathing or tending to other hygiene needs due to very poor mobility status.  He was wheelchair and walker dependent, and needed help with preparation of meals or bathing.  The examiner found that the Veteran had the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments, and was not able to direct someone to do so.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had normal power, grip, and range of motion in both upper extremities.  However, both knees, hips, and lumbar spine were stiff, and ROM was impaired.  He needed to wear knee braces and a back brace.  Range of motion of the knees and hip were moderately severely impaired, and lumbar spine ROM was also decreased.  He could not stand or walk without support.  He needed a rolling walker to stand and start walking, and could hardly walk up to a few feet with a walker.  He was a high-risk candidate for falls.  He was unable to climb ramp, stairs, ladder, rope, or scaffold; balance on narrow, slippery, or erratic surfaces; or stand or walk on level terrain frequently.  He was not able to kneel, crouch when bending both legs and spine, stoop when bending spine at the waist, or crawl frequently.  The examiner stated the Veteran could do light desk work or sedentary work without any specific restrictions.  No loss of bladder or bowel function was found.  The Veteran's memory appeared normal.  He had poor balance, and needed a rolling walker or a wheelchair for ambulation.  The Veteran stayed home most of the time, and his wife went out to shop, cooked for him, and helped him with activities of daily living, such preparing meals and bathing.  He saw his doctors every three months.

A December 2019 VA Form 21-2680 Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance shows diagnoses of low back pain, bilateral hip pain, and bilateral shoulder pain.  The examiner found that the Veteran was able to feed himself, and did not require nursing home care or medication management.  The examiner found that the Veteran had the mental capacity to manage his benefit payments and was not able to direct someone to do so.  However, it was also found that he was unable to prepare his own meals as he was not able to stand more than five to ten minutes.  He required assistance in bathing or tending to other hygiene needs.  His right-hand grip was mildly reduced and decreased ROM of bilateral shoulders may prevent fine motor activities, such as buttoning clothing.  He was able to stand and ambulate with assistance of a cane; due to hip and back pain, the Veteran was not able to stand for long periods of time.  It was difficult to bend forward.  The Veteran reported he was not able to travel beyond premises of his house due to hip and back pain, and he only left the home for doctors' appointments.  

In written statements dated March 2020, November 2021 and August 2022, the Veteran and his wife indicated that the Veteran needed daily assistance to get out of bed, go to and use the bathroom, take showers in a shower chair, shave, brush teeth, dress and undress, and prepare meals.  She also needed to help him to put on his prosthetic devices.  They reported fall incidents when he tried to get around by himself and found himself on the floor.  He did not leave the house except for his doctor appointments.

The AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran required aid and attendance; the December 2019 and March 2023 VA examinations showed he was in need of assistance with activities of daily living because of his degenerative disc disease low back pain, degenerative disc disease bilateral hip pain, and degenerative disc diseases of knees and shoulder.

Given the combined medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him in need of regular aid and attendance.  The evidence establishes that the Veteran has significant impairment in multiple areas that cannot be ruled out as not related to his service-connected disabilities, to include the ability to get out of bed, dress/undress, use the bathroom, prepare meals for himself, and keep himself clean and presentable.  The Veteran is unable to walk without a cane or walker due to his tendency to fall. The Veteran's history of falls shows that he needs regular aid and attendance to protect him from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  As such, he has demonstrated a factual need for regular aid and attendance.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  When there is an approximate balance of evidence, reasonable doubt is resolved in the Veteran's favor.  

Accordingly, special monthly compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) for aid and attendance is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

2. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on housebound status.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to SMC housebound pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) because his service-connected disabilities rendered him permanently housebound and thus qualifying for SMC at the housebound rate. 

SMC housebound is payable where the Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems, or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities.  This requirement is met when the Veteran is substantially confined as a direct result of service-connected disabilities to his or her dwelling and the immediate premises or, if institutionalized, to the ward or clinical areas and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his or her lifetime.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

A housebound in fact determination requires a Veteran's inability to leave his /her place of residence and immediate premises in order to earn any income.  However, it does not require a total inability to leave the place of residence and immediate premises for all circumstances.  Leaving home for medical purposes cannot, by itself, serve as the basis for finding that a veteran is not substantially confined for purposes of SMC housebound benefits.  Howell v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 535, 540 (2006).  The limitations must be the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  Non-medical indicators of housebound status may include but are not limited to an inability to walk substantial distances or leaving the home with assistance only occasionally for appointments; grocery shopping, or church, or an inability to mow one's lawn.

Although no additional disability compensation may be paid when a total schedular disability rating is already in effect, a separate award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) predicated on a single disability may form the basis for an award of SMC.  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008) (holding that there could be a situation where a veteran has a schedular total rating for a particular service-connected disability and could establish a TDIU rating for another service-connected disability in order to qualify for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) by having an additional disability of 60 percent or more).  Additionally, where TDIU is based on one service-connected disability and there are other service-connected disabilities that constitute the required additional disability under section 1114(s), SMC may be awarded.  Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2010).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Unfortunately, the Veteran does not meet the requirements for this SMC benefit.  Although his combined disability rating is 100 percent, he currently does not have a single disability rated as 100 percent disabling.  The Veteran's combined disability rating of 100 percent is based on multiple service-connected disabilities rather than one disability alone.  Nor is he in receipt of a TDIU.

The Board further finds that the probative evidence does not support a finding that the Veteran is housebound in-fact due to his service-connected disabilities.  The evidence does not demonstrate that he is substantially confined to his dwelling or institutionalized and confined to a ward or clinical area; rather, the December 2019 and March 2023 VA 21-2680 Forms and lay statements indicate that the Veteran was able to leave the house for medical and social security disability appointments.  He stated that when he goes to his physician in the VA hospital in Dublin, at least every three months, he would be out of home for eight hours.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran was not housebound during the appeal period because even though he needed a walker and assistance to leave the home, he was still able to travel for a significantly long period of time.  Therefore, special monthly compensation based on housebound status is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	In, M. J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.