Citation Nr: A25030323
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240305-422194
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability is granted.

REMANDED

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for rhinitis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War Era. 

2. The Veteran is reasonably shown to have a diagnosis of IBS.

3. Competent (medical) evidence reasonably supports a finding that the Veteran's headache disability is secondary to his service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Service connection for IBS is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.303, 3.317, 4.114, Diagnostic Code (Code) 7319. 

2. Service connection for a headache disability, as secondary to the service-connected acquired psychiatric disability, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2002 to November 2006. 

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2023 decision, which continued the 0 percent rating for allergic rhinitis. Also, in September 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, and requested review of a September 2023 rating decision, which denied service connection for IBS and headaches. In November 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal. The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board and requested the Board direct review lane option. 

Therefore, the Board's review is limited to evidence on record at the time of the July 14, 2023 rating decision (in the matter of an increased rating for rhinitis) and at the time of the September 18, 2023 rating decision (in the matters of service connection for IBS and headaches).

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is deciding the claims of service connection for IBS and headaches, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As the Board is remanding the claim of an increased compensable rating for rhinitis for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.

Service Connection

 Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To substantiate a claim for service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the disease or injury in service and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection is warranted for a disability which is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. To substantiate a claim of secondary service connection there must be evidence of: (1) a disability for which service connection is sought; (2) a disability that is already service connected; and (3) the already service-connected disability caused or aggravated the disability for which service connection is sought. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

For veterans who served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf Era, service connection may be presumed for a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active duty or became manifest to a compensable degree within a prescribed presumptive period. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. The Southwest Asia Theater of operations includes Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(2).

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, there are three types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness; and (3) a diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117(d) warrants a presumption of service-connection. IBS is one of the diagnosed illnesses listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B); headaches is not.

The term "medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness" means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii). 

Lay evidence may be competent evidence to establish incurrence. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a layperson. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2). 

Competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question requires medical knowledge. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions. Competent medical evidence may also mean statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises; it may also include statements contained in authoritative writings, such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1).

The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on analysis of all the evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value.  Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claims of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Service connection for IBS is granted.

Alternative theories of entitlement have been raised by the record and by the Veteran: (1) IBS is related to service, or (2) it is related to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with alcohol use disorder and major depressive disorder. See April 2021 claim. 

A January 2023 VA memorandum found that the Veteran was a Persian Gulf Veteran as he served in Iraq from May 2005 through October 2005.

In the June 2021 VA intestinal conditions examination, the Veteran reported symptoms of GERD. He alleged that his claim was for GERD and not IBS. IBS was not diagnosed.

In a November 2021 private opinion, IBS was diagnosed. The provider noted the Veteran's symptoms included recurrent pain with change in frequency and appearance of stool, with a duration greater than or equal to three months and an onset of initial symptoms greater than six months ago. The provider, a family nurse practitioner, diagnosed IBS with diarrhea (type D). The Veteran reported that he has diarrhea every week and he found himself going to the bathroom seven to eight times in a single day. He reported that he has abdominal pain and excess gas. He reported he has attempted to alter his diet to avoid flare ups of IBS and treats his IBS with over-the-counter medication.

A June 2022 VA intestinal conditions examination was based on review of the record as the examiner was not able to get in contact with the Veteran. The examiner opined that IBS was not diagnosed, noting the paucity of evidence of complaints to support a diagnosis of IBS and the lack of chronicity. 

In a February 2023 in-person VA intestinal conditions examination, the Veteran reported having an upset stomach which caused him to go to the bathroom and he then has loose stools. He reported when his stomach is upset, he will go to the bathroom two to three times. He was not sure if the reaction was stressed induced. IBS was not diagnosed. The examiner opined the Veteran did not have a chronic disability pattern related to IBS, noting no objective clinical evidence supported such diagnosis. While the examiner noted there must be clinical evidence and then the Veteran must be evaluated and diagnosed to meet the specific criteria for the condition of IBS, the examiner failed to address the November 2021 private clinical evaluation and diagnosis of IBS.

IBS is on the list of medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illnesses warranting a presumption of service connection if manifested in active service or to a degree of 10 percent disabling prior to December 31, 2021. A 10 percent disability rating for IBS (under Code 7319) is warranted is it is "moderate" (with "frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress").

The Board finds that the requirements for establishing service connection for IBS under the presumptive provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1117 are met. The Veteran had the requisite service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War era.  

Although IBS was not diagnosed on the June 2021 VA examination, June 2022 VA examination, or February 2023 VA examination, it was diagnosed on the November 2021 private examination. Notably, the Veteran believed his claim at the June 2021 VA examination was for GERD, not IBS, and he was not actually examined at the June 2022 VA examination. Moreover, the February 2023 VA examination did not address the November 2021 private provider's clinical evaluation of the Veteran and diagnosis of IBS based on that evaluation. The private provider was familiar with/reviewed the Veteran's record, examined the Veteran, and is competent to make the diagnosis. The description of the manifestations of the disease (and their frequency and severity) on the November 2021 examination reasonably establishes that the disease has been manifested to a compensable degree (is moderate). Accordingly, service connection for IBS is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.

2. Service connection for a headache disability is granted.

Alternative theories of entitlement have been raised by the record and by the Veteran: (1) his headaches are related to service, or (2) it is related to his service-connected PTSD with alcohol use disorder and major depressive disorder. See April 2021 claim.

The July 2022 and November 2023 rating decisions found that acute intermittent tension headaches have been diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

In the May 2021 VA headaches examination, acute intermittent tension headaches were diagnosed. The Veteran reported he experienced one to two major headaches a week and were localized in his temple, forehead, and behind his eyes. In the opinion against the claim of secondary service connection, the examiner noted tension-type headaches are common but the pathophysiology and likely mechanism remained unclear. The examiner stated current knowledge of the nociceptive (pain receptor) system suggests that the derivative pain of tension-type headaches has a muscular origin and concluded there was no evidence in medical literature that associated or found that PTSD causes acute tension headaches.

In the June 2021 VA headaches examination, the Veteran reported he will have headaches once or twice weekly and takes medication of either Naprosyn or Motrin for his headaches. Symptoms of headaches included headache pain (sharp or dull in nature), sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound. Despite the noted symptoms, the examiner found no evidence of a chronic headache condition. 

In the June 2021 VA opinion against the claim, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not related to service, noting there was no diagnosis of a chronic headache condition. The examiner stated a diagnosis of a headache condition depends entirely on reported history, since there was no independent means of corroborating or quantifying headache features, such as timing, location, frequency, intensity, or even if headache pain was present. The examiner opined (without rationale) that the Veteran's reported history was of insufficient reliability to be used for diagnosis and rating purposes. In addition, the examiner found that his treatment records were inconsistent with a diagnosis of a chronic headache condition. The examiner concluded that there was no objective clinical evidence to support the diagnosis of tension headache during his time on active duty. 

In a November 2021 private statement in support of the claim, a private provider, a family nurse practitioner, opined that the Veteran has a formal diagnosis of migraine headaches and the migraine headaches were at least as likely as not secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD with polysubstance abuse in remission. The provider found the Veteran's reports of his headaches credible. The provider noted medical literature establishes that a stressor such as psychiatric abnormalities compromise homeostasis and will cause the body to activate compensatory responses, including releasing adrenaline and cortisol. Noradrenaline and cortisol changes in response to low-grade cognitive stress differ in migraine and tension type headache. When a person with anxiety symptomatology experiences stressors, the body will compensate with a release of hormones manifesting into headaches due to the inhabited hypothalamic response.

In a February 2023 VA headaches examination, the Veteran reported he gets headaches a couple times per week and they were worse when there were allergens in the air or when cold. The examiner opined that a chronic headaches condition was not diagnosed. The examiner noted a diagnosis of a headache condition depends entirely on reported history, since there is no independent means of corroborating or quantifying headache features such as timing, location, frequency, intensity, or even if headache pain is present. The examiner opined (without rationale) the Veteran's current statements regarding his headache symptoms were not supported by the available clinical information and his reported history was of insufficient reliability to be used for diagnosis or rating purposes. The examiner then looked to his treatment records and found that they were inconsistent with a diagnosis of a chronic headache condition.

The AOJ found that a headache disability has been diagnosed during the pendency of the appeal and the Board is bound by that favorable finding. 

While there is conflicting evidence in the matter, the Board finds that the competent (medical) evidence in the record is at least in approximate balance as to the likely etiology of the Veteran's headache disability. At the outset, the Board notes that the June 2021 and February 2023 VA medical opinions are based on not finding that a headaches disability was diagnosed. Therefore, they warrant limited probative value. 

In support of the claim is the November 2021 statement by a private provider. The November 2021 private provider is competent to offer the opinion. The opinion reflects familiarity with the Veteran's medical history and all pertinent factual evidence in the record. Notably, the provider cited to medical treatise that establishes an association between PTSD, an anxiety disorder, and headaches. The May 2021 VA medical opinion against the claim is based on there being no evidence in medical literature that associated or found that PTSD caused acute tension headaches.

The Board finds the November 2021 opinion adequate, and probative evidence in the matter, sufficient to substantiate the claim. As it supports the claim and there is no medical evidence of greater probative value to the contrary, the Board finds it persuasive.

Resolving reasonable doubt in his favor, as required in such circumstances (see 38 C.F.R. § 3.102), the Board finds that the Veteran's headache disability is caused, at least in part, by his service-connected PTSD. Accordingly, service connection for a headache disability, as secondary to his service-connected PTSD, is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for rhinitis.

Under Code 6522, relating to allergic or vasomotor rhinitis, a 10 percent rating is warranted when there are no nasal polyps but obstruction of nasal passages on both sides is greater than 50 percent or obstruction is complete on one side. A 30 percent (maximum) rating is warranted when polyps are present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Code 6522. If the schedule does not provide for a zero percent rating under a Code, and the requirements for a compensable rating are not met, a zero percent rating shall be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

In the March 2023 VA sinusitis/rhinitis examination, the Veteran reported that his current symptoms included nasal congestion and the symptoms were better controlled due to medications. Current treatment included Claritin, 10 mg daily, two puffs of Flonase per day, and Sudafed as needed. Allergic rhinitis was diagnosed. The findings were all negative with respect to greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis, complete obstruction on the left or right side due to rhinitis, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, and nasal polyps.

In evaluating a disability, the Board must not consider the ameliorative effects of medication unless those effects are explicitly contemplated by the relevant rating criteria. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012). In this case, the Code 6522 does not mention the effects of medication. Therefore, the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication are not for consideration in rating his rhinitis.

There is evidence that the severity of the Veteran's rhinitis might have been greater but for the ameliorating effects of medication used during the rating period. The March 2023 VA examination report fails to address the severity of the Veteran's rhinitis without the ameliorative effects of medication. 

The failure to obtain a VA examination that addresses the severity of the Veteran's rhinitis without the ameliorative effects of medication is a pre-decisional duty to assist omission that requires correction on remand. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following:

Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician as to the severity of the Veteran's service-connected rhinitis. The clinician must opine as to what the Veteran's symptoms would be, in terms of the relevant rating criteria, without the ameliorative effects of the medication that he takes for his rhinitis. 

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or if the examiner does not have the requisite knowledge or training.

(By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested).

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Naumovich, Alexa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.