Citation Nr: A25030159
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-459156
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depressive disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1997 to May 2000.

This matter comes on appeal from an April 2023 rating decision.  The initial decision was returned as undeliverable.  Thereafter, the AOJ resent the decision the following month.  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

VA regulations state that a claimant, or his or her representative, must file a properly completed Notice of Disagreement (NOD) with a decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) within one year from the date that the AOJ mails the notice of the decision.  There are limited circumstances failure to meet the one-year deadline to file a Notice of Disagreement will not result in a dismissal.  VA regulations allow for the one-year deadline to be extended if a motion for an extension of time is filed and good cause is shown.  Ferko v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 262, 265 (2024)( holding that the one-year deadline for filing a NOD is not jurisdictional in nature but rather a mandatory claims processing rule subject to extension for good cause under 38 C.F.R. § 3.109 (b)); see also Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333-34 (2021). 

A claimant may request an extension of the period for filing an appeal for good cause.  A request for such an extension must be in writing and must be filed with the Board.  Whether good cause for an extension has been established will be determined by the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.203  In this case, along with her NOD, the Veteran submitted a statement indicating that her delay in submitting her NOD was due to homelessness and her mental illness.  Thus, the Veteran has submitted a valid request for an extension.  

In such statement, she provided that she was experiencing a period of homelessness at the time of notification of the rating decision from her previous claim.  Due to the receipt of housing assistance from the VA through the HUD VASH program and mental health treatment through the MHICM program, she was now able to focus on continuing her claim.  She concluded that the delay in filing this decision review request has been due to her mental health status and housing status.

As noted above, the April 2023 rating decision was initially returned as undeliverable, which supports her above statement indicating that she was homeless.  Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has shown good cause for missing the one year deadline and her extension request is granted.  As such, the Board will address this matter on the merits.    

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depressive disorder, is remanded.

It appears that the Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in April 2023, but she failed to report.  However, this examination was scheduled around the same period that it appears the Veteran was homeless; and notice of the rating decision was subsequently returned as undeliverable.  Thus, for similar reasons outlined above, it appears that the Veteran has shown good cause for failing to report to the examination.  Moreover, the record does not include a copy of the notice to the Veteran concerning this examination.  In light of the above, it is unclear from the record whether the Veteran received proper notice of the examination.  Accordingly, in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds that the Veteran should be afforded another opportunity to report to a VA examination to determine the etiology her psychiatric disorder.  If the Veteran again fails to report, copy of the notice to the Veteran scheduling the examination should be associated with the claims file.

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  When called upon to participate in an examination, it is incumbent upon the claimant to fully cooperate.  See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any currently diagnosed acquired psychiatric disability.  The examiner must review the claims file.  The examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any acquired psychiatric disorder is due to an in-service injury or disease. 

A detailed rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.  The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements.

If the Veteran fails to report to a scheduled examination, copy of notice of the examination to the Veteran should be associated with the claims file.  

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.