Citation Nr: A25030638
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448109
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date of December 20, 2021for the award of service connection for sinusitis is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date of December 20, 2021for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

On December 20, 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, seeking service connection for a sinus disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date of December 20, 2021, for sinusitis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.400.

2. The criteria for an effective date of December 20, 2021, for allergic rhinitis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1984 to March 1985.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the direct review docket.  Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting an October 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), a Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  See January 2023 HLR decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the rating decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Effective Dates

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  An initial claim includes a new claim requesting service connection and a claim for increase in a disability evaluation rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p) (2019).  The effective date for the assignment of an increased rating may be up to one year prior to receipt of a formal claim for increase when it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred based on all evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022 for the award of service connection for sinusitis is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022 for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis is granted.

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  See June 2024 VA Form 10182.  Specifically, the Veteran seeks service connection from the day she filed her December 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ claim for a sinus disability.  See August 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  The Veteran asserts that during military service, she was exposed to chemical substances found in the ground, water, and air in and around Fort McClelland, Alabama, which caused her sinus problems.  See e.g. Buddy/Lay Statement received November 2021.  She further asserts that she started to develop sinus issues in 1985 while training at Fort McClellan.  See December 2023 VA Examination.  She developed chronic nasal congestion, postnasal drip, facial swelling, sinus tenderness, and pressure headaches bilaterally at frontal lobe.  Id.  These symptoms have persisted and gotten worse over the years.  Id.

By way of history, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ on December 20, 2021.  The RO denied this claim in a June 2022 rating decision.  On October 24, 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR).  After conducting said review, the RO issued a January 2023 rating decision in which the RO identified a duty to assist error when it failed to complete a memorandum regarding the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity and request a VA examination and medical opinion.  The RO then conducted that development.

In the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO granted service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act and assigned an effective date of August 10, 2022, the date on which the PACT Act went into effect.

The Veteran appealed this decision through filing the June 2024 VA Form 10182 initiating the present appeal.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a claim can be continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued.  If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c)(h).  In 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p), the AMA categorizes claims as either "supplemental" or "initial."  The type of claim adjudicated can directly impact the effective date assigned for a granted benefit.  An "initial" claim cannot establish continuous pursuit, regardless of whether it was received within one year of the issuance of the prior VA decision.  Unlike a supplemental claim or a higher-level review request, an "initial" claim is not a request for review of the prior decision, but, rather, a claim for an increased rating based on a change or worsening since the last decision.

Here, the Board finds the Veteran has continuously pursued her claim seeking service connection for sinus disability since she first filed her claim on December 20, 2021.

In seeking service connection for these disabilities, the Veteran asserted that they were caused by in-service participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) as a result of her exposure to herbicide agents.  After the denial, the RO granted the Veteran's claims based on the presumptions established by the PACT Act, but did not consider the Veteran's entitlement on a direct basis.

The PACT Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022.  See PACT Act, Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  In relevant part, the act requires that when a veteran whose active service subjected the veteran to participation in a TERA files a claim to service connect a disability and there is evidence of such disability, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

After review of the evidence, the Board finds that an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis is warranted.

Upon a December 2023 VA sinusitis and rhinitis examination, the examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sinusitis and allergic rhinitis were incurred in or caused by her in-service toxic exposure at Fort McClellan.  The examiner explained 

The Veteran's claimed condition of sinusitis, as well as allergic rhinitis has been validated via examination for a rendered diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  Potential exposures identified by the VA in the public health report titled, Potential Exposure at Fort McClellan, identifies radioactive compounds, chemical warfare agents, and airborne polychlorinated biphenyls as potential exposures.  Polychlorinated Biphenyls are neurotoxic and cause immune system dysfunctions per Montano et al. (2022).  Radioactive compounds of cesium-137 and cobalt-60as well as mustard gas and nerve agents are all medically linked to significant systemic adverse effects per Reutter (1999) and VA (2020a & 2023b).  The Veteran's claimed condition started after exposure at Fort McClellan.  The VA (2023b) contends that the investigation potential risks is ongoing and positive exposure is confirmed via TERA.  Therefore, the claimed condition was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The Board has no reason to question the competency or credibility of the examiner.  The Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis on a direct basis due to TERA exposure.  The Veteran has current diagnoses of sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, which the December 2023 VA examiner attributed to her in-service toxic exposure.  Therefore, the Board finds the evidence sufficient to establish the Veteran's TERA caused her sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.

Additionally, the Board concludes that the Veteran is also entitled to an earlier effective date for her service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  As stated above, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim or a claim reopened after final disallowance will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Applying the relevant law to the present case, the earliest possible effective date for the award of service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis is December 20, 2021, the date on which she filed her claim.  Because the current effective date of the Veteran's sinusitis and allergic rhinitis is later than the Veteran's original date of claim, an earlier effective date of December 20, 2021, but no earlier, for the award of service connection is warranted.

Therefore, the claim for an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, is granted, and December 20, 2021, is assigned as the effective date for the award of service connection for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that during military service, she was exposed to chemical substances found in the ground, water, and air in and around Fort McClelland, Alabama, which caused her obstructive sleep apnea.  See e.g. Buddy/Lay Statement received November 2021.  Alternatively, she asserts that she has become obese, due to her service-connected residuals of cold injury, bilateral feet, which has in turn, caused her obstructive sleep apnea.  See e.g. December 2021 Buddy/Lay Statement.  The Veteran has also asserted that her obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  Id.

Turning to the evidence, the Board notes that service treatment records include a January 1985 Report of Medical History showing the Veteran marked "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping.

The Veteran underwent VA examination in June 2022.  The examiner opined the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  As rationale, the examiner stated 

Review of records indicates Veteran marked 'yes' to frequent trouble sleeping - no explanation given on Report of Medical History.  [The] Veteran currently has a diagnosis of insomnia that is consistent with complaint while in service.  No symptoms consistent with sleep apnea reported while in service.  Relevant evidence reviewed.

In January 2023, further development was directed after a HLR identified a duty to assist error.  Specifically, the RO identified a duty to assist error when it failed to complete a memorandum regarding the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity and request a VA examination and medical opinion.  

Subsequently, the Veteran underwent VA examination in December 2023.  The examiner stated 

The Veteran's claimed condition of sleep apnea has been validated via sleep study and examination for a diagnosis of severe obstructive sleep apnea.  Obstructive sleep apnea is a diagnosable sleep condition with an anatomical cause.  Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of your throat relax too much to allow normal breathing, causing obstruction.  Obstructive sleep apnea is not caused by A) residuals of cold injury, left foot or B) residuals of cold injury, right foot, but rather by physical anatomy (Heiser & Eckert, 2019).  Heiser, C., & Eckert, D. (2019).  Pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea. HNO, 67(9), 654-662.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00106-019-0720-9.

The examiner further stated

There is a linear correlation between obesity and obstructive sleep apnea.  In obese people, fat deposits in the upper respiratory tract narrow the airway; there is a decrease in muscle activity in this region, leading to hypoxic and apneic episodes, ultimately resulting in sleep apnea.  The Veteran is not morbidly obese and there is no clear medical pathway to link A) residuals of cold injury, left foot or B) residuals of cold injury, right foot, as primary causative for obesity.  Consequently, the claimed obesity as an intermediate step between the service-connected cold injuries and the development of sleep apnea is not validated with objective medical evidence and therefore, is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition.  Jehan, S., Zizi, F., Pandi-Perumal, S. R., Wall, S., Auguste, E., Myers, A. K., Jean-Louis, G., & McFarlane, S. I. (2017).  Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Obesity: Implications for Public Health. Sleep medicine and disorders: international journal, 1(4), 00019.

The examiner also opined 

The Veteran's claimed condition of sleep apnea has been validated via sleep study and examination for a rendered diagnosis of severe obstructive sleep apnea.  Obstructive sleep apnea is a diagnosable sleep condition with an anatomical cause.  Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of your throat relax too much to allow normal breathing, causing obstruction.  Obstructive sleep apnea is not caused by physical anatomy (Heiser & Eckert, 2019).  There is no medical or scientific evidence available currently that provides indication of a relationship between development of obstructive sleep apnea and the TERA.  Therefore, the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Heiser, C., & Eckert, D. (2019).  Pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea.  HNO, 67(9), 654-662. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00106-019-0720-9.

The Board finds the December 2023 VA opinion to be inadequate because the examiner did not address the Veteran's claim on a direct-incurrence basis.  Specifically, service treatment records reflect a January 1985 Report of Medical History shows the Veteran marked "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping.  Additionally, on a secondary service-connection basis, the opinion was limited to causation and failed to provide an adequate opinion on aggravation regarding the Veteran's service-connected residuals of cold injuries to the bilateral feet.  Further, the Veteran asserts that her obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  In a December 2021 statement, the Veteran reported that she has a CPAP machine, but because of her allergies and sinuses, it has not been beneficial.  As noted by the Veteran's representative in August 2024 correspondence, a VA opinion in this regard has not been obtained.

The Veteran's representative has also argued that the December 2023 VA examiner based their opinion on an inaccurate factual premise, namely that the Veteran is not obese.  The Board agrees.  The Veteran's representative asserted that "the Veteran's medical treatment records reflect BMI readings over 30, which medically classifies her as obese (even 29 is still considered overweight)."  See August 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  The Board additionally notes that a September 2023 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran was prescribed medication (Semaglutide) to treat her obesity.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.)

Failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Therefore, remand is warranted to obtain new medical opinions.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file to an examiner with the appropriate expertise to obtain a supplemental medical opinion as to the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had onset in service or is otherwise related to service, including the January 1985 Report of Medical History where the Veteran marked "yes" to frequent trouble sleeping.

(b) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is either (i) proximately due to; or (ii) has been aggravated by her service-connected residuals of cold injuries to the bilateral feet, sinusitis, and/or allergic rhinitis.

The examiner is advised that aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent" worsening of the nonservice connected disability.

The examiner is also advised that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 allows for service connection of conditions that would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability even if the worsening of the condition occurs due to the natural progression of that condition.  See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (2023).

The examiner must provide separate opinions and rationales to address secondary causation and secondary aggravation.  Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).

(c) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's service-connected residuals of cold injuries to the bilateral feet caused or aggravated her weight gain or obesity by, for instance, limiting her ability to exercise and/or causing her to eat more; and, if so,

(d) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the weight gain or obesity resulting from the Veteran's residuals of cold injuries to the bilateral feet was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating her currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea; and, if so,

(e) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that her obstructive sleep apnea would have occurred but for weight gain or obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected residuals of cold injuries to the bilateral feet.

Any opinion expressed should be accompanied by a complete rationale or explanation that is specific to the Veteran and supported by facts and medical evidence.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Griffith, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.