Citation Nr: A25030756
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-462378
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2000 to November 2003. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for hearing loss most recently addressed in a January 2022 rating decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Although the AOJ more recently denied this  claim in July 2024, current case law allows the Veteran to appeal the earlier rating decision addressing the same underlying issue if that earlier decision is within  a year.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran contends he has bilateral hearing loss due to noise exposure in service or as secondary to his service-connected tinnitus. The Board does not bifurcate the issue on this record and retains the characterization as denied and appealed, as such is in the best interest of the Veteran's claim.

After review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand is required to schedule the Veteran with a VA examination to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Board finds that additional development on direct service connection is not warranted based on the record on appeal. However, as part of the Veteran's claim, he asserts that tinnitus has aggravated his hearing loss. The Board finds that the evidence at the time of the rating decision on appeal raised the duty to assist in obtaining an opinion on this question, but such was not obtained. The Board remands to seek this opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an audiologist. Following a review of the claims file, the audiologist is asked to provide an etiology opinion addressing any diagnosed hearing loss. The examiner is asked to specifically opine as to whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that any diagnosed hearing loss was caused or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus.

A complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions expressed must be provided.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lane, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.