Citation Nr: A25030661
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-428394
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

A rating of 70 percent, but no higher, from January 22, 2024, for the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder, is granted.

A rating higher than 30 percent, prior to January 22, 2024, for the Veteran's unspecified depressive disorder, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From January 22, 2024, the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder (psychiatric disorder) has been characterized by symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most area, but not total occupational and social impairment.

2. Prior to January 22, 2024, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder did not cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. From January 22, 2024, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent and no higher, for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440.

2. The criteria for a disability rating higher than 30 percent, prior to January 22, 2024, for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, DC 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from March 2015 to December 2015, November 2018 to October 2019, and June 2020 to May 2021, and had additional service in the Army Reserves.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran was granted service connection for insomnia with a disability rating of 30 percent in a July 2022 rating decision. The Veteran did not appeal that decision within a year, and it became final.

Thereafter, the Veteran filed an October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation.

In a January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ deferred a decision. In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ continued the 30 percent evaluation for a psychiatric disorder, noted as unspecified depressive disorder, which had been previously rated as insomnia disorder.

The Veteran filed an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), seeking a higher disability evaluation, and elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The record shows that evidence was added to the record after the February 2024 rating decision which the Board cannot consider in this appeal.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The appeal period in this matter is from the date of the October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ to the February 2024 rating decision.

1. The issue of entitlement to a disability rating higher than 30 percent for unspecified depressive disorder (psychiatric disorder).

The Veteran' psychiatric disorder is currently rated 30 percent from May 24, 2021. The Veteran contends that a higher evaluation is warranted.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the assigned rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Although the recorded history of a particular disability should be reviewed to make an accurate assessment under the applicable criteria, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders , a 30 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted if there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has noted the "symptom-driven nature" of the General Rating Formula and that "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The Federal Circuit has explained that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Id. at 117.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the evaluation, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific evaluation. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). However, if the evidence shows that a Veteran has symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. at 443.

The Veteran had an April 2022 VA examination for mental disorders. The examiner's diagnosis was insomnia disorder. The Veteran reported having impaired sleep, racing thoughts, rumination, chronic pain interfering with sleep, tiredness, intermittent lapses in focus and concentration, and irritability. The examiner identified symptoms of depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his psychiatric diagnosis as impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

The Veteran had a January 2024 VA examination for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The examiners diagnoses were PTSD and unspecified insomnia disorder. The Veteran reported symptoms of anxious rumination, biweekly panic, startle response, severe hypervigilance, anxious avoidance, insomnia, nightmares, sleep paralysis one to two times per month, apnea symptoms, mild restless legs, poor focus and memory, mild irritability, mild sadness, and tearfulness. The Veteran denied suicide ideation, psychosis, eating disorder symptoms, psychiatric hospitalizations, and psychotherapy. The Veteran reported taking psychotropic medication since 2020. During the examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran was appropriately dressed and groomed, was cooperative, had depressed and anxious mood, had narrow, limited in range and mood-congruent mood, was alert and oriented to person, place, and situation, had normal speech, and had a logical and goal-oriented thought process. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and obsessional rituals which interfered with routine activities. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his psychiatric diagnoses as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood. The examiner opined that it was not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis, noting that the symptoms and their resulting impairments overlapped. The examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD and insomnia disorder diagnoses were not independent of each other and resulted from the same etiology.

The Veteran had a February 2024 VA mental disorders examination. The examiner's diagnosis was unspecified depressive disorder. The examiner noted that at the examination the Veteran was appropriately groomed, and his thinking was linear and lucid with no indication of psychosis. It was noted that his mood was depressed with congruent affect. The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. It was noted that his insight and judgment appeared intact. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, panic attacks that occurred weekly or less, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner stated that the Veteran had PTSD symptoms which were outside the purview of the evaluation. The examiner remarked that the Veteran had symptoms of depression including difficulty sleeping, decreased motivation, social isolation, decreased appetite, periods of pervasive sadness, increased anger, fatigue, and feelings of guilt. The examiner opined that the Veteran's depressive symptoms had worsened since he was diagnosed with an adjustment disorder and now met the criteria for a full-blown depressive disorder. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment with regard to his psychiatric diagnosis as impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks. 

The Veteran's has a service-connected condition identified as unspecified depressive disorder. VA examiners have provided diagnoses of unspecified depressive disorder, PTSD, and insomnia disorder. The January 2024 examiner opined that it was not possible to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis, noting that the symptoms and their resulting impairments overlapped. When there is more than one condition and it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected condition and the non-service-connected condition, reasonable doubt is to be resolved in the Veteran's favor and the signs and symptoms are to be attributed to the service-connected condition. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998). Therefore, all of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are attributed to his service-connected depressive disorder.

Staged ratings are warranted for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The Board finds that staged ratings are appropriate in this case. 

Based on the evidence of record, and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, his psychiatric disorder symptoms more nearly approximate a 70 percent disability rating from January 22, 2024, the date of his January 2024 VA examination. The January 2024 examination report is probative evidence that the Veteran had symptoms that resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas including work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.

The January 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. The January 2024 VA examination report is probative evidence that the Veteran's symptoms included difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and obsessional rituals which interfered with routine activities, as well as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. These symptoms support a 70 percent rating for his psychiatric disorder. 38 C.F.R.§ 4.130.

The February 2024 VA examination report also supports an increased rating. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms attributable to his depressive disorder had worsened and stated that the Veteran had additional symptoms attributable to his PTSD.

Prior to January 22, 2024, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, or total occupational and social impairment.

While the Veteran may contend that his psychiatric disorder warrants a rating higher than 70 percent and is competent (qualified) to observe his psychiatric symptoms, he does not have the training or credentials to determine the current nature, extent, and severity of those symptoms, as reflected by the applicable diagnostic criteria. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The evidence does not show that the Veteran's symptoms include gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger to hurting himself or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. There is no indication that the Veteran's symptoms have significantly interfered with the Veteran's social and occupational functioning to support the maximum 100 percent rating. The presence or absence of specific symptoms, which correspond to a particular rating, is not dispositive. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130; Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Overall, the current severity and frequency of the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate a 70 percent disability rating from January 22, 2024.

Based on the foregoing evidence, a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder fully contemplates his mental health symptoms from January 22, 2024, as his symptoms more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas from that date. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.

At no point during the appeal period has the Veteran's psychiatric disorder been characterized by total occupational and social impairment.

An increased rating of 70 percent from January 22, 2024, for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, is granted. An increased rating for his psychiatric disorder prior to January 22, 2024, is denied.

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lawrence Hubert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.