Citation Nr: A25030530
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240712-456098
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that left shoulder condition began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that right shoulder condition began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1978 to January 1985. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision by filing a July 2024 Decision Review Request. The Veteran elected Direct Review of his claim by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, only the evidence associated with the record at the time of the July 2024 rating decision will be considered on appeal.

1. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition.

The Board addresses the service connection claims together as they stem from the same factual background and are addressed under the same legal basis.

Generally, the Veteran contends that he developed left and right shoulder conditions due to an inservice injury. See e.g., January 2017 VA Form 21-526EZ. Attached to the July 2024 Decision Review Request, the Veteran's representative submitted a statement. In the statement, the representative indicated the examiner of the March 2024 VA examination provided a favorable nexus opinion. However, the claim was denied by the RO. He submitted a higher-level review pointing this out and the Decision Review Officer denied the claim because the in-service jeep accident could not be verified. Yet, the Veteran had credible evidence of an in-service event, a current diagnosis, and a favorable nexus opinion. Thus, the claim should be granted. 

On a statement attached to the May 2024 higher level review, the representative wrote the "medical opinion is wild and should have immediately been sent back for clarification. Why, because how does the examiner link a shoulder issue favorably to military service, but then say the arthritis is not."

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Under the Appeals Management Act, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the agency of jurisdiction in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The July 2024 rating decision favorably found the Veteran had a current diagnosis of bilateral shoulder strain with degenerative arthritis and right shoulder tendinitis. The rating decision also found the Veteran had a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service. There were notations of swollen/painful joints on a December 20, 1984, service treatment record (STR). 

The Board further notes that the Veteran's service records do note that in November 1984 he provided a history of having rolled his jeep resulting in pains and needles and pain in his back.  On separation from service in January 1985 he denied a history of a painful or trick shoulder.

The Board has reviewed the evidence of record and finds that service connection is not warranted for either claim. The requirement of a current diagnosis and an in-service injury has been conceded. Thus, the only requirement of service connection not met is a causal nexus between the current diagnosis and in the in-service event. 

Post-service treatment records indicate the Veteran suffered an injury after service. On an August 2004 VA General Medicine Note, it was noted that the Veteran fell on left side 2.5 months ago and had intense left shoulder pain since injury. However, the complaints of pain were not continuous. See generally, October 2013 Intake examination; January 2016 VA Telephone Encounter Note (denied discomfort, neck or jaw or shoulder or arm).

The Veteran was evaluated during a March 2024 VA examination. During the examination, the Veteran reported a motor vehicle accident (jeep rollover) in service. The examiner noted there was no indication in the STRs that the Veteran injured his shoulders in the accident. The examiner also noted the Veteran's initial service connection claim in 1985 included a claim for a back condition. There was no mention of shoulder conditions. The examiner noted the Veteran had bilateral shoulder strain with degenerative arthritis and right shoulder tendinitis.

The examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's bilateral shoulder condition was incurred in or caused by the Veteran's military service. The examiner wrote:

"There is no indication in the Veteran's service medical record that indicates that he injured his shoulders while serving on active duty. During today's examination, he stated that he injured the shoulders in a motor vehicle accident when a jeep he was in rolled over. He states that he injured the shoulder in that accident in 1985.  However, when he initially claimed service connection on February 1, 1985, he filed for a back injury that had occurred in a jeep accident resulting in injury to his back. There was no mention of his shoulders on the compensation application. In fact, the first mention of his shoulders was when he filed an application for disability compensation and related compensation benefits on January 10, 2011."

The examiner also included a CAPRI note in which read "Left shoulder pain -states dislocated shoulder in the military and does not feel like it healed and is continuing to have pain, pain with raising arm." The Board acknowledges the notations but also concludes that this is not a finding by the examiner. Contrary to the representative's contention in the May 2024 statement, this notation is reflective of the Veteran's report concerning the etiology of his condition. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that his current left shoulder condition and right shoulder condition are related to his duties in service. However, STRs do not indicate when the Veteran was involved in a jeep accident he injured his shoulders. He complained of swollen or painful joints, but the complaint was related to his knees and back. See June 1983 STR; December 1984 Report of Medical History. The Veteran did not report shoulder injuries. See December 1984 separation examination. Post-service treatment records indicate the Veteran fell in 2004 which resulted in an injury. The VA examination does not support causal relationship between the Veteran's current condition and his military service. There are no other medical opinions of records to contradict this finding. The Board finds that the VA opinion was based on an accurate understanding of the service medical records.  

Accordingly, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition and right shoulder condition have not been established, either through medical or lay evidence. In arriving at the decision to deny the claim, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim of entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition and right shoulder condition, that doctrine is not applicable. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?49, 53-56 (1990).

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Harris

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.