Citation Nr: A25030915
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240617-448865
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected right lower extremity sciatic nerve is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected left lower extremity sciatic nerve is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected right lower extremity femoral nerve is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent disabling for service-connected left lower extremity femoral nerve is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1977 to May 1985 and from December 1986 to April 2000.

The June 2023 rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The June 2024 VA Form 10182 does not specify the area of disagreement, but the attached argument makes clear that the Veteran does not dispute the effective date assigned but does seek a higher rating for each of the service-connected sciatic/femoral nerves of the lower extremities.  See June 2024 Argument in Support of Appeal (attached to NOD).  Therefore, the issues have been characterized as claims of entitlement to higher initial ratings to reflect the area of disagreement identified by the Veteran.

However, the issues must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the June 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) obtained a May 2023 VA examination report, but it did not adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with the peripheral nerves at issue. Specifically, the May 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with peripheral radiculopathy affecting the sciatic and femoral nerves bilaterally.  The examiner recorded some findings on the Back Conditions disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) regarding the symptoms of the Veteran's radiculopathy, but the RO did not request and the VA examiner did not complete a DBQ regarding the peripheral nerves.  The section of the Back DBQ addressing the radiculopathy makes some findings, but does not relate the identified symptoms to a specific nerve (sciatic nerve or femoral nerve) or indicate whether both nerves are affected identically or, if not, the severity of symptoms associated with each.  On this record, the RO should have obtained a peripheral nerves DBQ that more specifically evaluated the extent and severity of involvement of each affected nerve, so that an appropriate rating could be assigned.  The failure to obtain a full and complete evaluation of the peripheral nerves constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants remand.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current severity of the service-connected radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities particularly including the sciatic and femoral nerves.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hubers, Kerry

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.