Citation Nr: A25030310
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240404-430294
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for intervertebral disc syndrome (previously rated as lumbar strain), is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left sciatic nerve radiculopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right sciatic nerve radiculopathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2002 to December 2007.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the March 2024 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of these claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 40 percent for intervertebral disc syndrome (previously rated as lumbar strain), is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left sciatic nerve radiculopathy is remanded.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for right sciatic nerve radiculopathy is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded VA back condition and peripheral nerve condition examinations in March 2024 which the Board finds are inadequate because it is unclear if the VA examiner considered the ameliorative effects of the pain medication the Veteran was taking at the time.  Specifically, an October 2023 private treatment record reflects that the Veteran reported pain relief resulting from use of pain medication, including baclofen and gabapentin, as well as after a steroid injection.  The private treatment records also reflect that a steroid injection was administered on January 15, 2024.  The March 2024 VA examinations reflect that the Veteran's treatment for his service-connected back and radiculopathy disabilities included pain medication, including gabapentin, and injections.  However, it is unclear if the VA examiner considered the ameliorative effects of the pain medication in reporting the severity of the Veteran's disabilities.  

The Board also finds the March 2024 VA examinations to be inadequate because they appear to contradict the other medical evidence of record without explanation.  Specifically, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not have flare-ups of his back disability and that there was no evidence suggesting pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time.  However, an October 2023 private treatment record reflects that the Veteran reported that his back pain was worsened by walking, activity, and prolonged sitting and standing, and that his back pain was reduced by rest, lying down, and medication use.  Thus, the private treatment records appear to indicate that the Veteran experienced either flare-ups of his back disability and/or that his back disability worsened after repeated use over time.  Without further explanation, it is unclear how the VA examiner found otherwise.  Moreover, the examiner failed to address whether the Veteran experiences limitation of motion so severe during flare-ups or with repeated use over time that he experiences the functional equivalent of unfavorable ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine.

As the Board finds the March 2024 VA examinations to be inadequate, remand is warranted for new VA examinations to comply with VA's duty to assist.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for new examinations to assess the severity of his service-connected intervertebral disc syndrome (previously rated as lumbar strain) and bilateral sciatic nerve radiculopathy.

The selected examiner must test range of motion for pain in active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary, he or she should clearly explain why this is so.  The examiner should describe any pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, instability of station, and incoordination present.

The examiner should also state whether the examination is taking place during a period of flare-up.  If not, the examiner should ask the Veteran to describe the flare-ups he experiences, including frequency, duration, characteristics, precipitating and alleviating factors, severity and/or extent of functional impairment he experiences during a flare-up of symptoms and/or after repeated use over time.  Based on the Veteran's lay statements and the other evidence of record, the examiner should provide an opinion estimating any additional degrees of limited motion caused by functional loss during a flare-up and after repeated use over time.  

The examiner must also address if, during flare-ups or after repeated use over time, the Veteran experiences a range of motion so restrictive that he experiences the functional equivalent of unfavorable ankylosis of the thoracolumbar spine.  

If the examiner cannot estimate the degrees of additional range of motion loss during flare-ups and/or after repetitive use without resorting to speculation, the examiner should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training).

In addressing the above, the examiner must provide the requisite findings without consideration of the ameliorative effects of medications prescribed for the service-connected disabilities.  In other words, the examiner is asked to estimate what the Veteran's level of functional impairment would be without the benefit of such medication.

For the purposes of the opinion, the clinician should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence if the appeal returns.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The clinician may not dismiss the Veteran's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.  If any of the above issues cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elias, M

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.