Citation Nr: A25030870
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230118-458182
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for erosion teeth, to include as secondary to gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's GERD is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include post-traumatic stress disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lymphocytic colitis to, to include as secondary to GERD is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's dental condition, to include missing, decayed and eroded teeth missing teeth are not due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible.

2. The Veteran's GERD is manifested by pain and vomiting, but not by material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health, or esophageal stricture.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for erosion of teeth have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 4.150.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7346.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1984 to May 1987. Unfortunately, the Veteran passed away in October 2023, and the appellant is his surviving spouse.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2022 and November 2022 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the January 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review option. For the Direct Lane docket, the Board's review is limited to the evidentiary record at the time of the RO decision on appeal. See Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, (2021). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38?U.S.C. §?1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 38 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). The absence of any one element will result in the denial of service connection.

Additionally, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis when the evidence establishes (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.? See Wallin v. West, 11?Vet. App.?509, 512 (1998); 38?C.F.R. §?3.310.

Only certain types of dental and oral conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, such as impairment of the mandible, loss of a portion of the ramus, and loss of a portion of the maxilla may be considered for VA compensation purposes. Compensation is available for loss of teeth only if due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913; see Simmington v. West, 11 Vet. App. 41 (1998). For loss of teeth, bone loss through trauma or disease such as to osteomyelitis must be shown for compensation purposes. The loss of the alveolar process as a result of periodontal disease is not considered disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913, Note.

VA regulations provide that certain common dental conditions, including periodontal disease, can be service connected only to establish eligibility for outpatient dental care, not to receive disability compensation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a). Further, VA regulations indicate that impacted or malposed teeth, and other developmental defects will not be service connected for treatment purposes unless disease or pathology of these teeth developed after 180 days or more of active-duty service. § 3.381 (f)(4).

VA has a duty to liberally review claims and consider all reasonably raised arguments. The applicable regulations are clear that bone loss through trauma or disease must be established to show a disability for VA compensation purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913, Note.

1. Entitlement to service connection for erosion of teeth as secondary to GERD is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has tooth erosion secondary to his service-connected GERD. Initially the Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for GERD, and an October 2021 VA examination found the Veteran had tooth erosion and was missing teeth 19, 20, and 4.

As noted above, VA regulations distinguish between "replaceable missing teeth" or periodontal disease and teeth lost as a result of "loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible." Simington v. West, 11 Vet. App. 41 (1998); 38 C.F.R. § 3.381. Replaceable missing teeth may be considered as service connected solely for the purpose of determining entitlement to dental examinations or outpatient dental treatment, but only the loss of teeth involving the loss of substance of body of either the maxilla or mandible (as described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.381) is considered compensable and may be rated under the appropriate diagnostic codes.

In the present case, during the October 2021 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with erosion of teeth and noted the Veteran was missing teeth 19, 20, and 4. The examiner did not note loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible through trauma or disease. In a related opinion, the examiner found the dental condition was at least as likely as not proximately due to the Veteran's service-connected GERD.

After having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds a grant of service connection for a dental condition for compensation purposes is not warranted as the dental conditions shown are not considered a disability for compensation purposes. Treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease are not compensable disabilities. Compensation for loss of teeth is only available when there is a loss of the body of maxilla or mandible, which are not factors shown here. Accordingly, service connection for erosion of teeth as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected GERD is not warranted and the claim is denied.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).?38?U.S.C. §?1155;?38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.10.? 

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition. The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?589 (1991). The medical, as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.? Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.?See?38?C.F.R. §?4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.?38?C.F.R. §?4.3.? Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.?Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505.? 

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a Veteran prevailing in either event, or the evidence is persuasively against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied.?38?U.S.C. §?5107 (b);?38?C.F.R. §?3.102.

Hyphenated Diagnostic Codes are used when a rating under one Diagnostic Code requires use of an additional Diagnostic Code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. In the selection of code numbers assigned to disabilities, injuries will generally be represented by the number assigned to the residual condition on the basis of which the rating is determined. Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.27, unlisted disabilities requiring rating by analogy will be coded first with the numbers of the most closely related body part and '99'. See 38C.F.R. § 4.20 (when an unlisted condition is encountered it will be permissible to rate it under a closely related disease or injury, in which not only the functions affected, but the anatomical localization and symptomatology are closely analogous).

The Board acknowledges that the ratings criteria for the digestive system was updated during the appeal period, effective May 19, 2024; the changes in the rating criteria are addressed below along with the prior rating criteria.  

2. Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for GERD is denied.

The Veteran is current in receipt of a 30 percent disability evaluation for his GERD under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346 effective February 29, 2016. 

By way of history, in an April 2020 rating decision the Veteran was awarded service connection and a 10 percent disability evaluation for GERD effective February 29, 2016. The Veteran timely appealed this decision by filing an August 2020 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review seeking an increased rating for his GERD. In a January 2021 Higher-Level Review decision, the AOJ awarded the Veteran a 30 percent disability evaluation for his GERD effective February 29, 2016. The Veteran timely appealed this decision by filing a January 2021 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application seeking an increased rating for his GERD. A February 2021 rating decision denied the Veteran's increased rating claim which the Veteran timely appealed by filing an October 2021 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application. The Veteran's increased rating claim was again denied in a March 2022 rating decision which the Veteran timely appealed by filing a September 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application. An October 2022 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for increased rating which the Veteran timely appealed by filing an October 2022 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review. The Veteran's claim was again denied in a November 2022 rating decision which the Veteran timely appealed by filing the January 2023 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 

The Veteran's GERD is currently rated by analogy under Diagnostic Code 7346 for hiatal hernia. Prior to May 19, 2024, Diagnostic Code 7346 provides a 10 percent rating for two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity. A 30 percent rating is assigned for persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. A 60 percent rating is assigned for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

GERD is now a ratable disease under Diagnostic Code 7206, effective May 19, 2024. Under the new DC 7206 (gastroesophageal reflux disease), a 0 percent rating is warranted for a documented history without daily symptoms or requirement for daily medications. A 10 percent rating is warranted for a documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that requires daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic. A 30 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year. A 50 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following (1) dilatation 3 or more times per year, (2) dilatation using steroids at least one time per year, or (3) esophageal stent placement. An 80 percent rating is warranted for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the symptoms present: (1) aspiration, (2) undernutrition, and/or (3) substantial weight loss as defined by § 4.112(a) and treatment with either surgical correction or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube). 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

Under DC 7206 Note (1) it states that findings must be documented by barium swallow, computerized tomography, or esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Note (2) states that non-gastrointestinal complications of procedures should be rated under the appropriate system. Note (3) states that this diagnostic code applies, but is not limited to, esophagitis, mechanical or chemical; Mallory Weiss syndrome (bleeding at junction of esophagus and stomach due to tears) due to caustic ingestion of alkali or acid; drug-induced or infectious esophagitis due to Candida, virus, or other organism; idiopathic eosinophilic, or lymphocytic esophagitis; esophagitis due to radiation therapy; esophagitis due to peptic stricture; and any esophageal condition that requires treatment with sclerotherapy. Note (4) states that recurrent esophageal stricture is defined as the inability to maintain target esophageal diameter beyond 4 weeks after the target diameter has been achieved. Note (5) states that refractory esophageal stricture is defined as the inability to achieve target esophageal diameter despite receiving no fewer than 5 dilatation sessions performed at 2-week intervals.

The Veteran was first afforded a VA examination in September 2019. The Veteran was diagnosed with GERD and was noted to utilize a proton pump inhibitor three times a day with his meals. The Veteran reported symptoms of pyrosis (heartburn), reflux, regurgitation, and substernal pain. The Veteran's GERD caused sleep disturbances, and vomiting four or more times a year lasting less than one day, and nausea four or more times a year lasting one to nine days. The Veteran was not noted to have material weight loss, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, melena or an esophageal stricture.

The Veteran was afforded a second VA examination in December 2021. The examiner noted the Veteran utilized Pepcid and Pantoprazole for his GERD. The Veteran reported pyrosis, but not dysphagia, reflux, regurgitation, or pain related to his GERD. The Veteran's GERD caused nausea and vomiting four or more times a year lasting less than one day. The Veteran was not noted to have material weight loss, hematemesis, melena or an esophageal stricture. The Veteran did not report episodes of epigastric distress or symptoms productive of considerable or severe impairment of health. Although the Veteran's symptoms seemed to have improved at the time of the December 2021 VA examination, it was noted this examination did not constitute sustained improvement of his GERD.

Review of the Veteran's VA treatment records provide further insight to the Veteran's GERD symptoms. In February 2017 the Veteran reported frequent heartburn and tightness in his chest with intermittent vomiting in the morning, the Veteran denied hematemesis. In October 2021 the Veteran provided a written statement indicating that his GERD medication was causing him to suffer from stomach irritation and diarrhea. However, VA treatment records from throughout 2020 indicate the Veteran was suffering from bouts of constipation and diarrhea due to his lymphocytic colitis. In September 2022 the Veteran reported daily heartburn and regurgitation and that he has to sleep with his head elevated to alleviate symptoms, but that he still awakens due to regurgitation. In September 2022 the Veteran provided a written statement dated June 2022 outlining his GERD symptoms. The Veteran reported severe heartburn which caused pain in his chest, difficulty swallowing, reflux, and vomiting, as well as interrupted sleep. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the 30 percent disability criteria for GERD under Diagnostic Code 7346 for the entire period on appeal. A higher 60 percent evaluation is not warranted because although the Veteran has pain and vomiting, the evidence does not demonstrate symptoms of material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. The Board has also considered the revised criteria under Diagnostic Codes 7206; however, the record does not indicate the Veteran suffers from esophageal stricture as contemplated by Diagnostic Code 7206. 

Accordingly, a disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's GERD under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346 is not warranted for the entire appeal period.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38?U.S.C. §?5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38?U.S.C. §?5103A (f)(2)(A); 38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a).

An examination or opinion is necessary if the evidence of record (1) contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) establishes that the claimant suffered an event, injury, or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease or symptoms of such a disease manifesting during an applicable presumptive period; and (3) indicates that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease in service, or with another service-connected disability; but (4) does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim. 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79 (2006) (discussing the four elements to consider in determining whether a VA medical examination must be provided).

1. Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, to include post-traumatic stress disorder and generalized anxiety disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has an acquired psychiatric disability related to his active-duty service.

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran filed a service connection claim for PTSD; however, the record indicates the Veteran has a diagnosis for both PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder. As noted in?Clemons, a Veteran may not be competent to diagnosis his or her particular disability. See?Clemons?v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?1?(2009). Thus, VA will not limit the scope of a claim solely to the diagnosis as reported by the Veteran. Accordingly, the Board finds it appropriate to recharacterize the Veteran's claim as a claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder.

The Veteran's VA treatment records reveal the Veteran has a diagnosis of both PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder. Thus, the Board finds the Veteran has a current disability.

In the present case, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for his acquired psychiatric disorder as the Veteran's claimed stressor could not be verified. The Veteran consistently reported that while he was on active-duty service he witnessed a fellow service member pick up what he believed to be a training aid but was actually a live projectile which exploded in the service member's hand causing severe injuries. A report from the Records Research Response indicated records regarding this event could not be located, and thus the Veteran's stressor could not be verified. Although this incident could not be verified as a stressor for the Veteran's claim for PTSD, the Board finds this event is sufficient for an in-service incurrence for the Veteran's anxiety.

The Board further notes the Veteran has not yet been afforded a VA examination in conjunction with his claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder. As noted above, the Veteran has been diagnosed with PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder. The Veteran has consistently reported the incident which he contends caused his acquired psychiatric disability. The Board finds this information is sufficient to represent the in-service incurrence element and finds the low bar of McClendon has been met. Thus, remand is warranted for the Veteran to be afforded a VA examination for his acquired psychiatric disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for lymphocytic colitis as secondary to GERD is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his lymphocytic colitis is secondary to his service-connected GERD. Initially the Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for GERD and has a current diagnosis of lymphocytic colitis.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for hys lymphocytic colitis in June 2020 and February 2021, with additional addendum opinions provided in March, May, and November 2021. The June 2020 and February 2021 VA medical opinions found that the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis was not caused the Veteran's service-connected GERD; however, both the June 2020 and February 2021 VA medical opinions indicated that while the exact cause of lymphocytic colitis is unknown, there have been links associated with lymphocytic colitis such as GERD medications. In the March 2021 VA addendum opinion, the examiner found he Veteran's GERD did not aggravate his lymphocytic colitis, but did not address the prior examiners statements regarding a link between GERD medication and lymphocytic colitis. Similarly, the subsequent May 2021 addendum opinion found that the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis was less likely than not aggravated by the Veteran's GERD, but again, did not address the prior examiners statements regarding a link between GERD medication and lymphocytic colitis. Finally, in the November 2021 addendum opinion, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's GERD was not a cause or aggravating factor for the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis. The examiner noted that medical literature indicates a possible correlation between lymphocytic colitis and GERD, but that correlation does not equate with causation.

As noted above, multiple examiners raised the possibility that the Veteran's GERD medication may have some effect on his lymphocytic colitis. Although the examiners found the medication was not the cause of the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis, no examiner provided an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's GERD medication aggravated his lymphocytic colitis. The Board finds this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified clinician concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder.

The examiner should then address the following.? A thorough rationale is required for all conclusions:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD and generalized anxiety disorder manifested in service, within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to service. Explain why or why not.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified clinician concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis.

The examiner should then address the following.? A thorough rationale is required for all conclusions:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lymphocytic colitis was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected GERD to include the Veteran's GERD medications. Explain why or why not.

The examiner should note that "any incremental increase in disability-any additional impairment of earning capacity-in non-service-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions...regardless of its permanence" constitutes aggravation.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Risley, H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.