Citation Nr: A25030283
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-451109
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for generalized anxiety disorder is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for generalized anxiety disorder, are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Army from June 1987 to June 1991.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In April 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication most recently addressed in a March 2023 rating decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include generalized anxiety disorder and insomnia disorder. 

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In determining the present level of a disability for any increased rating claim, the Board must consider the application of staged ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  In other words, where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibited diverse symptoms meeting the criteria for different ratings during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is necessary.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an increased rating for his service-connected generalized anxiety disorder because his symptoms are more severe than what is contemplated by his current rating of 30 percent.

The Veteran is currently service connected for generalized anxiety disorder under Diagnostic Code 9400, with an effective date of September 7, 2022. DC 9400 falls under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, and the following criteria applies:

A noncompensable rating is warranted when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

A 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more frequently than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-3 (2002).  However, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that such symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The Veteran submitted an April 2023 statement in support of his claim, in which he described the occupational and social impairments resulting from his service-connected psychiatric disorder. He stated that his work performance has declined due to calling out sick or leaving early several times for mental health issues, and that he has been reprimanded for arguing with a coworker. He also asserted that his anxiety places a strain on his relationship with his wife by causing him to have angry outbursts. He described having anxiety symptoms including shortness of breath and a tight chest about 10 days per month. He stated that he feels the need to write down tasks, names, and directions so as not to forget them. He reported sleep issues related to his anxiety, which tend to make him tired, irritable, and unproductive the next day. He also described himself as socially withdrawn and tending to avoid making plans with others. 

Turning to the medical evidence of record, the Veteran has undergone three VA examinations. The Veteran first underwent a VA examination in October 2022. The Veteran was examined via video telehealth, and the examiner reviewed the Veteran's VA e-Folder and VA electronic health record. The Veteran complained of moderate anxiety with sleep issues, occasional panic attacks, and forgetfulness. He stated that he has worked at the same job for 26 years, receiving several promotions over the years, and that his job performance is generally fine, but that he has received feedback regarding arguments with his coworkers. He reported a good and supportive relationship of 23 years with his wife and a good relationship with his children. He also reported being in contact with his siblings and their children, as well as spending time with his in-laws. The Veteran was observed as having a tired mood, appropriate affect, logical and goal directed thought process, and pleasant and cooperative demeanor. Ultimately, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified anxiety disorder and insomnia disorder, noting symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. The examiner assessed the Veteran's level of impairment as "occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation," equivalent to the criteria for a 30 percent rating.

The Veteran underwent a second VA examination in February 2023. The Veteran was examined via video telehealth, and the examiner reviewed the Veteran's VA e-Folder. The Veteran reported restlessness, anxiety, and irritability, as well as excessive worrying, routines involving locking doors, and significant sleep issues. He noted good relationships with his family and friendly relationships with coworkers but no close friends. He stated that he typically stays at home, as he has too little energy to engage in hobbies. He reported generally good work performance but with some struggles with fatigue, irritability, and difficulty with coworkers. The Veteran was observed as having good hygiene and grooming, good eye contact, full range of affect, normal speech, appropriate, relevant, and logical thought process, fair concentration and attention, and good judgment and insight. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Insomnia Disorder with symptoms of depressed mood, moderate anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The assessed his level of impairment as "occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication," the equivalent of a 10 percent rating. 

The Veteran underwent a third VA examination in in August 2023. The Veteran was examined via video telehealth, and the examiner reviewed the Veteran's VA e-Folder. The Veteran complained of excess worry, difficulty concentrating, fatigue, and irritability, as well as compulsions to double check locks. He reported physical symptoms of quickened heart rate, dizziness, and shaking. He reported a good relationship with his family but stated he does not have friends. He complained of difficulty at work, stating that he argues with his coworkers frequently and sometimes leave early because he does not want to interact with people. He stated he has been verbally reprimanded but not written up. The Veteran was observed as having adequate dress and grooming, hyperverbal speech, fidgety and restless psychomotor behavior, a pleasant and cooperative demeanor, an appropriate affect, a very anxious mood, avoidant eye contact, unimpaired and fully oriented perception, good judgment, mild memory impairment during heightened anxiety, and a logical and goal-directed thought process. Ultimately, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with Generalized Anxiety Disorder alone and opined that any sleep issues are subsumed within that diagnosis, rather than constituting a separate diagnosis. His symptoms were noted as anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances in motivation and mood. The examiner described the Veteran's level of impairment as "occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation," the equivalent of a 30 percent rating. 

Other than the VA examinations, the claims file contains one other medical opinion: an April 2023 opinion from a private Physician's Assistant. The provider reviewed the March 2023 initial rating decision and the Veteran's April 2023 statement and opined that the Veteran "submitted a credible lay statement that clearly outlines symptomatology of his current mental health condition and documents a more severe level of social and occupational impairment than the VA assigned." The provider then opined that, based on the Veteran's lay statement, the Veteran demonstrated "occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood," and was therefore entitled to a 70 percent rating for his service-connected psychiatric condition.

The claims file contains little other medical evidence beyond the opinions described above. The Veteran appears to have discussed this condition with his medical providers only once, in the context of a sleep medicine visit with his primary care provider in February 2024. At that visit, the Veteran reported that his anxiety was "decent overall" but that he experienced "some panic attacks" and that his obsessive-compulsive symptoms were "worse lately." He reported continued sleep troubles. 

In light of the evidence above, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms do not warrant a rating in excess of 30 percent. 

The Veteran's symptoms closely align with those listed in the criteria for a 30 percent rating. The Veteran's symptoms are consistently noted as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss, such as needing to write down tasks and names in order to remember them. When panic attacks are noted, such as on the October 2022 examination or during the February 2024 primary care visit, they are noted as occurring infrequently. 

Moreover, the Veteran has not consistently demonstrated the more severe symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating. VA examiners frequently note his affect as normal or appropriate, his speech as normal if hyperverbal, his judgment as good, and his thought process as logical and goal directed. The Veteran's motivation and mood are impacted, and his anxiety and irritability has reportedly had some negative effects on his social relationships, particularly those with his coworkers. However, the Veteran has maintained gainful employment at the same company for approximately 26 years, has been promoted to a leadership position, and reports only a few instances of verbal reprimand for conflicts with coworkers during those 26 years. He reports calling out of work or going home early, at worst, three times per month. He also maintains a reportedly good and supportive relationship with his wife of over 20 years, with occasional conflict due to his irritability, as well as relationships with his siblings and in-laws. Therefore, the Veteran's symptoms appear to be more consistent with the intermittent and occasional difficulties associated with a 30 percent rating than the overall reduction in reliability and productivity associated with a 50 percent rating. 

The weight of the medical opinions on file also supports a denial of a rating in excess of 30 percent. The Veteran has been examined by VA providers three times, and no VA provider has endorsed a rating in excess of 30 percent. The most recent August 2023 VA examination endorsed a rating of 30 percent, and the February 2023 and August 2022 examinations endorsed ratings of 10 percent and 30 percent, respectively. The Board has also considered the private medical opinion endorsing a 70 percent rating. However, the private provider based his opinion on a review of the Veteran's lay statement alone. The provider did not examine the Veteran, so he was not given the opportunity to interview the Veteran and objectively assess his behavior, affect, judgment, and thought process before formulating his opinion. Accordingly, the Board assigns the private opinion less probative weight than the opinions of the VA examiners, whose opinions are informed by their interactions with and observations of the Veteran. 

Finally, the Board has considered the argument submitted by the Veteran's representative. The Board does not dispute that the Veteran is competent, as a lay person, to report his experiences and observable mental health symptoms, and the Board has taken the Veteran's lay statements into consideration when assessing the balance of the evidence of record. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994). However, even considering the Veteran's statements regarding his symptomatology, the Board finds that the severity and frequency of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximates the "occasional" and "intermittent" criteria associated with a 30 percent rating. 

Accordingly, the Board does not find that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas and reduced reliability and productivity. Accordingly, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's overall symptoms are contemplated by the 30 percent disability under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for generalized anxiety disorder is not warranted.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990).

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Utter, Margaret M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.