Citation Nr: A25030633
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241203-490820
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

An initial increased rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

For the period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment is not shown.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD has been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1966 to February 1968.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the evidence submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 RO decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the December 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the December 2024 VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

An initial increased rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD is granted.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a compensable rating for his service-connected PTSD.  Specifically, he contends that he is entitled to a 100 percent disability rating.  See December 2024 VA Form 10182.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the veteran's medical history.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

When determining the appropriate disability rating to assign, the Board's primary consideration is a veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; see also, Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Rather, it is the effect of the symptoms which are present that determines whether the criteria for the next higher rating are met, and the Board must draw fact-based conclusions as to whether those symptoms, and their severity, frequency and duration, have caused the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a given rating.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017).  A veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a compensable rating.  After review, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms most closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and thus they resulted in a level of impairment that is most closely approximated by that rating.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), a 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to symptoms such as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  Id.

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

The maximum schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

During the rating period, the Veteran underwent VA mental health examinations in December 2023 and October 2024, as well as one private mental health examination in March 2023 (associated with the claims file in May 2023).  The results from those examinations along with the Veteran's medical records, lay statements, and other evidence, show that his PTSD is manifested by symptoms associated with the 30, 50, and 70 percent rating criteria of the diagnostic code.  

Specifically, the Veteran has symptoms associated with the 30 percent rating including depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, occasional panic attacks, and mild memory loss.  He presents with symptoms associated with the 50 percent rating including disturbances of motivation and mood, circumstantial/circular speech, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and impaired short term/ long term memory.  In the 70 percent disability rating he presents with symptoms of suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control with periods of unprovoked irritability, obsessional rituals interfering with routine activities, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.

The evidence of record also shows that the Veteran endorses symptoms not specifically listed with a rating, such as forgetfulness, trouble concentrating, social isolation, hypervigilance, anxiety in crowded places, sensitivity to loud noises, flashbacks or intrusive memories, and nightmares.

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms of hypervigilance, anxiety in crowded places and sensitivity to loud noises, and trouble concentrating, are similar to the symptom of occasional impairment due to depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment contemplated by the 30 percent rating criteria.  His symptom of forgetfulness is similar to the symptom of mild memory loss, also contemplated by the 30 percent rating criteria.  The Veteran's unlisted symptoms of social isolation, flashbacks or intrusive memories, and nightmares are similar to symptoms contemplated by the 50 percent rating criteria's disturbances of motivation or mood.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's record includes a documented history of suicidal ideation and issues with impulse control.  However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation is consistent with the symptomatology contemplated by the 70 percent rating; it has not risen to the level contemplated by the 100 percent rating.  Throughout the rating period on appeal, the Veteran regularly denied a specific intent or a plan involving self-harm and his mental health examiners indicated he is a low risk.  Moreover, the record does not reflect any instances where the Veteran expressed any violent thoughts or exhibited any violent actions towards others.  Thus, neither the Veteran's suicidal ideation nor his issues of impulse control have risen to the level of a persistent danger to himself or others as contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  See "Persistent," Meriam-Webster Dictionary Online (defining persistent, among other entries, as "continuing or included to persist in a course").  

After review, the Board finds that the evidence of record supports a finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptomatology most closely approximates a 70 percent disability rating.

Regarding the level of social impairment caused by his symptoms, the Veteran was generally described as well groomed, cooperative, and pleasant with normal speech and thought processes during his mental health examinations and in his counseling records.  The Veteran has been divorced twice, currently lives alone, and has two adult children.  He described positive relationships with his children and the record indicates that he has good relationships with his ex-wife and with people that he knows.  Furthermore, the record included evidence that the Veteran was involved in a social organization, the Free Masons, and that he has enjoyed working on charitable causes with that organization.  Despite these encouraging findings, the record also reflects symptomatology that has drastically affected the Veteran's ability to complete mundane tasks of daily life.  The Veteran specifically described difficulty in going shopping in a store, as that causes him an outsized level of anxiety.  He indicated that he generally refrains from going out in public, due to suspiciousness or hypervigilance related to the assault he sustained in service and to that end, his mental health provider has documented that he has been distrustful of others since his period of service.  See August 2023 Lay Statement; see also, May 2023 Private Mental Health Examination.  The Veteran's noted suspiciousness and anxiety was also perceptible within other documents in the claims file.  In one noteworthy example, a statement written by the Veteran described dissatisfaction with a VA mental health social worker due to a missed appointment.  In the statement, the Veteran explain that he appeared for a mental health counseling session only to be told that his social worker was unavailable and would have to reschedule.  He describes his frustration with that situation and that he believed that the social worker saw him on the date of the appointment through a window and deliberately avoided him.  See August 2023 Lay Statement.  

The findings from these statements and the Veteran's counseling records are also consistent with the conclusions from his mental health examinations.  Specifically, in the May 2023 examination, the provider described the Veteran's personality profile as one defined by "intrusive and obsessive thoughts that they find to be distressing and disturbing," that such individuals have "significant emotional concerns...are prone to negative emotions.  They experience intense anger and irritability...[t]hey desire to spend time alone or only with those whom they know well.  They find other people to be selfish and uncaring and may be isolated or withdrawn."  See May 2023 Private Mental Health Examination.  Moreover, the Veteran is also reported to have issues with impulse control, bouts of irrational anger or irritability that the Veteran himself describes as being related to "silly things."  Taken together, the record supports a finding that the Veteran experiences significant social impairment due to his PTSD symptoms.

Regarding the Veteran's occupational impairment, the record indicates that the Veteran has held thirteen jobs since leaving service in 1968 and that the Veteran has not been employed since 2019.  There is no evidence that the symptoms of his PTSD, specifically, have led to this period of unemployment.  Nevertheless, the records suggests that while the Veteran is able to interact with family members and others in his close personal network, he struggles to interact with members of the population at large because of the distrust, suspiciousness, anxiety, and outbursts of anger and irritability manifested by his symptoms.  As this is compounded by his recognized difficulties in adapting to stressful situations, including work environments, difficulties in establishing effective work relationships, impairment with short and long term memory, impulse control issues, and history of suicidal ideations, the Board finds that the Veteran's occupational outlook is meaningfully degraded due to his PTSD. 

Putting it all together, the Veteran's current disability rating is based on the October 2024 medical examiner's findings that his symptoms do not warrant a compensable rating, though the Board also acknowledges that the May 2023 private medical opinion endorses a level of occupational and social impairment consistent with a 50 percent rating and the December 2023 VA medical examiner endorses a 70 percent rating.  However, determining the level of a veteran's occupational and social impairment is an adjudicative rather than a medical question.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  Here, the Board has considered each of the medical opinions as well as the entirety of the evidentiary record and concludes that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptomatology results in reduced reliability and productivity in "most areas," and thus he is entitled to a disability rating of 70 percent.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's argument that he is entitled to a 100 percent disability rating for his PTSD.  See December 2023 VA Form 10182.  However, the record is devoid of any of the most symptoms noted in the 100 percent criteria. There was no evidence in the claims file of active delusions, hallucinations, severe memory loss, disorientation to time or place, grossly inappropriate behaviors or grossly impaired thoughts or illogical speech.   The Board must consider the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms within the totality of the evidentiary record, which in this case does not otherwise support a finding that the Veteran has occupational or social impairment as characterized by the 100 percent criteria.  As addressed above, the Veteran presents as generally well groomed, thoughtful, and coherent, he has maintained lasting and largely positive relationships with family and the people in his immediate network, and he has demonstrated an ability to be involved in social organizations and charitable work, suggesting his symptoms, taken together, do not correspond to the 100 percent rating criteria.  In rendering this decision, the Board is not minimizing the Veteran symptoms nor his sincere belief that he is entitled to a higher rating.  However, again, the record at this juncture does not demonstrate that the frequency, duration, and severity of the Veteran's symptoms impair him as contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria. 

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology is most closely approximated by the 70 percent rating criteria.  Accordingly, the Veteran is entitled to an increased rating of 70 percent.

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Todd; Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.