Citation Nr: A25030575
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 201112-120263
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The appeal with respect to entitlement to a compensable rating for a residual scar of the left shoulder is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbar spine strain is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain with instability (right ankle disability) is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle deltoid ligament sprain (left ankle disability) is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to an effective date prior to April 7, 2020, for the award of service connection for a right ankle disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to an effective date prior to April 7, 2020, for the award of service connection for a left ankle disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for right knee strain, meniscus tear, status post arthroscopic surgery (right knee disability) is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for left knee arthritis, status post arthroscopic surgery (left knee disability) is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

By correspondence received in March 2021, prior to the promulgation of an appellate decision, the Veteran requested that the present appeal be withdrawn in its entirety.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from December 1993 to December 2005. His decorations include the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from two October 2020 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD))) in November 2020, selecting the hearing review option. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(2).

The Board notes that in his November 2020 NOD, the Veteran expressed a desire to appeal the "right ankle" and "left ankle," indicating that the rating decision he was appealing with respect to those issues was dated in April 2020. Review of the claims file shows that he filed a supplemental claim seeking service connection for ankle disabilities in April 2020, but there is no rating decision dated in April 2020. In an October 2020 rating decision, however, the agency of original jurisdiction granted service connection for disabilities of both ankles, and the Veteran filed the present appeal the following month. In light of those events, the Board has interpreted the Veteran's November 2020 NOD as expressing a desire to appeal the determinations with respect to the ankles as set out in October 2020 rating decision. Because the Veteran did not specifically indicate in his November 2020 NOD whether he wished to appeal the initial ratings and/or the effective dates, the Board has liberally interpreted his NOD as expressing disagreement with both the initial ratings and the effective dates, and has characterized the issues accordingly, as set out above, on the title page. 

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that, in addition to the present appeal, other issues are pending before the Board in separate appeal streams under the Appeals Modernization Act. Those issues will be addressed in separate Board decisions, if otherwise in order, in accordance with their place on the Board's docket. 

Dismissal

An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Only an appellant, or an appellant's authorized representative, may withdraw an appeal. Id. 

Appeal withdrawals must include the name of the veteran, the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the veteran (e.g., a veteran's survivor, a guardian, or a fiduciary appointed to receive VA benefits on an individual's behalf), the applicable VA file number, and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn. If the appeal involves multiple issues, the withdrawal must specify that the appeal is withdrawn in its entirety or list the issue(s) withdrawn from the appeal. Id. 

By correspondence received in March 2021, prior to the promulgation of an appellate decision on the matter, the Veteran requested that the present appeal be withdrawn in its entirety, identifying the appeal by docket number. The submission included his name and his VA file number. Under the circumstances, the Board finds that the requirements for a proper withdrawal have been satisfied.

As the Veteran has withdrawn his appeal of these issues, there remain no ?

allegations of error of fact or law for appellate consideration with respect to these issues. Accordingly, the appeal of these issues must be dismissed. 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Oldroyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.