Citation Nr: A25030397
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240608-446216
DATE:  April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active naval service from October 2014 to October 2018. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 and requested direct review of the March 2024 rating decision by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence that was before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence that was submitted after the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If evidence was associated with the claims file after the March 2024 rating decision, the Board has not considered it in the herein decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability and a left shoulder disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board initially notes that on the VA Form 21-526EZ, submitted in November 2023, the Veteran characterized his claim as entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition, paranoia, and major depression. A review of the record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with other mental health disorders, to include obsessive compulsive disorder. As such, the Board has expanded the appealed issue of entitlement to service connection for an anxiety condition, paranoia, and major depression, to include all psychiatric disabilities. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). 

Service Connection - Acquired Psychiatric Disability

The Veteran asserts that he has a psychiatric disability, claimed as anxiety condition, paranoia, and major depression, that is related to his active service. 

Service treatment records (STRs) reveal that the Veteran had a positive depression screening in August 2018. His STRs are otherwise absent of any complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis of a psychiatric disability or symptoms. 

An August 2023 treatment note documented the Veteran's report that he had ongoing concerns of anxiety and possible paranoia.

In a September 2023 treatment note, the Veteran reported that his obsessive thoughts started in the military after being told to lose weight or be discharged. He also reported that he worked in intelligence for the Navy and had knowledge of things that were going to happen and didn't say anything about it. The Veteran also reported concerns of perseverative thoughts, significant isolating behaviors, and not caring for himself physically. At that time, the Veteran was assessed to have social anxiety, major depressive disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder by a VA social worker. The social worker also stated that it was difficult to separate the Veteran's compulsive perseverative anxious thoughts from possible trauma related to his work in the military. Additionally, the social worker noted that a complicating factor was the Veteran's concern and paranoia about revealing information from his time in the military. 

During a VA Examination in February 2024, the Veteran reported that he did not have significant disciplinary issues during his time in service. At that time, the examiner assessed that the Veteran had diagnoses of persistent depressive disorder with intermittent major depressive disorder and social anxiety disorder. However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's mental health diagnoses were less likely than not incurred in or caused by his active service. The examiner reasoned that they were unable to find evidence of depressive symptoms before or during his military service. The examiner also noted that the Veteran denied mental health symptoms on documents such as his Report of Medical History from August 2018.

The Board finds that the February 2024 VA opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the Board finds that the opinion is based on an inaccurate account of the evidence as the Veteran had a negative depression screening at the time of his separation, in August 2018, despite his failure to report depressive symptoms on his Report of Medical History. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008). Additionally, the examiner failed to take the Veteran's lay statements related to the onset of his symptoms into account and instead solely relied on a lack of in-service complaint of mental health symptoms to support their negative conclusion. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). 

Accordingly, the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). 

Service Connection - Left Shoulder Disability 

The Veteran has asserted that he has a left shoulder disability that is etiologically related to his active service.

A review of the record shows that efforts were undertaken to afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left shoulder disability. In the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, it was noted that the Veteran failed to report for a scheduled examination. However, a review of the record shows that the examination request was canceled due to an inability to contact the Veteran. However, a review of the record does not document which efforts were made to contact the Veteran. Further, a review of the record shows that the Veteran was contacted and informed, and did report for, a VA mental health examination. As such, it stands to reason that had appropriate efforts been made to contact the Veteran, he would have reported for a scheduled VA examination for his left shoulder. 

As such, the Board finds that failure to ensure adequate efforts were made to afford the Veteran an examination with regard to his left shoulder disability is a failure in the duty-to-assist and remand is required for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by a psychologist or psychologist to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed psychiatric disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the results of the examination and review of the record, the examiner must first identify all psychiatric disabilities present during the pendency to the claim, or proximate thereto. 

Then, for each identified disability, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must in-service positive depression screening, as well as the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed left shoulder disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Randall, Alexandria G.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.