Citation Nr: A25030412
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439514
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected insomnia disorder and right ankle and back disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1999 to January 2003.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) determined that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim, but it continued the denial of the underlying merits.  The Board will not disturb the favorable finding as to new and relevant evidence.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in May 2024 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision.   If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, the AOJ will be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider because the case is being remanded.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran is now represented by the above-named accredited representative, and a VA Form 21-22a is of record.

On review, the Board finds that additional development is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  Specifically, it appears that there may be outstanding non-VA treatment records, as detailed in the directives below.  

In addition, the Veteran was provided a VA home sleep study in September 2023 in connection with the claim, and VA examiners then provided medical opinions based on the acceptable clinical evidence (ACE) process in September 2023 and November 2023.  The first examiner found no etiological relationship between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and his right ankle disability.  The second examiner determined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was not caused by his in-service toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiners addressed the questions posed in the medical opinion requests; however, neither examiner addressed whether obesity was an intermediate between the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder and right ankle disability and his sleep apnea.  The record also shows that the AOJ granted service connection for a back disability in the November 2023 rating decision, and the Veteran has reported similar limitations in physical activity due to that service-connected disability.  See, e.g., historical April 2023 written statements several months before current claim.  Based on the foregoing, an additional VA medical opinion was needed.

The Board acknowledges the June 2023 private medical opinion from P.D., APRN (initials used to protect privacy) addressing obesity as an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his sleep apnea.  However, the private medical opinion is not adequate to decide the case by itself, as it does not appear that P.D. considered the complete history of the development of the disorder, such as the Veteran's in-service history of weight issues documented in the service treatment records or any records related to the Veteran's report of an initial obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis in 2018. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding medical opinion based upon incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). 

The case is REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  The AOJ should request that the Veteran provide the names and addresses of any and all health care providers who have provided treatment for his obstructive sleep apnea.  After acquiring this information and obtaining any necessary authorization, the AOJ should obtain and associate these records with the claims file.

The record indicates that the Veteran had a non-VA sleep study several years prior to the current claim, but the record does not contain that report or any related treatment records.  He also did not establish VA care until 2021.  See, e.g., May 2021 VA treatment record; June 2023 private medical opinion.

2.  The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should address the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by or resulted from his service-connected insomnia disorder, right ankle disability, and/or back disability.  He or she should address whether the obstructive sleep apnea would have been less severe but for those disorders, to include any worsening of functionality.

(b) Whether the Veteran's weight gain or obesity was an intermediate step between his service-connected insomnia disorder, right ankle disability, and/or back disability and his obstructive sleep apnea.  In so doing, the examiner should state whether the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder, right ankle disability, and/or back disability caused or worsened his obesity.  If so, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  He or she should also provide an opinion as to whether the obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by or worsened by his service-connected insomnia disorder, right ankle disability, and/or back disability.

The Veteran has contended that his obstructive sleep apnea was caused by weight gain from decreased exercise due to his service-connected right ankle and back disabilities, as well as poor food choices due to his service-connected insomnia disorder.  See, e.g., written statements from April 2023 and July 2023.  He has reported that he was first diagnosed with sleep apnea by a non-VA treatment provider.  That report is not in the claims file at the time of this remand, but a September 2023 VA home sleep study provided in connection with the claim confirms the diagnosis.  VA examination reports from 2021 and 2023 show information about the Veteran's functionality related to the service-connected disabilities.  See also VA treatment records from May 2021 and September 2021 (including smoking history of one pack per day for 25 years).

The Veteran's service treatment records provide potentially relevant history, including treatment related to his weight.  See, e.g., service treatment records from November 1998 entrance examination with report of medical history, 2000 and 2001 weight control program records showing Veteran denied having any medical/physical problems that would interfere with his taking part in a remedial physical training program), and November 2002 separation examination with report of medical history and report of medical assessment (summary of defects and diagnoses includes obese with an LDL measurement and recommendations for decreased calories, increased cardiovascular exercise, and a decreased fat/cholesterol diet; Veteran denied having suffered from any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care).

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.