Citation Nr: A25030718
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241205-491417
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

An earlier effective date (EED) prior to February 23, 2022, for a 60 percent disability rating of coronary artery disease (CAD) is denied.

A higher rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder is denied.

A higher rating in excess of 60 percent for coronary artery disease (CAD) is denied.

A rating higher than 20 percent for right lower extremity (RLE) peripheral neuropathy (PN) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

Entitlement to an EED prior to February 23, 2022, for the grant of eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. chapter 35 is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence persuasively shows that entitlement to 60 percent rating for service-connected CAD arose on February 23, 2022 during the VA examination and entitlement to a 60 percent rating for CAD was not factually ascertainable for the one-year period prior to February 23, 2022.

2. During the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD with depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder has been characterized by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood; total occupational and social impairment has not been shown.

3. The Veteran's CAD did not manifest a workload of 3 METs or less; or left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 30 percent.

4. The Veteran has no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve in his RLE.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than February 23, 2022 for a 60 percent rating for service-connected CAD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400.

2. The criteria for a higher rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not all been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

3. The criteria for a rating higher than 60 percent for CAD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.100, 4.104, DC 7005.

4. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for RLE PN have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.120, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1964 to May 1967.

The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) notes that these claims were previously continuously adjudicated in legacy and Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

The case is on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2022 decision.  In December 2023, the RO issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior July 2022 decision.  

In the December 2024 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 RO decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or attorney representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

As for the claims of EED for CAD and increased rating for PTSD, CAD, and RLE, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on these claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  See Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As for TDIU and DEA claims, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); see also Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Earlier Effective Dates

Legal Criteria

Generally, except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

For increases in disability, the effective date will generally be the date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1).  Otherwise, the effective date may be assigned beginning from the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within 1 year from such date, otherwise, date of receipt of claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 980 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

1. An EED prior to February 23, 2022 for the 60 percent disability rating of CAD.

By way of brief procedural history, in September 2021, the Veteran appealed an EED prior to January 10, 2017 for the assigned of 30 percent disability rating for CAD.  In January 2022, the Board denied this claim.  The Veteran did not appeal it.  As such, the Board will address whether an earlier effective date is warranted for the assigned 60 percent disability rating for CAD.  The Veteran's disability is represented by staged ratings.  Nevertheless, the record shows he continuously pursued claim for CAD prior to February 23, 2022 since his application for a TDIU was received January 10, 2017 which included service-connected CAD.

The Veteran seeks an effective date earlier than February 23, 2022 for a 60 percent disability rating for the service-connected CAD.

The evidence demonstrates during the period on appeal, in a February 23, 2022 VA examination, the examiner found cardiac hypertrophy and cardiac dilatation by echocardiogram, left ventricular rejection fraction (LVEF) at 60-65 percent, and METs level greater than 3 but not greater than 5 with breathlessness, dizziness, and fatigue.  The Veteran's treatment records do not show that it was factually ascertainable that the Veteran was entitled to a 60 percent rating at the time of or for the one year period prior to February 23, 2022.  Rather, the Veteran's 60 percent rating was based on the day of the February 23, 2022 VA examination.  There is no evidence within one year prior to the claim that shows an increase in the heart disability such that the criteria for a 60 percent rating were met.  Therefore, the selection of February 23, 2022, as the effective date for the rating is most favorable to the Veteran, as that is the date VA is able to ascertain the Veteran's CAD disability severity for an increased rating.

In light of the foregoing, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  Accordingly, an effective date earlier than February 23, 2022 for a 100 percent evaluation for CAD, is not warranted.

Increased Ratings

Legal Criteria

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.  The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155.  Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

2. A higher rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder.

Specific Legal Criteria

The Veteran's PTSD has been evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for PTSD where there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for PTSD for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name cause total occupational and social impairment.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Factual Background

The Veteran is seeking an increased rating for his service-connected PTSD.  He contends the 70 percent rating does not reflect the severity of his symptoms.  The Board notes that in March 2014, the Board denied a rating in excess of 70 percent.  

In a December 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's spouse reported that the Veteran experienced worsening psychiatric symptoms including anxiety, depression, irritability, avoidance, social withdrawal, memory problems, lack of motivation, lack of concentration, sleep impairment, and difficulty in making decisions.   

In February 2022, the Veteran was afforded a psychiatric evaluation to determine the severity of his PTSD.  He reported worsening of symptoms in the past three to four years "after he took an Honor Flight and went to the Vietnam Wall."  This led to an increase in memories relates to his past traumas.  He stated he has been doing well but the return of the memories has worsened his PTSD and mood.  Additionally, he denied attending therapy and this is contributing to the worsening of symptoms.

The examining psychologist reviewed the claims file and diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD, major depressive disorder (MDD), and alcohol use disorder.  The psychologist found occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Also, she found PTSD symptoms, including anxiety, depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, short and long term memory impairment, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, and suicidal ideations.  During the examination, the psychologist observed that the Veteran was appropriately dressed and well groomed.  He was oriented in all spheres, maintained good eye contact, was cooperative, and responded well to questions.  Also, he exhibited intact memory, normal judgement and normal speech with loud volume and thought processes were linear and goal directed.  He reported "fleeting" thoughts of suicide that includes a vague plan and no intent.  The thoughts appear to be an escape for his stressors and there is no intent to kill himself.  "He stated he doesn't want to be a burden on anyone and that is why he would consider killing himself."  He denied panic attacks, hallucinations, and delusions.  He can manage his financial affairs.

Analysis

After review of the evidence, the Board determines a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted during the appeal period.  After engaging in a holistic analysis assessing the severity, frequency and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD, recognizing that the symptoms listed in the rating criteria are non-exhaustive examples and when looking at the effects determining the impairment level, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 70 percent rating is not warranted during the entire appeal period.  See Vazquez, 713 F.3d at 117; Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22.  In this regard, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has experienced gross impairment in thought processes or communication, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, or intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  In addition, the record does not show any findings that his PTSD results in total occupational and social impairment.

A disability that justifies a 100 percent rating is so severely disabling that some of the examples of symptoms include posing a "persistent" threat of danger to others and delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, not knowing one's own name, the names of close relatives, and an inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of even minimal personal hygiene, and disorientation to time or place. Here, while the evidence indicates the Veteran has depression, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, memory limitations, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances and social isolation, there is no evidence of grossly inappropriate behavior or that he is a persistent danger to himself or others.  He has also never shown symptoms of, or comparable in severity to, persistent delusions, an inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene, memory loss for names of close relatives or his own name.  These symptoms are consistently absent throughout the appellate period.

Moreover, while the evidence reported an inability to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships, among other PTSD symptoms, the Veteran reported still being married to his spouse of 40 years.  The absence of total social impairment is exhibited by the fact the Veteran maintains relationships with his family.  No reasonable reading of total social impairment, which is a requirement for a 100 percent rating, would encompass the ongoing relationships the Veteran has with his family.  Rather, the level of social impairment experienced by the Veteran is contemplated by the 70 percent rating for which there is an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The Board carefully reviewed the medical and lay evidence of record and has considered whether the assignment of a 100 percent rating is appropriate at any point during the appeal period.  Both total occupation impairment and social impairment have not been shown by the evidence.  Moreover, the lay statements regarding the Veteran's PTSD symptoms describe the levels of functioning described are encompassed by the criteria for the 70 percent rating being assigned. While the Veteran's PTSD results in significant occupational impairment and he is in receipt of a TDIU, total social impairment is not shown, and such is a conjunctive requirement for a 100 percent rating.  Therefore, the Veteran's PTSD has not resulted in total social impairment.

The Board acknowledges that he reported having to consume alcoholic substances to manage his PTSD symptoms and experiences depressed mood, irritability, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and difficulty in maintaining social relationships, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Further, the February 2022 VA examination shows he once reported suicidal ideations.  However, the overall medical records shows that the Veteran did not generally demonstrate gross impairment in thought processes or communication, delusions or hallucinations or grossly inappropriate behavior and he has consistently been cooperative during treatment and on examination.  See Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22.  

In sum, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  It does not show that he experiences total occupational and social impairment at any point during the appeal period.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.3.

3. A higher rating in excess of 60 percent for CAD.

Specific Legal Criteria

The Veteran's CAD is rated under DC 7005.  The Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating on January 10, 2017; therefore, the appeal period before the Board begins January 10, 2016, one year prior to the date VA received his increased rating claim.  See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Effective November 14, 2021, VA amended the rating criteria for arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease) under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7005. 86 Fed. Reg. 54089 (Sep. 30, 2021).  This amended regulation applies to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the RO on or after November 14, 2021.  Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both the pre- and post-amendment rating criteria, and whichever is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.  However, the Board may not apply the post-amendment rating criteria to a period prior to its effective date, unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise.  See Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  Conversely, the Board is not precluded from applying the pre-amendment rating criteria to a period on or after the effective date of the post-amendment rating criteria so long as it was in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

Prior to November 14, 2021, under DC 7005, for arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) a 60 percent rating is warranted where there is more than one episode of acute congestive heart failure in the past year, or; a workload of greater than 3.0 METs but not greater than 5.0 METs results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope, or; left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 30 to 50 percent.

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is chronic congestive heart failure, or; a workload of 3.0 METs or less results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope, or; left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 30 percent.

Under the pre-amendment rating criteria, one MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (2).  When the level of METs at which dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope may be used.  See Id.

For the purposes of a 60 percent evaluation, the pre-amendment rating criteria do not require a separate showing of left ventricular dysfunction in addition to an ejection fraction of 30 to 50 percent.  See Otero-Castro v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 375, 382 (2002).  Additionally, the phrase "30 to 50 percent" means 30 percent through 50 percent.  Id. at 380.

For the purposes of a 100 percent evaluation, the pre-amendment rating criteria do not require a separate showing of left ventricular dysfunction in addition to an ejection fraction of less than 30 percent.  See id. at 382.

Effective November 14, 2021, under DC 7005, a 60 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.1-5.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms.  A 100 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.0 METs or less results in heart failure symptoms.

Under the post-amendment rating criteria, one MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (2).  When the level of METs at which breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in those symptoms may be used.  Id.

For purposes of the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart, heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.  38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (3).

Under that DC, a 10 percent rating is warranted when the Veteran experiences a workload of greater than 7 METs but not greater than 10 METs resulting in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope; or if continuous medication is required.  A 30 percent rating is warranted when the Veteran experiences a workload of greater than 5 METs but not greater than 7 METs resulting in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope; or there is evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation on electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, or x-ray.  A 60 percent rating is warranted when the Veteran experiences a workload of greater than 3 METs but not greater than 5 METs resulting in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope; or left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 30 to 50 percent.  A 100 percent rating is warranted when the Veteran experiences congestive heart failure; a workload of 3 METs or less resulting in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope; or left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 30 percent.

Analysis

While the claim was on remand, in a June 2022 rating decision, the Veteran was awarded a 60 percent rating from 30 percent for the condition from February 23, 2022 under DC 7005.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.104. 

The Veteran is seeking a higher disability rating which, under the rating criteria.

In January 2017, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for CAD.  He reported experiencing fatigue and taking prescribed medication.  He denied chest pain.  The examiner reviewed the claims and diagnosed the Veteran with CAD. Exercise stress testing was not performed, as it was not required as part of the Veteran's current treatment plan and was not without significant risk.  The interview based METS testing showed results of a METs level of greater than 3 to 5 with symptoms of fatigue.  However, this result was not to be due solely to the heart condition.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's CAD was limited due "more to neuropathy and left fused ankle" rather than the heart conditions itself.  The examiner opined that the heart condition is more consistent with a METs level of 7 to 10, and also more in line with his diagnosed conditions at that time and level of functioning based on history and the evidence in medical records.  This METs level was noted to be due solely to the heart condition.  The examiner reported that the Veteran's heart condition did not impact his ability to work.  She noted that the Veteran noted that the ejection fraction is normal and there was no obvious functional limitation due to cardiac status as he exercises 3 times a week for 35 min on a universal weight machine.

Pursuant to January 2022 Board remand, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his increased rating claim in February 2022.  The VA examiner conducted an interview based METs test, inquiring into the lowest level of activity at which the Veteran reports short of breath, fatigue, and dizziness.  The examiner diagnosed CAD and congestive heart failure.  Also, the examiner found cardiac hypertrophy and cardiac dilatation by echocardiogram, left ventricular rejection fraction (LVEF) at 60-65 percent, and METs level greater than 3 but not greater than 5 with breathlessness, dizziness, and fatigue.  

After reviewing all evidence of record, with specific attention to the documents discussed above, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 60 percent has not been shown.  The only disability rating in excess of 60 percent for CAD is a 100 percent rating which requires evidence of chronic congestive heart failure; or, LVEF of less than 30 percent; or, workload of 3 METs or less which results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope.  VA records are silent for any showings of congestive heart failure, a workload of 3.0 METs or less results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, syncope or heart failure symptoms, or left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 30 percent.

The evidence does not show chronic congestive heart failure of LVEF less than 30 percent.  In addition, the Veteran's METs were specifically noted to be between 3 and 5 METs.  This disability picture is in alignment with the disability picture for a 60 percent disability rating.  

For these reasons, the Board finds that an increased rating in excess of 60 percent for service-connected CAD is not warranted and the claim is denied.

4. A higher rating in excess of 20 percent RLE PN.

Specific Legal Criteria

The Veteran's RLE PN is currently rated at 20 percent disabling under DC 8520.

A neurologic disability is evaluated on the basis of nerve paralysis, partial paralysis, neuritis, or neuralgia in proportion to the impairment of motor or sensory function.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120-4.124 a.  Under DC 8520, mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants a 10 percent rating; moderate incomplete paralysis warrants a 20 percent rating; moderately severe incomplete paralysis warrants a 40 percent rating; and severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy warrants a 60 percent rating.  Finally, complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants an 80 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The maximum rating which may be assigned for neuritis not characterized by organic changes as noted above will be that for moderate, or with sciatic nerve involvement, for moderately severe, incomplete paralysis.  Neuralgia, cranial or peripheral, characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain, of typical distribution so as to identify the nerve, is to be rated on the same scale, with a maximum equal to moderate, incomplete paralysis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 1.23.

Descriptive words, such as "mild," "moderate" and "severe," are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  However, it is the task of the Board to provide definitions for each term.  The term "mild" has been commonly defined as not acute, moderate in action or effect, not sharp, or not being or involving what is extreme or severe.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild.  "Moderate" has been defined as not violent, severe, or intense; or tending towards the mean or average amount.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate.  "Severe" has been defined as of a great degree or very painful or harmful.  See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.  

Due to the seemingly contrary nature of the last two definitions, the Board finds the term "moderately severe" to mean a roughly equal distribution of or alternation between non-intense and intense symptoms.

Analysis

The Veteran contends a higher rating is warranted. 

The Veteran's claim for an increased rating for RLE PN stems from a TDIU claim filed on January 10, 2017.  Thus, the appeal period before the Board begins on January 10, 2016.

The Board finds the May 2018 VA diabetic sensory-motor PN examination to be the most probative evidence of record. 

In April 2017, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for diabetic PN.  At the examination, the Veteran reported worsening aching and burning in the bilateral lower extremities as his current symptoms.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in both lower extremities.  Light touch/monofilament testing revealed decreased sensation at sensation at the foot/toes on both sides.  Strength testing was less than normal (4/5) on right ankle dorsiflexion.  Deep tendon reflexes were decreased in right ankle.  The examination revealed no muscle atrophy and no trophic changes (e.g., loss of extremity hair, smooth or shiny skin).  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the Veteran's neuropathy.  The Veteran's RLE overall manifested in mild incomplete paralysis.  

A December 2020 VA muscle injury examination showed the Veteran was marked for right foot weakness.

In March 2022, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for diabetic PN.  At the examination, the Veteran reported extreme sensitivity in the feet, numbness, tingling, and pain.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had moderate constant pain, no intermittent pain, severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness.  Light touch/monofilament testing revealed decreased sensation at sensation at the foot/toes on both sides.  Strength testing was less than normal (4/5) on right knee flexion, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion.  Deep tendon reflexes were decreased in the right ankle and knee.  The examiner noted loss of hair in the legs as trophic changes.  She denied muscle atrophy.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the Veteran's neuropathy.  Based on the symptoms and findings above, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  With respect to functional impact, the examiner stated that the Veteran is unable to stand or walk for long periods of time due to the numbness and pain in his feet.  The loss of sensation causes the Veteran to stumble and fall.  The pain in his feet makes focusing on tasks difficult and decreases his productivity.

The Board finds that a higher rating in excess 20 percent is not warranted.  The collective evidence persuasively shows that the Veteran's RLE PN manifests in moderate incomplete paralysis.  Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's RLE PN has manifested as subjective complaints of pain and numbness, and objective findings of diminished sensation in his lower legs/ankles and feet/toes.  Thus, the Board finds that the evidence of record is persuasively against a rating higher than 20 percent for the entire appeal period.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

The Board notes that the Veteran displayed moderate symptoms of constant pain, numbness, paresthesia, intermittent pain and deceased strength, reflexes, and sensation in his right lower leg/ankles and feet/toes.  Nevertheless, motor strength was full, reflexes were intact, and there were no signs of atrophy.  There are no indications of atrophy or use of assistive devices. 

Thus, while there were some subjective complaints of a severe nature with regards to the Veteran's RLE, the Board finds that those subjective complaints are not as probative of the actual severity of the Veteran's RLE PN, particularly when viewed with the other evidence of record noted above.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The clinical evidence similarly supports no more than moderate disability in the RLE.

Throughout the appeal period, the Board finds that the clinical evidence and Veteran's statements show that the Veteran's RLE PN has manifested as moderate severity.  As such, for the above reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating higher than 20 percent for RLE PN is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application.  The Veteran has no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve in his RLE.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. TDIU.

The Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, the Board finds that the multiple VA opinions as to the Veteran's ability to function in an occupational environment and his functional limitations are incomplete and contradict each other, and provide a confusing picture of the Veteran's ability to obtain and retain substantially gainful employment.  Also, all of the opinions of record do not provide a rationale explaining the examiner's determination as to the occupational impact of each service-connected disability.  Moreover, the Board notes that some opinions do not indicate what disability is being address.  Furthermore, to the extent that the RO did not obtain a single opinion addressing the collective impact of his service-connected disabilities on the Veteran's employability, the Board acknowledges that such an opinion is not required.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir 2013).  However, given that the Veteran bases his claim for TDIU on the combined effects of his service-connected disabilities, the Board finds such an opinion would be helpful to the adjudication of the claim for TDIU.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  However, such opinion was not obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal.  As such a remand is warranted to corrected the deficiencies stated above.

2. An effective date prior to February 23, 2022, for basic eligibility for DEA.

Preliminarily, the Board notes that a February 23, 2022 rating decision granted an earlier effective date to February 23, 2022, for entitlement to DEA benefits.  The Veteran is presumed to be seeking the maximum allowable benefit.  See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38-39 (1993).  As such, this claim remains for Board consideration.

Because a decision on the above remanded issues could significantly impact a decision on the issues of entitlement to TDIU and entitlement to DEA benefits prior to February 23, 2022, the issues are inextricably intertwined.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991). A remand of these claims is warranted

The claims are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate medical professional obtain an opinion commenting on the aggregate effect of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on his employability.  The examiner should review the claims file and a copy of this remand.

The examiner must provide an assessment of the functional impairment resulting from this condition, as well as his other service-connected conditions, based on the Veteran's statements, the physical examinations, and the treatment records.

Also, the examiner is asked to provide a full description of the combined effects the service-connected disabilities have on the Veteran's ability to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation when considering his educational background and vocational experience, but not his age or non-service connected disabilities.

A rationale should be provided for the opinions expressed.

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nevarez-Myrick, Nancy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.