Citation Nr: A25030452
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240504-438234
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent prior to October 16, 2020, for intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) with lumbosacral strain is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent from October 16, 2020, for IVDS with lumbosacral strain is denied.  

Entitlement to an initial rating of 40 percent for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a finding of total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to October 16, 2020, the Veteran's IVDS with lumbosacral strain was manifested by a combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees.  

2. Since October 16, 2020, the Veteran's IVDS with lumbosacral strain is manifested by forward flexion greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees.  

3. The Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is manifested by no worse than moderately severe incomplete paralysis.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent prior to October 16, 2020, for IVDS with lumbosacral strain are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237-5243.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent from October 16, 2020, forward, for IVDS with lumbosacral strain are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237-5243.

3. The criteria for an initial rating of 40 percent for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from April 2005 to May 2005.  These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected an appeal to the Board, using the direct review docket.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board considers the same record as the AOJ in rendering a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that the AOJ, in a March 2022 rating decision, awarded service connection for lumbosacral strain with IVDS, and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective February 5, 2009, and an initial 20 percent rating, effective October 16, 2020.  The AOJ also awarded service connection for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective July 28, 2015.  In March 2022, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim (VA 20-0995) to the March 2022 rating decision.  Submitting a Supplemental Claim does not begin a new claim; the claims have been continuously pursued since the respective effective dates for the awards of service connection.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found.  In other words, the evaluations may be staged. Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  A claim will be denied only if the preponderance of the evidence is against the claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990).  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, functional loss due to pain and weakness causing additional disability beyond that reflected on range of motion measurements must be considered.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.40; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  Consideration must also be given to weakened movement, excess fatigability, and incoordination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45.

The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 5237-5243, covering IVDS, and is assigned a 10 percent rating, effective February 5, 2009, and a 20 percent rating, effective October 16, 2020.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243.

Effective February 7, 2021, the schedular criteria for rating the musculoskeletal system were amended.  Prior to February 7, 2021, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, disabilities evaluated under Diagnostic Code 5242 may be rated either under the General Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Formula) or the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  After February 7, 2021, Diagnostic Code 5243 for IVDS is assigned only when there is disc herniation with compression and/or irritation of the adjacent nerve root; otherwise, Diagnostic Code 5242 is assigned for all other disc diagnoses.  Substantively, however, the criteria are unchanged.

Under the General Rating Formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is warranted where forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding is severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted where forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is 30 degrees or less; or, there is favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is warranted where there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  Lastly, a 100 rating is warranted where there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

The Notes following the General Rating Formula provide further guidance in rating diseases or injuries of the spine.  Note 1 specifies that any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, should be separately evaluated under an appropriate diagnostic code.

Note 2 states that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees.  The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation.  The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.  The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion.

Note 3 provides that in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurological disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note 2.  Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted.

Note 4 provides that range of motion measurements are to be rounded to the nearest five degrees.

Note 5 defines unfavorable ankylosis as a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching.  Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

Comparatively, under the formula for rating IVDS, a 10 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  Note 1 to the formula for rating IVDS based on incapacitating episodes defines an incapacitating episode as "a period of acute signs and symptoms due to [IVDS] that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician."

At a July 2012 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that flare-ups of his back worsen with any strenuous activity.  He further stated that bending also caused flare-ups.  

The evidence of record reflects that the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2015.  The examination report referenced the Veteran's diagnosis of IVDS.  The Veteran endorsed persistent pain in the tailbone region with radiation into the lower extremity.  He noted that he was a truck driver and had difficulty in "air-ride seats" as they put pressure on his lower back.  The Veteran further endorsed difficulty in extending his leg to push the clutch and brake.  Regarding flare-ups, the Veteran reported that he experienced them daily, and that during flare-ups, he tried to lay straight and stretch out.  Upon physical examination, the Veteran displayed 90 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 25 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 30 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 30 degrees of left lateral rotation.  While the VA examiner indicated that range of motion itself did not contribute to functional loss, pain was noted on examination and caused functional loss.  The VA examiner reported that pain was exhibited on extension and left lateral flexion.  The examination report indicated that there was no evidence of pain with weight bearing.  The VA examiner noted that there was lumbar vertebral tenderness and negative sacroiliac (SI) joint point tenderness.  

The VA examiner reported that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran was not examined immediately after repetitive use over time nor was the examination conducted during a flare-up.  The VA examiner noted that she was unable to state without mere speculation as to whether pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time or with flare-ups.  The examination report indicated that while there was no guarding or muscle spasm, the Veteran had localized tenderness that did not result in abnormal gait or spinal contour.  It was further noted that the Veteran had the additional contributing factor of less movement than normal.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory testing were assessed as normal, and the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy.  The examination report indicated that a straight leg raising test was negative bilaterally.  

Concerning radiculopathy, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had mild intermittent and constant pain, severe paresthesias, and moderate numbness in the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve.  The VA examiner assessed the severity of the radiculopathy as mild.  The VA examiner reported that the Veteran did not have ankylosis of the spine.  While it was reported that the Veteran had IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine, he did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  The examination report noted that the Veteran did not use any assistive devices.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work, and referenced the Veteran's reports of difficulty riding on "air-seats" at work, and difficulties with prolonged sitting, extending legs out, and getting in and out of a truck.  

Thereafter, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2020.  The examination report referenced diagnoses of IVDS, degenerative disc disease, and radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  The Veteran described his pain as sharp and was worse at times with radiation to the left leg with numbness in the thigh.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran denied flare-ups but endorsed functional loss and impairment.  He reported that he was unable to lift over 20 pounds, inability to squat or bend to pick things up from the ground, and inability to drive a truck.  Upon range of motion testing, the Veteran displayed 60 degrees of forward flexion, 15 degrees of extension, 15 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 30 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 30 degrees of left lateral rotation.  The examination report indicated that range of motion itself contributed to functional loss as it limited flexion, and that pain was exhibited on forward flexion, extension, and right and left lateral flexion.  The VA examiner noted that there was no objective evidence of localized tenderness, pain on palpation, or pain with weight bearing.  

The VA examiner indicated that there was objective evidence of pain upon non-weight bearing, and that passive range of motion for the back was unable to be performed as it was not medically appropriate.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion.  While the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, the VA examiner reported that pain and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time.  The VA examiner estimated the range of motion as 55 degrees of forward flexion, 15 degrees of extension, 15 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 30 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 30 degrees of left lateral rotation.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran did not have guarding, muscle spasm, or muscle atrophy.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory examinations were assessed as normal.  While a straight leg raising test was negative on the right, it was positive on the left.  

The examination report indicated that the Veteran had radicular pain and symptoms due to radiculopathy.  The VA examiner reported that the Veteran had severe intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias, and moderate numbness of the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve.  The VA examiner assessed the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy as moderate.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran did not have ankylosis of the spine.  The VA examiner reported that the Veteran had IVDS but did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  The VA examiner further noted that the Veteran did not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work, and referenced the Veteran's reports of an inability to lift over 20 pounds, inability to squat or bend, and inability to drive a truck.  

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in January 2022.  The examination report referenced diagnoses of lumbosacral strain and IVDS.  The Veteran endorsed a recent workplace injury in November 2021 when he slipped on oil in a shipping container.  He stated that when he bent over, his foot "shot out" from under him and caused him to fall back into barrels.  The Veteran stated that he worked as an oil field truck driver and did not work since.  While the Veteran denied flare-ups, he reported functional loss or impairment.  The Veteran stated that if he slept on his back wrong, he experienced spasms.  He further reported an inability to sit in one position for very long, pain when driving his truck for longer than an hour, and that hooking up a 3-inch high-pressure hose aggravated his back.  On range of motion testing, the Veteran displayed 80 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 30 degrees of right lateral flexion, 30 degrees of left lateral flexion, 30 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 30 degrees of left lateral rotation with pain exhibited on all planes.  The VA examiner indicated that passive range of motion testing was not performed as he was unable to physically and simultaneously lift the Veteran's upper back and measure passive range of motion.  The examination report noted that there was evidence of pain on weight-bearing and active motion but did not result in or cause functional loss.  It was further reported that there was no objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness, or pain on palpation.  

The VA examiner reported that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran was not immediately examined after repeated use over time, but that pain significantly limited functional ability.  The VA examiner estimated the range of motion as 40 degrees of forward flexion, 10 degrees of extension, 15 degrees of right lateral flexion, 15 degrees of left lateral flexion, 15 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 15 degrees of left lateral rotation.  The VA examiner indicated that the estimation was based upon the Veteran's lay report that his range of motion was about half his normal range with repeated use over time.  The examination report noted that the Veteran did not have localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine.  Muscle strength, reflex, sensory, and straight leg raise testing were assessed as normal and that the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  

Concerning radicular pain and symptoms due to radiculopathy, the VA examiner reported that the Veteran had moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias, and moderate numbness of the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran had IVDS but did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not use any assistive devices.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work as he had difficulty sitting, standing, walking, and bending for long periods. 

The Veteran was most recently afforded a VA examination in March 2023.  The examination report referenced diagnoses of lumbosacral strain, IVDS, and left lumbar radiculopathy.  The Veteran stated that he took methadone for back pain management.  He noted that he was a truck driver and heavy equipment operator but was unable to work since last September.  Regarding flare-ups, the Veteran reported that there were times he was unable to get out of bed without assistance, and several times a week he was unable to put on shoes and socks.  Concerning functional loss or impairment, he endorsed back spasms when he slept "wrong" or sat in one position for too long, which occurred several times a week.  Upon range of motion testing, the Veteran displayed 70 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 20 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 20 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 20 degrees of left lateral rotation with pain exhibited on all planes.  The VA examiner indicated that passive range of motion was unable to be performed as he was unable to physically lift the Veteran's upper body to measure range of motion of the lower back without risk.  The examination report noted that there was evidence of pain on weight-bearing and active motion.  No objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness, or pain on palpation.  

The VA examiner reported that the Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions without additional loss of function or range of motion.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, but that pain significantly limited functional ability.  The VA examiner estimated the range of motion as 70 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 20 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 20 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 20 degrees of left lateral rotation.  The examination report further indicated that the Veteran was being examined during a flare-up, and that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination significantly limited functional ability.  The range of motion was estimated as 70 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 20 degrees of right lateral flexion, 20 degrees of left lateral flexion, 20 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 20 degrees of left lateral rotation.  While it was reported that the Veteran did not have localized tenderness or muscle spasm, guarding was reported during range of motion testing but did not result in abnormal gait or spinal contour.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory testing were assessed as normal, and no muscle atrophy was reported.  A straight leg raising was negative on the right side but positive on the left.  

Regarding the Veteran's radiculopathy, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had moderate constant pain, severe intermittent pain, severe paresthesias, and mild numbness of the left lower extremity involving the sciatic nerve.  The examination report noted that the Veteran did not have ankylosis of the spine.  The VA examiner reported that the Veteran had IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine but did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  The examination report noted that the Veteran regularly used a cane as a normal mode of locomotion.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work and referenced the Veteran's difficulty with standing and bending for long periods.  

The record also reflects that the Veteran was afforded a VA peripheral nerves examination in March 2023.  The examination report referenced the Veteran's diagnosis of left lumbar radiculopathy.  The responses provided by the VA examiner were consistent with those contained in his March 2023 VA back examination report.  The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had moderate constant pain, severe intermittent pain, severe paresthesias, and mild numbness.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory testing were assessed as normal.  The VA examiner further indicated that severity of the Veteran's incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve was mild.  It was reported that the Veteran did not have trophic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy or muscle atrophy.  The VA examiner reported that the Veteran had an antalgic gait.  The examination report reiterated findings from the VA back examination report that the Veteran regularly used a cane for ambulation.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left lumbar radiculopathy impacted his ability to walk as the Veteran had difficulty walking on uneven ground.  

IVDS with Lumbosacral Strain:

All of the spine examinations affirmatively reflect findings of no ankylosis, and no other medical evidence of record reflects any such limitation of ankylosis of the spine.  During the period on appeal, the record reflects that the Veteran's symptoms of pain with flare-ups significantly limited his functional ability.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017).  In the period prior to October 16, 2020, the record did not demonstrate evidence of forward flexion greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees, or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  

While the record reflects forward flexion greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees in the period from October 16, 2020, there is no evidence of range of forward flexion of 30 degrees or less.  The Veteran's lay testimony regarding actual functional impairment is consistent with and supported by the VA examinations of record during the relevant appellate period.  Despite observed fluctuations in range of motion, based on the Veteran's overall symptomatology and the resulting impairment stemming therefrom, the Board finds that the evidence shows that his disability picture more nearly approximates the level of severity contemplated by the currently assigned 20 percent rating from October 16, 2020, forward.  Accordingly, the 10 percent rating for the period prior to October 16, 2020, and 20 percent rating thereafter, adequately represent any functional impairment attributable to the disability during the appellate period.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.10, 4.41.

The record reflects that while VA examinations during the relevant appellate period referenced IVDS in relation to the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability, it was routinely reported that the Veteran did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms of IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician or treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  Consequently, the General Formula for the Spine more appropriately encompasses the current nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability.

Therefore, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent prior to October 16, 2020, and in excess of 20 percent thereafter, for the Veteran's IVDS with lumbosacral strain is not warranted.

Radiculopathy of the Left Lower Extremity:

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  The Veteran's radiculopathy is evaluated pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8520, which contemplates paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Code 8520.  Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Id.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Id.  Severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Id.  Complete paralysis, in which "the foot dangles and drops, no active movement [is] possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee [is] weakened or (very rarely) lost" is rated as 80 percent disabling.  Id.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor functions, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions.  Although not bound by the M21-1, the Board must consider and address the standards provided in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide a reasoned explanation for its decision; the M21-1 standards act as "relevant guidance promulgated [to facilitate] . . . the efficient and proper resolution of claims."  Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 312, 321 (2021).

Per the M21-1, mild incomplete paralysis is assigned "for a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area."  M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.  "A very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis."  Id.

Moderate incomplete paralysis encompasses symptoms that may affect a larger area in the nerve distribution and "will likely be described by the claimants and medically graded as significantly disabling."  Id.  Other sign or symptom combinations of moderate incomplete paralysis include "significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree" as well as "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate."  Id.

For moderately severe incomplete paralysis, the M21-1 describes "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability."  Id.  The M21-1 notes that atrophy "may be present" but there is no "marked muscular atrophy."  Id.

To be classified as severe incomplete paralysis, the evidence must show "a very high level of limitation or disability" due to "motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes)."  Id.  The M21-1 indicates that "the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve," although they will be "substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve."  Id.

The Board acknowledges the M21-1 guidance but finds it insufficient.  The M21-1 guidance generally fails to give specific parameters or definitions, instead describing vague interrelated tiers: "sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area" (mild); "significant" changes and a potentially larger area of nerve distribution affected (moderate); "a high level of limitation" due to "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment" (moderately severe); and "a very high level of limitation" due to "motor and/or reflex impairment" that remains "substantially less than" the criteria for complete paralysis.

The Board has accordingly relied on clearer definitions from alternative sources. The Board notes "mild" - as relevant to a physical condition - is defined as "not severe" or temperate, with "temperate" being defined as "keeping or held within limits" and "not extreme or excessive."  Merriam-Webster's Dictionary (merriam-webster.com/dictionary, accessed April 1, 2025).  It is similar to "slight," which is defined as "small of its kind or in amount."  Id.  "Moderate" is defined as "tending toward the mean or average amount," "not violent, severe, or intense," and "limited in scope or effect."  Id.  "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree."  Id.  The term "severe" is used throughout the Rating Schedule to indicate a very great degree of the specific listed disability, differentiating between lesser (or sometimes greater) cases of that same disability within that Diagnostic Code.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function that is substantially less than the complete paralysis described with each nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  This lesser degree of loss or impairment may be "due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration."  Id.  "When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree."  Id.  This establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, not a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376, 377 (2017).

Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology most closely approximates the criteria for moderately severe incomplete paralysis, warranting a 40 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8520 for the entire period on appeal.  Although the VA examiners during the appellate period rendered assessments of mild and moderate incomplete paralysis, findings were also made of severe intermittent pain and severe paresthesias in those same examination reports.  There is no medical evidence associated with the file which established the Veteran experienced severe radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  The evidence of record does not document marked muscular atrophy.  Therefore, an initial rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The issue of entitlement to TDIU due to service-connected disabilities has been raised by the record pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).  The Veteran reported that he had to "give up" his job as a truck driver and heavy equipment operator due to severe back pain with leg and foot pain.  The Board notes that the Veteran made a similar statement regarding his unemployment to the March 2023 VA examiner.  

Thus, the record is unclear regarding the Veteran's employment history and current employment status.  The failure to develop and clarify such is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  A formal application for TDIU, on a VA Form 21-8940, should be requested to ensure that all factors for consideration in such a claim have been addressed.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the Veteran and request a properly executed VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.A. Ong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.