Citation Nr: A25030464
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231122-395901
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lateral collateral ligament (claimed as right ankle condition) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lateral collateral ligament (claimed as left ankle condition) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 1998 to December 2001. The Board recognizes the Veteran's service to her country and the sacrifices it entailed. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denying service connection for right knee, left knee, right ankle, left ankle, right hip, and left hip disabilities and denying a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety.

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety is denied.

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to a higher disability rating for her service connected PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Veteran's service-connected PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety disability is currently rated at 70 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not an exhaustive checklist, but rather examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

According to the applicable rating criteria, when evaluating a mental disorder, the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission must be considered. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a).

In addition, the evaluation must be based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id. Further, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the extent of social impairment is considered, but the rating cannot be assigned solely the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023. The Veteran reported she is currently under the care of a psychiatrist, but she is not in therapy. The Veteran also reported being in school. However, she feels overwhelmed trying to keep up with assignments and going to class.

Socially, the Veteran reported that she has been married since 2018. She reported that her marriage has gotten a lot better. She noted all her kids have moved out of the house since the last evaluation and she has struggled having an "empty nest." She indicated her social life now is not active.

Occupationally, the Veteran reported she has worked at Amazon, at FedEx, helping kids in before and after school programs, and doing security. She is currently working doing grocery delivery. She has gotten along "pretty fairly" with her supervisors at her jobs. She noted it is "hit or miss" with co-workers.

The Veteran's symptoms were manifested by depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effective; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.

Addressing the Veteran's mental status, the examiner noted that the Veteran was friendly and cooperative. Her mood seemed to be anxious and dysthymic.

According to the examiner, the Veteran's overall disability picture was best summarized as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood. See September 2023 Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).

Turning to the Veteran's treatment records, treatment notes at times indicate that the Veteran is easily overwhelmed, but she is generally described as pleasant and cooperative with intact memory, concentration, and insight. See CAPRI Records.

After a review of the record, to include the lay and medical evidence, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms and their effects more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Here, the medical opinion evidence from the VA examiner is consistent with a 70 percent evaluation. The Veteran experiences intermittent suicidal ideation. She appears to have limited relationships outside of her family. There is also evidence of other symptoms to include inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and near-continuous panic or depression. However, the Board finds these symptoms are consistent with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms such as suicidal ideation and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships so as to support a rating of 70 percent.

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment. While the rating criteria is not an exhaustive list, it is important to note there is little, if any, evidence of the symptoms consistent with total occupational and social impairment, to include persistent delusions or hallucinations, persistent danger of hurting self or others, and disorientation to time.

To the contrary, mental status examinations consistently showed normal thought processes. The evidence demonstrates the Veteran is oriented and cooperative with her examiners. She regularly denies experiencing hallucinations, and no independent evidence suggests otherwise. While some suicidal ideation is noted, it is expressly contemplated in a rating of 70 percent. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017).

Moreover, the Veteran's performance of work activity is probative evidence of one factor weighing against a 100 percent evaluation. The Veteran reported some difficulty with work, which she attributed to having a recent stroke and being treated for multiple sclerosis. She reported getting along "pretty fairly" with her supervisors at her job and being "hit or miss" with coworkers. See September 2023 DBQ.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating of 100 percent is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a finding. The purpose of the 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) "benefit of the doubt doctrine" is to tip the evidentiary scales in a veteran's favor when there is nearly equal evidence for and against them on a particular issue, and therefore it does not apply here. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The Veteran's PTSD with persistent depressive disorder and anxiety is accurately and appropriately rated at 70 percent.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right lateral collateral ligament (claimed as right ankle condition) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left lateral collateral ligament (claimed as left ankle condition) is remanded.

Issues 1-4:

The Veteran contends that her right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament disabilities are related to service. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The Board regrets the delay, but as explained in greater detail below, it finds remand is necessary here to fully and properly adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

In general, the Board grants service connection if the evidence establishes three key facts, or elements: (1) an existing disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, or "nexus," between the present disability and the in-service incurrence. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The first element of service connection is met. The October 2023 rating decision contains a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament disabilities.

Regarding the Veteran's reported in-service injury or disease, the Veteran has reported that her right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament disabilities are related to service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that her conditions are related to various tasks she engaged in while in service to include bootcamp, combat training, carrying firearms, routine hikes, and other strenuous tasks. See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. 

While the Veteran's service treatment records show no complaints of right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament disabilities, the Veteran is competent to report the occurrence of an in-service injury. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). Thus, extending to the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds this is sufficient to satisfy the second element.

Finally, concerning whether there is a causal nexus between the in-service events and the Veteran's disabilities, while the Board observes there is an inherent logic to connecting the two, and the Veteran undoubtedly believes they are indeed connected, unfortunately the record includes no adequate medical opinions on this issue.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations in October 2023. The examiner noted that the Veteran's right knee condition, left knee condition, and bilateral lateral collateral ligament ankle sprain are less likely than not incurred in or related to service. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's service treatment records did not note symptoms of the claimed conditions during the period of review. See October 2023 DBQ.

The Board finds these opinions are inadequate. A medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the service treatment records or that fails to consider lay statements is inadequate. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006). See also Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (finding that a medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the record is inadequate and a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not consider the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history).

When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

Thus, the failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and therefore, remand is warranted.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

Issues 5-6:

The Veteran contends that her left hip and right hip conditions are secondary to her left and right knee disabilities. See July 2023 VA Form 10182.

In general, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is the result of a service-connected disease or injury. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) a current disability exists and (2) that it was either caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc).

Here, service connection has not been established for the Veteran's left or right knee disabilities. As such, the Board finds the claim for secondary service connection for left and right hip disabilities are inextricably intertwined with the herein remanded claim of service connection for left and right knee disabilities.

Accordingly, remand is warranted pending adjudication of the left and right knee disability claims. If, and only if, such evidence shows that the Veteran's left or right knee disability is related to her service, then an examination with medical opinions should be obtained to address any relationship between the service-connected condition and the Veteran's left and right hip disabilities.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to determine the nature and likely cause of the Veteran's right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament disabilities. 

2. The examiner should review the claim file, including this remand, lay statements, and treatment records. If the examiner deems a physical examination necessary, one should be scheduled. 

3. For each disability (right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament), the examiner must opine as to the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least approximately as likely as not the disability had its onset during service.

(b.) If "no" to paragraph (a.), whether it is at least approximately as likely as not the Veteran's disability (right knee, left knee, right lateral collateral ligament, and left lateral collateral ligament) resulted from or is otherwise causally related to any event or circumstance of service.

4. All opinions, findings and conclusions must be supported by a complete rationale, including references to patient history, evidence in the record, medical knowledge, publications, or other sources of information relied on in the examiner's analysis.

(Continued on the next page)

?

5. All opinions, findings and conclusions must take into account the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, which means the VA must find in favor of the Veteran when positive evidence is at least "approximately balanced" with or "nearly equal" to the negative evidence on any material issue.

6. If any of the requested opinions or responses cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why this is so.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	I. Duclos

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.