Citation Nr: A25030835
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240524-443405
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss (previously addressed as left ear hearing loss) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1980 to May 1983.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 supplemental review decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss 

The AOJ has favorably found that the Veteran was exposed to noise during military service due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) as a heavy vehicle operator, and that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of hearing loss.  See May 2023 Rating Decision - Narrative. The Board is bound by these findings and finds no clear and unmistakable error to rebut them. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's hearing loss is related to his in-service noise exposure.

In March 2017, the Veteran was afforded a VA hearing loss and tinnitus examination. The examiner initially stated he could not provide a medical opinion without resorting to speculation "because the [V]eteran's service medical records are not dated correctly and are therefore incomplete for rating purposes." See March 2017 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). In an addendum opinion, the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion for hearing loss. In support of his opinion, the examiner found (regarding both the right ear and the left ear) that the Veteran's enlistment and separation audiograms were normal, and that no significant threshold shift was seen during active service. The examiner noted that the Institute of Medicine (2006) (IOM) has stated, "there [is] not sufficient evidence from longitudinal studies in animals or humans to determine whether permanent noise-induced hearing loss can develop much later in one's lifetime, long after the cessation of that noise exposure," and also noted its conclusion that a prolonged delay in the onset of noise-induced hearing loss was "unlikely."  The examiner ultimately concluded that, in light of that study, there was "no scientific basis on which to conclude that the veteran's current hearing loss was caused by or the result of military service, to include military noise exposure." See March 2017 Addendum.

The Board finds the March 2017 addendum opinion inadequate because it relied on medical literature (the 2006 IOM report) containing apparent qualifiers or contradictions without reconciling that seemingly contradictory information. McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257-58 (2019).  

Therefore, the issue is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. Specifically, the AOJ obtained a medical opinion prior to the rating decision on appeal; however, the medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss. If a new examination is deemed necessary to respond to the questions posed, one should be scheduled.

The clinician must provide an opinion addressing whether the Veteran's hearing loss at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) arose during or within a year of separation from, or is otherwise related to, his service. 

In rendering an opinion, the clinician should consider all pertinent evidence of record, including but not limited to the extent of the Veteran's in-service noise exposure.

If the clinician relies to any extent upon the 2006 IOM report discussed above, the clinician must explain why this report, which notes there is not sufficient evidence from longitudinal studies in animals or humans to determine whether permanent noise-induced hearing loss can develop much later in one's lifetime, long after the cessation of that noise exposure, leads the clinician to conclude that this particular Veteran's hearing loss is more likely due to factors other than his conceded in-service noise exposure.

Regardless of whether the clinician relies on the 2006 IOM report, if he or she concludes the Veteran's hearing loss is not at least as likely as not related to service, he or she should explain why factors other than the Veteran's conceded in-service noise exposure are the more likely cause of his hearing loss. 

The clinician should include a complete rationale for the opinions provided. If the clinician cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, they should expressly indicate this and state why it is so.

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hampl, Samantha

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.