Citation Nr: A25030345
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230705-359950
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right ankle disability, to include lateral collateral ligament sprain, is remanded.

Service connection for a right testicle disability, to include varicocele/hydrocele, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1995 to January 1997. This is an appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

There are two rating decisions on appeal. The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the first rating decision on May 10, 2023, and the second rating decision on June 16, 2023. The May 2023 AOJ decision, in part, denied service connection for cervical spine, left shoulder, left knee, right knee, and right ankle (lateral collateral ligament sprain) disabilities. The June 2023 AOJ decision, in part, denied service connection for a right testicle disability (varicocele/hydrocele). 

On July 5, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) for the six issues identified above. He elected the "direct review" option on the Notice of Disagreement. That means the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal for each issue. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. So, if the Veteran or his representative submitted any evidence after the AOJ decisions on appeal, the Board did not consider that evidence. 

As explained below, the Board must remand all six issues to the AOJ to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Any evidence the Board could not consider here will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those issues on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection 

In general, the Veteran asserts that his current neck, left shoulder, bilateral knee, right ankle, and right testicular problems all started during service. For each of the claimed disabilities, he reports having "chronic pain and symptoms ever since discharge." See January 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. 

The Board finds that remand is necessary so that the AOJ can obtain an addendum medical opinion for each claim. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). "Direct" service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the AMA, the Board must remand claims to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, unless the claim can be granted in full. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Failing to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion is one type of duty to assist error. See e.g., Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Typically, a VA examiner must address a veteran's relevant lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 259-60 (2020); see also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007).

In this case, the "current disability" requirement is satisfied for all six claims. The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with cervical strain, left shoulder strain, left knee strain, right knee strain, right lateral collateral ligament sprain, and varicocele/hydrocele. These favorable findings are binding on the AOJ and the Board. 38 C.F.R. §3.104(c).

The AOJ, however, denied service connection because it found that the Veteran's current disabilities "neither occurred in nor [were] caused by service." The AOJ made this finding based on unfavorable VA medical opinions. 

In February 2023, a VA contractor examined the Veteran in connection with the claims. The Veteran told the VA examiner that the onset of his neck, shoulder, knee, and ankle problems was in 1995 or 1996, while he was serving as a fire support specialist. He stated that he carried heavy packs and was "continually running and [physical] in the military." He also stated that he fell a few times. He reported having symptoms like stiffness, popping, pain, and/or limited range of motion when the disabilities began. His current symptoms, at the time of the exam, were similar. He stated he "was afraid to report anything while active duty" so he did not receive medical treatment during service. 

The Veteran also told the VA examiner that his testicular disability began in service. He reported that his symptoms at onset included sharp pain, sensitivity to touch, and decreased sexual activity from the pain. His current symptoms, at the time of the exam, were the same. As with the other disabilities, he stated that he was worried to report anything while on active duty so he did not receive in-service treatment.  

The February 2023 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's current disabilities were all less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. The VA examiner's rationale was essentially the same for each disability: review of service treatment records showed "no medical evidence" of a neck, left shoulder, left knee, right ankle, or testicular condition while in service. The VA examiner also asserted that there was no evidence of a left shoulder or left knee condition after service either. As for the right knee, the VA examiner acknowledged that the service treatment records documented a complaint of knee pain in 1995. However, the VA examiner found "no chronicity or complaints of a knee condition since 1995." Notably, though, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's statements concerning continuity of neck, shoulder, knee, ankle, and testicular pain and other symptoms since service. 

The Board finds that the VA examiner did not adequately address the Veteran's lay statements about the onset and history of his disabilities. Miller, 32 Vet. App. at 259-60. The VA examiner did not indicate, for instance, whether there was any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported pain and other symptoms in service represented the onset of his currently diagnosed disabilities. Nor did the VA examiner state whether the reports about the Veteran's symptoms align with how the disabilities are known to develop, or if his reports were generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible. Id. Instead, the VA examiner seems to have impermissibly ignored those statements due to lack of documentation in his medical records. Dalton, 21 Vet. App. at 39-40. 

The Board therefore finds that the AOJ erred by relying on inadequate VA medical opinions to deny the claims. On remand, the AOJ must correct this error by obtaining addendum opinions that address the Veteran's lay statements about his symptoms. 

The Board by this remand makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain addendum medical opinions for the Veteran's cervical spine, left shoulder, left knee, right knee, right ankle, and right testicle disabilities. The examiner must determine whether each disability was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by service. 

For each disability, the examiner should note whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of his currently diagnosed disability. Stated another way, the examiner must state whether the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the current disability is known to develop, or if the Veteran's reports are generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible. 

 

 

KELLI A. KORDICH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D.Z. Wall, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.