Citation Nr: A25030180
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240327-427856
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1986 to September 1989. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in March 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance.

The Veteran contends SMC based on the need for the regular aid and attendance of another person is warranted. Specifically, the Veteran contends, that as his health has declined over the last few years, he has needed to take more medications, which his spouse must administer, and that he suffers dizzy spells daily which has caused falls. It is noted that SMC at the housebound rate per regulation is in effect. See March 2024 Rating Decision. 

Upon review, however, the Board finds the evidence of record is conflicting as to whether the Veteran is in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person at any time during the appeal period. VA treatment records indicate the Veteran is able to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) and has little to no memory loss. Conversely, the Veteran's spouse's lay statements  tend to support a finding of the regular need of aid and attendance, and the VA treatment records indicate the Veteran has had numerous falls due to his service-connected vertigo. The Veteran was provided a VA examination to determine whether his service-connected disabilities render him in need of regular aid and attendance in November 2019. The Veteran and his spouse have asserted the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have worsened since such time. Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran should have been provided a VA examination prior to the rating decision on appeal and a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. Palczewski v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 174 (2007); Weggenmann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 281, 284 (1993); Caffrey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 377, 381 (1994) (finding that the Board should have ordered a contemporaneous examination of veteran because a 23-month-old exam was too remote in time to adequately support the decision in an appeal for an increased rating).

The Board notes the two additional aid and attendance examination reports of record from February 2023 and February 2024 submitted by the Veteran. The reports do not indicate what information was relied upon in completing the examination reports (i.e. examination of the Veteran and/or documentation review.) Further, the February 2023 examination did not address the Veteran's spouse's lay statements indicating she must administer the Veteran's medication. Finally, the February 2024 VA examination indicated the Veteran required assistance with routine activities and marked a box indicating "Additional Activities" but failed to specify what additional activities required assistance. Accordingly, the Board finds the examination reports inadequate for review. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) (holding that an "examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion"); see also Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

Based on the aforementioned pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds a remand is necessary for an examination.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran an appropriate examination for special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance. The record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner.

Following a review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person.

In providing the above opinion, the clinician is asked to identify, to the extent possible, which service-connected disability (or disabilities) results in the following, if present:

1. Inability to dress or undress himself or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable;

2. Frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this does not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.);

3. Inability to attend to the wants of nature;

4. Inability to feed himself through loss of coordination of the upper extremities or through extreme weakness; and,

5. Incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hager, William J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.