Citation Nr: A25030571
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231016-385936
DATE:  April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for mixed anxiety disorder is dismissed.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 30 percent for migraine including migraine variants is denied.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for major depressive disorder (MDD), recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder, prior to February 27, 2023, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 70 percent for MDD, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder, from February 27, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to February 27, 2023, for a 70 percent rating for MDD, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder is dismissed.

Entitlement to an effective date of September 1, 2021, but no earlier, for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In the June 2023 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was awarded service connection for unspecified anxiety disorder associated with his service connected MDD, recurrent; the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms cannot be differentiated.

2. At no time during the appeal period have the Veteran's migraines been productive of very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

3. Prior to February 27, 2023, the Veteran's psychiatric disability was manifested by occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

4. At no time from February 27, 2023, has the Veteran's MDD with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder more closely approximated total occupational and social impairment.

5. The grant of an increased rating of 70 percent for MDD, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder from the effective date of the grant of service connection on September 1, 2021, renders the claim of entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 27, 2023, for a 70 percent rating for such disability moot.

6. The Veteran became permanently and totally disabled for purposes of basic eligibility to DEA benefits effective September 1, 2021.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The issue of entitlement to service connection for mixed anxiety disorder is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for a disability rating greater than 30 percent for migraines have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

3. The criteria for an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for MDD, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder for the entire appeal period prior to February 27, 2023, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

4.  The criteria for an initial rating greater than 70 percent for MDD, recurrent, with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder from February 27, 2023, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

5. The criteria for dismissal of the claim of entitlement to an earlier effective date for a 70 percent rating for MDD with anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

6. The criteria for an earlier effective date of September 1, 2021, for the award of basic eligibility to DEA benefits have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 3510; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from August 2000 to August 2021.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from November 2022, June 2023, and October 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

On the notice of disagreement filed in October 2023, the Veteran chose the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider evidence that was of record at the time of the rating decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

I. Service Connection for Anxiety Disorder

By way of background, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood in July 2022. In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for MDD, recurrent, and denied service connection for adjustment disorder and mixed anxiety disorder. Later in November 2022, the Veteran filed a higher-level review claim (VA Form 20-0996) of the November 2022 denial of service connection for mixed anxiety. The AOJ continued to deny service connection for mixed anxiety in a February 2023 Decision Review Officer Decision, followed by a supplemental claim for service connection for mixed anxiety in March 2023. In the June 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ reclassified the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability as MDD, recurrent, moderate with unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder. 

Thus, as the Veteran is presently service connected for an anxiety disorder, there is no longer any case or controversy with respect to this issue and the appeal for service connection for mixed anxiety disorder is dismissed as moot. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994). The Board notes that the downstream issues on appeal involving increased ratings for this disability and for an earlier effective date for the assigned rating are discussed below. 

II. Increased Rating Claims

A. Migraine and Migraine Variants

Rating Criteria

The Veteran is currently rated at 30 percent for migraines under 38 C.F.R. §4.124a, DC 8100. 

Under DC 8100, a 30 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average once a month over the last several months. A maximum schedular 50 percent rating is assigned for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The rating criteria contain several undefined phrases. The descriptive phrase "very frequent" for a 50 percent rating connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 253 (2018). The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless. Id. Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32nd Ed. 2012), defines "prostration" as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." Johnson (internal citation omitted). Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability." Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with respect to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445-46 (2004).

Importantly, to evaluate migraines under DC 8100, "VA must look at everything the Veteran experiences as a result of migraine attacks and then consider the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of those symptoms." See Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 72-73 (2020). Therefore, when the Board discusses migraines below, the term encompasses not only headache pain, but also the other symptoms including nausea, vomiting, photophobia, phonophobia, visual auras, and the like that the Veteran would experience.

Facts and Discussion

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA contract headache examination in September 2022. He reported at that time that he began having migraines in 2005 when his head was pounding. He described his current symptoms as sensitivity to light and dizziness and said he has been treated with injections. He also said that the condition impacted his ability to perform occupational functioning and ordinary activities as he needed to be in a dark setting. He said that he took Excedrin to treat the condition. His noted symptoms included pain on both sides of his head lasting less than one day with nausea and sensitivity to light and sound. The examiner noted that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once every month. He also said the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner noted that the condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work since he required isolation until his symptoms resolved which decreased productivity. 

The Veteran asserted in a February 2023 statement that he had frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. He said that his migraine attacks were so severe that he had to lay down in a dark and quiet room for 10 hours. He said this had a "massive effect" on his work and social life being isolated. He also said the attacks occur 3 to 4 times a week lasting up to 10 hours at a time. He further reported that the attacks cause sensitivity to light, smells, and noises. In February 2023, the Veteran submitted a headache diary for the month of January 2023 showing a headache every day lasting up to 10 hours and ranging in severity from "n/a" to a "17". It also shows that the headaches caused the Veteran to isolate in a dark room approximately three times, caused blurred vision approximately six times, caused the Veteran to skip a meal approximately three times, interfered with the Veteran's sleep approximately five times, caused sensitivity to light approximately two times, caused sensitivity to smell once, and caused sensitivity to noise once. 

The Veteran reported during a VA contract examination in July 2023 via telephone interview that his migraines occurred three to four times a week and were accompanied by sensitivity to light and sound. He also reported pulsating or throbbing headache pain on both sides of his head that lasts less than one day. The examiner reported that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain greater than once a month. He further reported that he did not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain. He said that the impact of the condition on the Veteran's ability to work was one to two weeks of lost work time in the past 12 months. He explained that the migraines made it difficult to concentrate and has led to absenteeism from work. 

In written argument in December 2024, the Veteran's representative took issue with the AOJ's reliance on the July 2023 VA examination report showing that the Veteran does not have completely prostrating attacks and said that the Veteran has reported experiencing completely prostrating attacks three to four times a week lasting 10 hours. 

At the outset, there is no dispute that the evidence shows that the Veteran has frequent migraine headaches that are at times severe. However, the evidence does not persuasively show that the migraines are very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability at any point during the appeal period. 

Both the September 2022 and July 2023 VA contract examiners found that the Veteran did not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines, with the September 2022 examiner adding that the headaches were not productive of severe economic inadaptability. They made their determinations after considering the Veteran's reported symptoms, reviewing his medical history, and examining or interviewing him. In this regard, the September 2022 examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches cause isolation until his symptoms resolve which decreases his productivity, and the July 2023 examiner noted that the Veteran lost 1-2 weeks of time at work in the last 12 months due to the headaches. Notably, both examiners concluded that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain greater than once a month, but he did not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain. The Board finds that the VA contract examination reports are of significant probative value as the examiners based their opinions on the Veteran's reports regarding the frequency and symptoms of his headaches, on a physical examination or telephone interview with the Veteran and review of his claims file, and on the examiners' medical expertise. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). 

Regarding the Veteran's assertions that the frequency and severity of his headaches meet the criteria for a 50 percent rating, his assertions are outweighed by the contemporaneous medical evidence of record which does not show completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. Moreover, regarding the July 2023 examiner's report that the Veteran lost 1-2 weeks of time at work in the last 12 months due to the headaches, his lost time from work is compensated for by the currently assigned 30 percent rating, as VA's rating schedule compensates for the average impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disability.

In making the above findings, the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran has used medication, Excedrin, to treat his migraines. The Court has held that in assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). Here, however, there is no competent medical opinion, or other competent evidence, demonstrating that he would meet additional criteria for a higher rating but for the use of such medication.

After considering the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of the Veteran's headache symptoms as shown by the probative evidence, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for a rating greater than 30 percent for migraine and migraine variants. As the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim for an increased rating must be denied. 38 U.S.C. §5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

B. MDD with Anxiety Disorder and Alcohol Use Disorder

Rating Criteria

The general rating formula for mental disabilities is found under 38 C.F.R. 4.130. The Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9434. Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms.

The criteria for a 50 percent rating provide for: Occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The criteria for a 70 percent rating provide for: Occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria for a 100 percent rating provide for: Total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

38 C.F.R. §4.130, Code 9434.

The use of the phrase "such symptoms as" followed by a list of examples provides guidance as to the severity of symptomatology contemplated for each rating. The use of such terminology permits consideration of items listed as well as other symptoms and contemplates the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

The Board acknowledges that fleeting or passive suicidal ideation does not preclude a 70 percent disability rating for suicidal ideation and that thought alone may be sufficient to support a 70 percent disability rating. The Board further acknowledges that a report of suicidal ideation does not automatically confer entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating. VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017), the Court wrote the Board must consider the effects of each of a veteran's mental symptoms on his or her own social and occupational situation and undertake "a holistic analysis." 29 Vet. App. at 22. When evaluating the severity of a psychiatric disorder, a factfinder should focus on a symptom's effects to determine the level of impairment. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 426, 443 (2002).

Facts

The Veteran asserted during an informal conference in October 2023 that he is entitled to the higher 70 percent rating for his service-connected psychiatric disability beginning on September 1, 2021, which is the date of the grant of service connection. He explained that the AOJ did not associate his anxiety with his service-connected psychiatric disability until the June 2023 rating decision, but his anxiety has been part and parcel of his disability since he initially filed his claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability in July 2022. Thus, his rating should reflect his anxiety symptoms effective the date of the grant of service connection on September 1, 2021. 

Notably, the basis of the AOJ's denial of service connection for mixed anxiety in November 2022 was not that the condition was not related to service, but that the Veteran was not found to have an anxiety disorder. In this regard, an August 2022 VA contract examiner diagnosed the Veteran as having major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate, and he said that the Veteran did not suffer from symptoms of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. It was not until a February 2023 private mental health counselor's report, and a May 2023 VA contract psychiatric examination report, that the Veteran was diagnosed as having an anxiety disorder. Nevertheless, in evaluating the Veteran's psychiatric disability beginning in September 2021, all the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have been considered in determining the appropriate rating regardless of how they have been characterized. See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

The Veteran reported during the August 2022 VA psychiatric contract examination that after retiring from service in August 2021 he was seen on three occasions by a private psychologist. He said he recently ended treatment and was not currently receiving treatment. His symptoms were noted to include difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep, suicidal thoughts, irritability, occasional verbal outbursts or anger, depressed mood, difficulty with concentration, significant social isolation, and quickness to take offense at perceived slights. Findings on examination revealed that the Veteran was not suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, hypomanic, obsessive or compulsive. His noted symptoms included depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and suicidal ideation although the Veteran clearly indicated he was not suicidal at that time and never attempted suicide. He maintained good eye contact and his speech and thought processes were goal directed. He had no other symptoms attributable to his mental disorders. The examiner remarked that the Veteran would not be able to provide a leadership role amongst a large group of people and he preferred to spend time away from crowds. 

A private licensed mental health counselor's report dated February 27, 2023, shows that the Veteran presented with recurrent depression and anxiety symptoms which had been in remission and controlled by medication until he stopped taking medication in August 2021. The Veteran reported that he thought he would be fine when he stopped taking medication but that symptoms slowly returned, and he requested resumption of medication. He reported that his anxiety symptoms were "a little worse" than his depressive symptoms and manifested by difficulty falling and staying asleep, depressed mood, irritability, and anxiety with reduced appetite. He reported intermittent, fleeing thoughts of suicidal ideation without a plan which seemed to resolve on its own, without ongoing sequelae. The Veteran expressed a desire to resume counseling as it had helped in the past. He was noted to be married with four kids. He reported that his depressive symptoms had strained his marriage, but he was optimistic that he would get better. Regarding employment, the Veteran said he retired in 2021 but after about one year he went back to work as a quality inspector, and he was still working. On examination the Veteran was fully alert with appropriate grooming and hygiene. His ability to interact with the interviewer was appropriate as was his eye contact. His affect was full, and his cognitive evaluation was normal. His short-term memory, function of knowledge, calculation and abstraction were intact. He had appropriate insight, and his judgement was noted to be both "impaired poor" and "appropriate". 

A VA contract psychiatric examination report in May 2023 shows that in addition to MDD, the Veteran was diagnosed as having unspecified anxiety disorder and alcohol use disorder. He endorsed a depressed mood most of the time. In addition, he had anhedonia, irritability, low-energy, sadness, and found little to no enjoyment in most activities. He further reported that he was much more willing to engage in altercations with strangers than he had in the past, and he worried about his ability to finish tasks, finding it hard to focus. He reported being tense at bedtime and found it hard to fall asleep. He also reported passive suicidal ideation without plan or intent to harm himself. He was diagnosed as having MDD, unspecified anxiety disorder, and alcohol use disorder. The examiner noted that the symptoms of each diagnosis overlapped and could not be fully differentiated without speculation. 

The Veteran reported during the May 2023 examination that since his last VA contract examination in 2022 he and his wife of 15 years had separated and for the past two months he has been staying with his mom. He said he has five children and maintains contact with his younger children, although he doesn't like to be around them when he is feeling depressed/anxious. He also said he and his mother have no problems sharing the house and he has his own space. He said he has missed some work due to his mental health and has had disciplinary problems recently due to his inability to focus or concentrate. He said he has been at the job for 10 months. He also said his anger and irritability have increased since 2022. He had two psychiatric hospitalizations, one in 2014 when he had suicidal ideation, and one in 2017. His mental health symptoms are noted to be recurrent and include difficulty falling asleep, difficulty remaining asleep, suicidal thoughts, irritability, occasional verbal outbursts of anger, depressed mood, difficulty concentrating, significant social isolation and quickness to take offense at perceived slights. The veteran was noted to not be suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, manic, hypomanic, obsessive or compulsive. He continues to experience occasional passive ideation of suicide with no plan and no intent to harm himself or others. He said he started taking Lexapro in March 2023. He also takes Wellbutrin that was prescribed by a private provider. 

The May 2023 examination report contains psychiatric symptoms that include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective relationships, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and grossly inappropriate behavior. On examination the Veteran was cooperative, oriented in all spheres, with a constricted/irritable affect and a dysphoric mood. His thought content and process shoed no evidence of psychotic symptomatology. There was no tangentiality or circumstantiality noted. Speech was clear, coherent, and unpressed. Insight/judgement were fair. The Veteran denied current intent or plan to harm to self or others, and there was no evidence to the contrary. The examiner assessed the Veteran as having occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Discussion

1. Rating Greater than 50 Percent Prior to February 27, 2023

For the appeal period prior to February 27, 2023, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms fall somewhere between a 50 and 70 percent rating. This is based primarily on findings from the August 2022 VA contract psychiatric examination report that show that the Veteran had a flattened effect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective relationships which are all symptoms listed in the criteria for a 50 percent rating. However, findings on this report also show that he experiences suicidal ideation, although none at the time. This symptom is listed in the criteria for a 70 percent rating. In specific regard to suicidal ideation, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that the presence of suicidal or homicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. See Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22.

The Board has also considered the February 27, 2023, private mental health counselor's report which shows that the Veteran's symptoms include fleeting thoughts of suicidal ideation without a plan and have continued to worsen since he stopped taking medication in August 2021. As noted, the Veteran said in February 2023 that he thought that he would be fine when he stopped his medication, but his symptoms slowly returned requiring that he restart his medication. It is thus evident that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have been progressively worsening throughout the appeal period. 

In consideration of the foregoing, and by affording reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that an increased rating of 70 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's chronic adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood for the entire appeal period prior to February 27, 2023. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F. 4th at 776.

2. Rating Greater than 70 Percent from February 27, 2023

To warrant the next highest rating of 100 percent, for the period from February 17, 2023, the Veteran's psychiatric disability must be productive of both total occupational and social impairment. Examination findings from the May 2023 examination show that the Veteran did not have gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Notably, his symptoms included grossly inappropriate behavior. However, also notable is that his behavioral observations revealed that he was cooperative and responded to all questions asked. In addition, he was found to be oriented in all spheres with no psychotic symptomatology, no tangentiality or circumstantiality noted, and clear, coherent, and unpressured speech. 

In short, while the record demonstrates that the Veteran has a noted symptom contemplated by a 100 percent rating, that is, grossly inappropriate behavior, the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating. Occupationally, the May 2023 VA examination report shows that the Veteran was working. In this regard, the Veteran reported during the examination that he has held his current job for 10 months, although he said he had missed some work due to his mental health and has had disciplinary problems recently due to his inability to focus or concentrate. Socially, the Veteran reported that he had recently separated from his wife. However, he said he maintained contact with his younger children when he wasn't feeling depressed or anxious, and he had no problems sharing the house he lived in with his mother. 

In short, the Board does not find after considering the effects of all the Veteran's symptoms that they are of the duration, frequency, and severity, that would warrant finding that the Veteran is totally occupationally and socially impaired at any point during the appeal period. See Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). As the evidence is persuasively against a higher than 70 percent rating, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim to this extent is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F. 4th at 776.

III. Earlier Effective Date Claims

A. Earlier Effective Date for a 70 Percent Rating for a Psychiatric Disability

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege a specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105.

By way of background, the Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability in July 2022 which the AOJ granted in November 2022, assigning a 50 percent rating effective September 1, 2021, which is the day following the Veteran's separation from active duty. See 38 C.F.R. §3.400(b)(2). The Veteran has continuously pursued the appeal for a higher rating, asserting that he is entitled to a 70 percent rating effective September 1, 2021. 38 C.F.R. §3.2500. As discussed above, the Board granted an increased rating of 70 percent for the Veteran's psychiatric disability effective the entire appeal period prior to February 27, 2023, that is, from September 1, 2021, to February 27, 2023. 

In consideration of the grant above of a 70 percent rating for the Veteran's psychiatric disability from the earliest possible date, which is the September 1, 2021, date of the grant of service connection, the issue of entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 27, 2023, for the 70 percent rating is moot. Id. Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review this claim, and it must be dismissed. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104, 7105.

B. Earlier Effective Date for DEA Benefits

Regarding the earlier effective date for an award of basic eligibility for DEA, Chapter 35 benefits, DEA benefits are payable to the child, spouse, or surviving spouse of a Veteran if the following conditions are met: (1) the Veteran was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable, or died in service; and (2) the Veteran has a permanent total service-connected disability; or (3) a permanent total service-connected disability was in existence at the date of the Veteran's death; or (4) the Veteran died as a result of a service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 3510; 38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a), 21.3021.

The Veteran was initially awarded basic eligibility to DEA benefits in June 2023, effective February 17, 2023, but in October 2023, the AOJ assigned an effective of February 27, 2023, based on clear and unmistakable error. The AOJ explained that February 27, 2023, is the effective date that the Veteran was assigned a 70 percent rating for his psychiatric disability and is the date that his combined disability rating was 100 percent. See 38 C.F.R. §4.25, Table I, Combined Ratings Table. However, based on the decision above awarding the Veteran a 70 percent rating for his psychiatric disability effective September 1, 2021, with a combined rating of 100 also effective September 1, 2021, the Veteran is entitled to an effective date of September 1, 2021, for eligibility for DEA benefits. This is because eligibility for DEA benefits is predicated on a finding of permanent and total disability and in this case permanent and total disability has been found from September 1, 2021. Therefore, an earlier effective date of September 1, 2021, but no earlier, for entitlement to basic eligibility for DEA benefits is granted.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Shawkey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.