Citation Nr: A25030338
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240126-411755
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 10 percent rating for chronic sinusitis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for eczema is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his chronic sinusitis manifested in three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year with symptoms of headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that eczema began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a 10 percent rating for chronic sinusitis, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

2. The criteria for service connection for eczema have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2009 to July 2017 and from November 2021 to July 2022.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to an initial 10 percent rating for chronic sinusitis is granted.

The Veteran asserts that a compensable rating for his chronic sinusitis is warranted. Specifically, the Veteran contends that he was exposed to burn pits while deployed and on numerous times he would be in a guard tower within 30 meters of the burn pit. See August 2023 VA 21-526EZ. For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that entitlement to a 10 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's chronic sinusitis.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Ratings Schedule), which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When the Veteran is appealing the initial assignment of a disability rating, the severity of the disability is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). If the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings, then separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. This practice is known as "staged" ratings and is employed for initial or established ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

If the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In general, it is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A Veteran can only be granted service connection effective one year prior to his date of claim or intent to file a claim when the issue is a claim for an increased rating. In the case of a non-initial increased rating claim, the effective date for an increase will be the earliest date that it is factually ascertainable based on all the evidence of record that an increase in a disability occurred if the claim or statement of intent to file is received within one year of the date of increase; otherwise, the effective date will be the date of the receipt of claim. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979 (Fed. Cir. 2010); 38 C.F.R. § 4.400(o)(2); 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2) (which provides veterans with a one-year grace period for filing a claim following an increase in severity of a service-connected disability).

The Veteran was granted service connection for chronic sinusitis in the December 2023 rating decision with a noncompensable rating effective August 8, 2023, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

Under Diagnostic Code 6513, A 0 percent (noncompensable) rating is granted for sinusitis detectable by x-ray only. A 10 percent rating is granted for one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. 

A 30 percent rating is granted for three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. 

A maximum 50 percent rating is granted following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or; near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries. A note following the General Rating Formula states that an incapacitating episode of sinusitis means one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician.

The Veteran was diagnosed with chronic maxillary sinusitis in a September 2023 VA examination. The examiner noted the following signs and symptoms: episodes of sinusitis, headaches, pain of affected sinus, tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge. The Veteran reported episodes of increasing facial/sinus pain pressure with frontal headaches and purulent nasal discharge. On examination, the examiner noted maxillary, ethmoid, and frontal sinuses were tender to palpation. 

The Veteran was noted to have 2 non-incapacitating episodes over the past year and no incapacitating episodes. As for medications, the Veteran reported he took Ibuprofen for headaches and Tylenol sinus for pressure. The Veteran reported that traveling and staying at new places usually results in a headache if outside of local area and he gets prone to sinus headaches and sinus pressure if there are drastic weather changes.

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for his chronic sinusitis. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran takes medications, such as Tylenol and Ibuprofen for his chronic sinusitis symptoms and notes that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use." Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025). Here, while the beneficial effects of medication have not clearly been articulated in the record, what is clear from the record is that the Veteran has used medications for his chronic sinusitis and yet still demonstrates the type of symptoms warranting a noncompensable evaluation. For this reason, the Board will resolve all doubt in the Veteran's favor and grant a compensable rating of 10 percent for the Veteran's chronic sinusitis.

Accordingly, given the Veteran's numerous symptoms, some of which are not contemplated by the rating criteria, and disregarding any ameliorating effects of medications, it is reasonable to conclude that his chronic sinusitis manifests in three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. Therefore, the Board finds a 10 percent rating is warranted throughout the appeal period. 

Next, the Board finds that neither the Veteran nor the pertinent medical evidence has established that the Veteran's disability warrants a rating higher than 10 percent. The September 2023 VA examination did not note that the Veteran had three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. Therefore, the criteria for a 30 percent disability evaluation are not met. Similarly, the evidence does not show that the Veteran had radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or; near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries to warrant a maximum 50 percent disability evaluation. 

Accordingly, a 10 percent rating, but no higher, for chronic sinusitis is granted.  

Finally, a claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disability, either expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability and is part of the claim for an increased rating. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In this case, the Veteran has not argued, and the record does not otherwise reflect, that the disability at issue renders him unemployable. Accordingly, a TDIU claim has not been raised.

2. Entitlement to service connection for eczema is denied.

The Veteran asserts that service connection for his eczema is warranted because he was exposed to smoke and chemicals from burn pits while deployed. See August 2023 VA 21-526EZ. For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for eczema is not warranted.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In August 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act (PACT Act) was signed into law. Therein, under?38 U.S.C. § 1168, if a Veteran submits a claim for compensation for service connection with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxi exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military, naval, air, or space service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish a service connection for the disability, VA shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the TERA. The PACT Act established additional presumptive diseases for in-service TERA. As applicable to Persian Gulf Veterans, the PACT Act also created a broader presumption for exposure to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT), to include fine particulate matter. However, the PACT Act did not establish eczema as a new or modified presumptive condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309;?38 U.S.C. §§ 1116(a)(2). That said, even if a disease is not listed as presumed, direct service connection must be considered. See Combee?v. Brown,?34 F.3d 1039, 1043-44?(Fed. Cir. 1994). 

In September 2023, VA obtained a TERA examination for the Veteran's eczema. The examiner rendered the diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis and found that one small flake was noted on the right check but otherwise the Veteran was largely asymptomatic. The Veteran described his skin condition as irritated, red, and with flaky skin of eyebrows, cheeks and around nose. The examiner noted that, on physical examinations in October 2007 and March 2017, the Veteran responded "NO" to the question of whether he had any claimed conditions. 

The examiner opined that the Veteran's seborrheic dermatitis is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. 

The examiner found that seborrheic dermatitis is a common inflammatory skin disease presenting with a papulosquamous morphology in areas rich in sebaceous glands, particularly the scalp, face, and body folds. The examiner noted that the infantile seborrheic dermatitis and adult seborrheic dermatitis variants reflect the condition's bimodal occurrence. The examiner reported that there are multiple factors associated with the development of seborrheic dermatitis, and their disparate nature has led to many proposals about its cause and pathogenesis, but the onset of seborrheic dermatitis appears linked to the interplay of normal microscopic skin flora (especially malassezia spp.), the composition of lipids on the skin surface and individual susceptibility. The examiner noted that neither the level of sebum produced, nor the amount of yeast appears to be significant factors. The examiner found that this diagnosis is consistent with the Veterans prior diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis and largely thought to be fungal in nature. The Veteran cited to several sources of medical literature to support this rationale.

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for eczema is not warranted under the PACT Act. In reaching this conclusion, the Board finds that the September 2023 VA medical opinion is highly probative and persuasive, as it was made by a medical professional with consideration of the specific facts in this case. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning). The examiner conducted a thorough in-person examination and relied on accurate facts gathered from the examination. Further, the examiner considered the Veteran's relevant medical records and medical history while supporting the rationale with medical literature. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Further, as the Veteran has only articulated a theory of causation based on his participation in TERA and not based on direct service connection, a medical opinion for direct service connection is not needed here and entitlement to service connection on a direct basis is not warranted. 

The Board would further point out that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms but does not have the training or credentials needed to render a competent opinion as to diagnosis or medical etiology, including in relation to TERA. His lay contentions therefore lack probative value. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that there is no competent lay or medical evidence linking the Veteran's eczema to his service, including his participation in TERA. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for eczema is not warranted, and this claim is denied.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Khan, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.