Citation Nr: A25030403
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-447070
DATE:  April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral spine disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1998 to December 1998 and from October 2005 to August 2007.

The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), creates a new framework of review for veterans disagreeing with VA's decision on their claim. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 AMA rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), previously referred to as the Regional Office (RO). The AOJ denied service connection for GERD, a left knee disorder, a right knee disorder, and a lumbosacral strain. 

In June 2024, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) and requested Direct Review by the Board. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. GERD

The Veteran seeks service connection for GERD, claiming that the GERD is generally related to an in-service event, injury, or exposure with an onset of 2006. See December 2023 Fully Developed Claim; January 2014 VA Examination. 

In this case, a December 2023 VA Memorandum found that the Veteran participated in a TERA during service based on exposure to chemicals in bottled and municipal water, incinerator and burn air emissions, particulate air inhalation, bacteriological ingestion via bottled and municipal water, flight air jet inhalation, vehicle air inhalation, ambient air, and bed bugs. See December 2023 Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record. 

The Board finds that the Veteran participated in Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) in service and has a current disability of GERD. See January 2014 VA Examination (documenting a GERD diagnosis); December 2023 Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record; May 2024 Rating Decision (favorable findings). The Board is bound by these favorable findings. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). 

In a January 2024 VA examination opinion, the VA examiner opined that the GERD was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The VA examiner explained that GERD results from abnormal relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter, citing a Cedar Sinai website. The VA examiner reasoned that there is no medical or scientific evidence available which provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The Board notes that this is the only opinion of record.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion inadequate to decide the claim. In that regard, the examiner did not provide adequate supporting rationale for the conclusions reached and did not provide an opinion for direct service connection. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his GERD. The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

2. Service Connection - Bilateral Knees and Lumbosacral Spine Disabilities 

The Veteran seeks service connection for disabilities in both knees and the lumbosacral spine, claiming that he experienced an in-service injury when he fell off a Humvee while he was stationed in Iraq. He contends that the current bilateral knee and lumbosacral spine disabilities are etiologically related to this in-service injury. See December 2023 Fully Developed Claim. 

VA provided the Veteran with VA examinations in February 2024 for both knee disorders and the back disorder. Corresponding opinions were issued. 

In the February 2024 VA bilateral knee opinion, the VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the bilateral knee disabilities were incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury. The VA examiner reasoned that the medical records are silent during military service for bilateral knee disorders and that the enlistment and separation examinations are silent for bilateral knee disorders. See February 2024 VA Examination.

In the February 2024 VA lumbosacral spine opinion, the VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the lumbosacral spine disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury. The VA examiner reasoned that the "medical record is silent and during military service for lumbar spine condition" and that the enlistment and separation examinations are silent for a lumbar spine condition. See February 2024 VA Examination. 

The Board finds that the above VA examination opinions are inadequate. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examiner seems to rely solely on the lack of diagnoses during active service when rendering the opinions. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). In addition, the VA examiner did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusions reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). This opinion is therefore afforded little, if any, probative weight.

The examiner is reminded that the lack of in-service complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of bilateral knee and/or lumbosacral spine disorders is not a sufficient basis to find that the claimed disorder is not etiologically related to active service.

Once the Secretary undertakes the effort to provide an examination, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, he must provide an adequate one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed GERD. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present GERD had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include his in-service exposure to the environmental hazards in Southwest Asia (notwithstanding the fact that there may not be a presumed association)? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee disorders. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present bilateral knee disorders had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed lumbosacral spine disorder. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present lumbosacral spine disorder had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Costantino, Danielle K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.