Citation Nr: A25030346
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231205-397701
DATE:  April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a head injury, and/or a disability or disabilities manifested by vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army from May 2009 to December 2015.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for residuals of a head injury, and/or a disability or disabilities manifested by vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that it has expanded the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for Meniere's syndrome to one of entitlement to service connection for residuals of a head injury, and/or a disability or disabilities manifested by vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus, based on the Veteran's lay statements. See, e.g., March 2023 VA Form 21-4138; see also Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (indicating that the scope of a disability claim includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record).

1. Entitlement to service connection for residuals of a head injury, and/or a disability or disabilities manifested by vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus, is remanded.

Legal Principles

Service connection may be granted for disability due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) a disease, injury, or event in service; and (3) a nexus or causal relationship between the claimed disability and the disease, injury, or event in service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When VA seeks to obtain a medical opinion, the Secretary must ensure that the opinion provided is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A VA medical opinion is adequate "where it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations," Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007), "describes the disability... in sufficient detail so that the Board's 'evaluation of the claimed disability will be a fully informed one'," id. (quoting Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994)), and "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of a medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion," Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105 (2012). See Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 293 (2012) ("[A]n adequate medical report must rest on correct facts and reasoned medical judgment so as [to] inform the Board on a medical question and facilitate the Board's consideration and weighing of the report against any contrary reports."); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) ("[A] medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two").

Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. Id. The remand must specify the action to be taken by the AOJ. Id.

Relevant Facts and Analysis

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for Ménière's syndrome because he suffered a head injury in service and thereafter began experiencing symptoms including vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus, with frequent debilitating episodes of dizziness. See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023. See May 2023 C&P (Compensation and Pension) Examination. The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's lay statements but declined to provide a current diagnosis based on the obtained medical history because the Veteran did not voice this complaint to his VA medical center provider and there is no evidence of a chronic condition. Id., pp. 2, 4. The examiner did not explain that she found that the Veteran's statements not credible, nor did she provide an adequate reason for ignoring the Veteran's experience and recurrence of symptoms in declining to render a diagnosis. She also did not give adequate consideration to the fact that the Veteran obtained emergency care in May 2021 for dizziness. See CAPRI (Compensation and Pension Record Interchange) received September 2021, pp. 1-2. The examiner produced an etiology opinion that rested on the same rationale to support the conclusion that Ménière's was not related to service because there was no current diagnosis. For these reasons, the Board finds the examination and opinion inadequate. See May 2023 C&P Examination.

The AOJ should have obtained an adequate VA examination and opinion prior to adjudication. The AOJ also should have added imaging referenced in the CAPRI record to the claims file. The fact that the AOJ did not complete these tasks prior to adjudication constitutes pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The evidence is not sufficient to grant the claim; thus, remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. First, obtain and add to the claims file the VISTA (Veterans Health Information System Technology Architecture) Imaging scanned document referenced in the CAPRI received September 3, 2021, pages 1-2. In addition, as appropriate, obtain the Veteran's complete record directly from the referenced community care provider.

2. After the above development is complete, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for residuals of a head injury, and/or a disability or disabilities manifested by vertigo, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, imbalance, altered gait, and tinnitus. The examiner must review the claims file. In completing the disability benefits questionnaire(s), the provider should order tests and imaging, as appropriate, to obtain any and all diagnostic information that has a possibility of pertaining to the Veteran's claim. The examiner should elicit a detailed and complete medical history that is directly relevant to the claimed condition and service records.

(a.) First, identify and diagnose all current disabilities relating to the reported symptoms. If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. If the examiner cannot provide a diagnosis, the examiner should explain, in detail, why a diagnosis is not possible, and provide an opinion, supported by rationale, as to the cause or causes of the Veteran's reported symptoms.

(b.) Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

1.	Direct Service Connection: For each disability identified in (a), is it at least as likely as not that the disability had onset in service, had onset within one year of discharge from service, or is otherwise related to service?

2.	Secondary Service Connection - Causation: For each disability identified in (a), is it at least as likely as not that the disability was caused by, or is otherwise due to, a service-connected disability (including headaches, other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, and tinnitus), or due to two or more service-connected disabilities in combination?

3.	Secondary Service Connection - Aggravation: For each disability identified in (a), is it at least as likely as not that the disability was aggravated (i.e., worsened) by a service-connected disability, or due to two or more service-connected disabilities in combination?

Provide rationale to support the opinions.

The requested opinions should reflect consideration of the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "at least as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay 

?

contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Williams, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.