Citation Nr: A25030175
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240428-435059
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 30 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a back condition is remanded.

Service connection for a right-shoulder condition is remanded.

Service connection for a right-knee is condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The functional impact of the Veteran's PTSD manifests as no worse than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2005 to November 2006. The Veteran has additional inactive service in the reserve component.

Via the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 and the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a back, right-knee and right-shoulder condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Rating for PTSD.

i.	Legal criteria.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

A 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal). This may be due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and/or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9411.

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood). This may be due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment. This may be due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The list of symptoms in the General Formula is not intended to constitute an exhaustive list. Rather, it provides examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). However, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Furthermore, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment, but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

ii.	Facts and analysis.

The Veteran underwent a compensation and pension examination in February 2024. Neither the Veteran nor the record has raised a reason for the Board to doubt the competency or credibility of the examiner. The examiner is a clinical psychologist.

The examiner noted that the Veteran separated from active service approximately ten years prior to his examination. Since his separation, the Veteran has been consistently employed; he is currently working as a truck driver. The examiner relays that the Veteran describes his psychological and marital functioning as good. Indeed, the Veteran has been married to his spouse since 2009. They share one child together.

Similarly, the examiner relays that the Veteran reports that he is in good mental health. The Veteran is not involved in counseling or treatment. The Veteran is not taking any medications for mental health. Further, the Veteran denies any history of suicidal ideation or mental health hospitalization.

The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD. The examiner opines that the Veteran's PTSD is "mild" in nature. The examiner notes the following symptoms associated with the Veteran's PTSD: depressed mood, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often and chronic sleep impairment. Further, the examiner relays that, due to his PTSD symptoms, the Veteran avoids certain social events involving crowds and load noises. Likewise, at times, the Veteran becomes irritable for no reason.

The functional impact of the Veteran's PTSD most closely corresponds to a 30 percent rating. Firstly, all of the Veteran's clinically-noted symptoms are specifically mentioned as representative of a 30 percent rating. Moreover, the Veteran's own assessment is that his mental health and social functioning are good. Further, the Veteran's occasional irritability and avoidance of certain crowded social events manifests as no worse than an occasional decrease in work efficiency or intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks. By contrast, a higher rating would require a finding of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity-which is against the weight of the evidence. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for back condition.

In July 2023, the Veteran claimed service connection for a back condition. In his claims form, the Veteran indicated that he believed that the cause of his back condition was carrying heavy equipment in Iraq, including carrying the M 249 light machine gun. The Veteran's certificate of discharge reflects that he served in a designated imminent danger area; the Veteran received the Iraq Campaign Medal.

The Veteran underwent a compensation and pension examination for his back in April 2024. Neither the Veteran nor the record has raised a reason for the Board to doubt the competency or credibility of the examiner. The examiner notes that the Veteran's symptoms had an onset date in 2006. The examiner relays the Veteran's reports that his symptoms have become progressively worse since onset. Moreover, the Veteran reports losing half an inch in height. The Veteran's symptoms include pain, stiffness and flare ups lasting for multiple days with severe pain. The Veteran was not experiencing a flare up during the examination. Upon examination, the Veteran's ranges of motion were all within normal limits. The Veteran's muscle strength testing and reflexes also tested normal. No radiculopathy, ankylosis or invertebral disc syndrome was detected. To support the examination, no imaging was obtained or reviewed.

The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with a back condition. Nonetheless, in evaluating whether a current disability exists, the Board must consider reports of the Veteran's pain, even if there is no diagnosed condition. "Pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability." Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). The Veteran estimates that, due to his back pain, he lost approximately one week of work time in the year preceding his evaluation. The Veteran explains that when he has a flare up, he cannot get out of bed and cannot work.

The examiner opined against medical nexus. In a written opinion, the examiner supports her conclusion with the rationale that, "[w]ithout chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." This rationale is inadequate. Firstly, without explanation, this rationale would appear to discount the Veteran's statements that he tends to only seek medical treatment for his back when he has a particularly painful flare up-at which point he visits a chiropractor. Moreover, according to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), the legal standard is not continuity of care, but continuity of symptomatology. Continuous symptoms, not continuous complaints or treatment for them (i.e., care), are what VA regulations require. See Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991). The Veteran reported an in-service onset of symptoms that have become progressively worse since service. In other words, the Veteran's lay statements support continuity of symptoms.

Finally, the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt:

The reasonable doubt doctrine is also applicable even in the absence of official records, particularly if the basic incident allegedly arose under combat, or similarly strenuous conditions, and is consistent with the probable results of such known hardships. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The Veteran carrying a light machine gun through a designated imminent danger area is a situation similarly strenuous to combat. Moreover, carrying heavy equipment is consistent with possibly causing or aggravating a back condition. Accordingly, the benefit of the doubt doctrine applies.

Once an examination and/or opinion has been obtained, it must be adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Therefore, a remand is required in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and to obtain an adequate medical nexus opinion.

2. Service connection for right-shoulder condition.

3. Service connection for right-knee condition.

The VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when is necessary to make a decision on a claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4). Such development is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but (1) contains competent evidence of diagnosed disability or symptoms of disability, (2) establishes that the veteran suffered an event, injury or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006) (noting that the third element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and active service, including equivocal or non-specific medical evidence or credible lay evidence of continuity of symptomatology).

Firstly, the AOJ granted an examination for the Veteran's back but not for his shoulder or knee. In his claims form, the Veteran indicated his belief that all three conditions were the result of carrying heavy equipment during his deployment to Iraq. It is unclear why an examination would be granted for the back but not the knee or shoulder; all three issues are orthopedic in nature and the Veteran contends that they share the same cause. 

Moreover, as considered above, the Veteran served in a designated imminent danger area. In his claims form, the Veteran's complains of symptoms of knee and shoulder conditions. The Veteran attributes these complaints to carrying heaving equipment in Iraq. The Veteran's service documents reflect that he was deployed to Iraq. 

Concerning the first McLendon factor, the Board finds sufficient evidence of a knee and shoulder condition. Further, the Veteran's deployment to Iraq where he contends that he carried heavy equipment satisfies the second McLendon factor-as this deployment is an in-service event. Finally, the Veteran's claims of having incurred orthopedic disabilities while deployed in Iraq meet the third McLendon factor, as these orthopedic disabilities reasonably may be associated with the strenuous duties that the Veteran performed while on deployment.

Under McLendon, an examination should have been provided. Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred. A remand is necessary. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. First, contact the April 2024 VA examiner-or, if this individual is not available, an appropriate substitute-to provide an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's claimed back condition. The entire claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner. If a reexamination is deemed necessary, it shall be provided. An explanation for all opinions expressed must be provided.

The examiner must opine whether it is approximately as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a back condition that was incurred in or is otherwise related to his active federal service-including his deployment to Iraq when it was a designated imminent danger area.

The examiner is directed to consider all relevant evidence but to pay particular attention to the Veteran's lay statements and to a military treatment record from January 2005 reflecting the Veteran's noted in-service complaints of "upper back pain."

Finally, in providing a medical nexus opinion, the examiner is reminded that continuous symptoms, not continuous complaints or treatment for them (i.e., care), are what VA regulations require. See Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991).

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the current nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right-knee and right-shoulder conditions. Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished. All clinical findings must be reported in detail.

(a.) If the examiner diagnoses a knee disability, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's knee disability was incurred in or is otherwise related to his active service.

(b.) If the examiner diagnoses a shoulder disability, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's shoulder disability was incurred in or is otherwise related to his active service.

In providing these opinions, the examiner is directed to consider and address in writing all relevant evidence, including the Veteran's lay statements.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Drum, Ryan S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.