Citation Nr: A25030601
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-429534
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU) due solely to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the entire period on appeal, the competent and probative evidence is not in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's PTSD renders him unable to obtain and sustain substantially gainful employment. 

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD has been characterized by depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and suicidal ideation. There is orientation to person, place, time, and situation; normal thought process and speech; and no hallucinations, delusions, unusual thought content, perceptual or behavioral disturbances, homicidal ideations, violence, self-harm, assaulting others, or verbally- or physically abusive behavior.

3. The Veteran's PTSD has been productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity in areas such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking, and mood; total occupational and social impairment has not been demonstrated.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for individual unemployability due solely to PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 4.3, 4.16, and 4.18.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1982 to April 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 rating decision and a February 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In a April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Regarding the TDIU claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. With respect to the claim for an increased rating for PTSD, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Procedural History

On July 17, 2019, in a VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran sought service connection for PTSD. In a January 2020 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim; and the Veteran sought higher-level review. See January 2020, VA Form 20-0996. Subsequently, the Veteran claimed entitlement to a TDIU. See February 2020, VA Form 21-526EZ and March 2020, VA Form 21-8940. In a May 2020 higher-level review decision, the AOJ identified a duty-to-assist error for PTSD and returned the claim. See May 2020, VA Form 20-0999.

During the pendency of the claim for service connection for PTSD, in a July 2021 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran was entitled to a TDIU, effective January 29, 2020, due to his bilateral knee disabilities. In a March 2022 higher-level review decision, the AOJ confirmed the denial of service connection for PTSD. In a February 2023, VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, the Veteran appealed the denial of service connection for PTSD. In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for PTSD evaluated at 70 percent disabling effective July 11, 2019, the initial date of the claim. 

In September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, along with a VA 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, seeking entitlement to a TDIU based on his PTSD. In a February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ denied the TDIU claim. In the April 2024 VA Form 10182 before the Board, the Veteran appealed the April 2023- and February 2024 rating decisions.

1. Entitlement to a TDIU due solely to service-connected PTSD is denied.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to a TDIU based solely on his service-connected PTSD. 

In a July 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative argues that the evidence supports a finding that PTSD singularly prevents the Veteran from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation. The representative argues the Veteran continuously pursued the PTSD claim; therefore, he is entitled to TDIU based on PTSD, effective December 2019 when he ceased work due to the same. The Veteran's symptomatology significantly impacts functioning in all work types and settings: irritable behavior; angry outbursts with little or no provocation; verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response; problems with concentration; sleep disturbance; depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; memory loss; disturbances of motivation and mood; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like settings; and suicidal ideation. Concentration problems and daytime fatigue contribute to difficulties in completing tasks in a timely, efficient, and safe manner.

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied entitlement to a TDIU because the Veteran had a 100-percent combined evaluation based on other service-connected disabilities and was receiving the maximum benefits. The Board will not disturb any favorable findings. The Board must determine if the Veteran was receiving the maximum benefits for the entire period on appeal.

In order to establish entitlement to a TDIU due to service-connected disabilities, there must be impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. In reaching such a determination, the central inquiry is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to his age or to the impairment caused by non-service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).

The phrase substantially gainful employment has two components: an economic one and a noneconomic one. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019). In assessing the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Board is to consider the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training as well as physical abilities and mental abilities required by the occupation at issue.

Such specific physical ability-factors include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and visual. Specific mental ability-factors include memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work-place stress, getting along with coworkers, and demonstrating reliability and productivity.

The regulatory scheme for a TDIU provides both objective and subjective criteria. Hatlestad, 5 Vet. App. 524; VAOPGCPREC 75-91 (Dec. 27, 1991) 57 Fed. Reg. 2317 (1992). The objective criteria, set forth at 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340(a)(2), provide for a total rating when there is a single disability or a combination of disabilities that results in a 100 percent schedular evaluation. Subjective criteria, set forth at 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16(a), provide for a TDIU when, due to service-connected disability, a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, and has a single disability rated 60 percent or more, or at least one disability rated 40 percent or more with additional disability sufficient to bring the combined evaluation to 70 percent. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

In exceptional circumstances, where the veteran does not meet the aforementioned percentage requirements, a total rating may nonetheless be assigned upon a showing that the individual is unable to obtain or retain substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

A total rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when it is found that a Veteran is unable to obtain or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service connected disabilities and has a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or two or more service-connected disabilities when one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability or disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following disabilities will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable, (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident, (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g. orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric, (4) multiple injuries incurred in action, or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a). Here, the Veteran was initially granted a TDIU due to his bilateral knee disabilities, each assessed at 60 percent disabling.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has recognized that a 100 percent rating under the Schedule for Rating Disabilities means that a Veteran is totally disabled. Holland v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 443, 446 (1994), citing Swan v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 20, 22 (1990). Thus, if VA has found a veteran to be totally disabled as a result of a particular service-connected disability or combination of disabilities pursuant to the rating schedule, there is no need, and no authority, to otherwise rate that veteran totally disabled on any other basis.  See Herlehy v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 33, 35 (2001) (finding a request for TDIU moot where 100 percent scheduler rating was awarded for the same period).

However, the receipt of a 100-percent schedular rating for a service-connected disability does not necessarily render moot any pending claim for a TDIU. See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 291-92 (2008).  Although no additional disability compensation may be paid when a total schedular disability rating is already in effect, Bradley recognizes that a separate award of a TDIU predicated on a single disability may form the basis for an award of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s). Id. Thus, it might benefit the Veteran to retain the TDIU rating, even where a 100-percent schedular rating has also been granted. See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 248 (2010).

In Bradley, the Veteran had been in receipt of TDIU until the time at which he was awarded a 100 percent combined schedular rating. 22 Vet. App. at 293. The Court determined, however, that "the Secretary should have assessed whether [the Veteran's] TDIU rating was warranted based on his PTSD alone before substituting a combined total rating for his TDIU rating."  Id. at 294.  The Court reasoned that "a TDIU rating for PTSD alone would entitle [the Veteran] to SMC benefits as an additional benefit not otherwise provided to persons with a 100 [percent] combined rating." Id. Accordingly, VA should potentially consider whether TDIU is warranted for a particular service-connected disability even when a schedular 100-percent rating is already in effect for other service-connected disabilities in order to determine the veteran's eligibility for SMC under section 1114(s). Id.

A veteran is entitled to SMC (s) when the veteran has "a service-connected disability rated as total" and a separate disability or disabilities rated at 60 percent or higher. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s). In other words, in order to receive additional SMC benefits the Veteran must be entitled to TDIU based on a single disability. See Buie, 24 Vet. App. at 243 (holding "that a total disability rating based on individual unemployability that is based on more than one underlying disability does not satisfy the first requirement of section 1114(s) that a claimant have a service-connected disability rated as total."). "VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits requires VA to assess all of the claimant's service-connected disabilities without regard to the order in which service connection was awarded to determine whether any combination of the disabilities establishes eligibility for SMC under section 1114(s). Id.

If the Veteran's PTSD singularly supports a TDIU, entitlement to SMC under § 1114(s) would be effective December 2019, when he became unemployed and met the criteria for that ancillary benefit as of that date. See Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373, 387 (2019). SMC is "to be accorded when a veteran becomes eligible without need for a separate claim. Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 294 (explaining that SMC is "to be accorded when a veteran becomes eligible without need for a separate claim" (citing Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991))); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2) (2024) ("Once VA receives a complete claim, VA will adjudicate as part of the claim entitlement to any ancillary benefits that arise as a result of the adjudication decision (e.g., ... entitlement to [SMC] under [38 C.F.R. § 3.350] ...").

The Board notes the Veteran is service connected for numerous disabilities: PTSD (70 percent, effective July 11, 2019); left knee arthroplasty and residuals (60 percent from January 2022); obstructive sleep apnea (50 percent from July 11, 2019); bilateral plantar fasciitis (50 percent from January 29, 2020); degenerative disc disease, protrusion L5-S1 with intervertebral disc syndrome (40 percent from January 29, 2020); degenerative joint disease, right knee joints (10 percent from May 1, 2002);  tinnitus (10 percent from June 29, 2007); dermatophic tinea versicolor of the upper back (10 percent from September 28, 2009); peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity associated with degenerative disc disease (10 percent from January 25, 2011); peripheral neuropathy, left lower extremity associated with degenerative disc disease (10 percent from January 25, 2011); and bilateral hearing loss (0 percent from November 3, 2009). The Veteran's total combined rating is currently 100 percent effective July 11, 2019. See May 2023, Rating Decision Codesheet.

Here, the AOJ awarded the Veteran a TDIU, effective January 29, 2020, (due to bilateral knee disabilities) and, later, a 100 percent combined rating covering the entire period on appeal. However, the claim of entitlement to a TDIU is not necessarily rendered moot. The Veteran received special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i) for knee disabilities rated 100 percent and additional service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, from August 4, 2021, to January 1, 2022. Thus, for SMC purposes, the Board must consider whether the Veteran was entitled to a TDIU between December 11, 2019, and August 4, 2021, and after January 1, 2022.

The Board has reviewed the evidence comprehensively. Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases to support a decision, there is no requirement to discuss in detail all the evidence submitted by or on behalf of a Veteran. Gonzales v. West, 218 F. 3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (the Board must review the entire record; however, the Board does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).

The analysis below focuses on the most relevant evidence; and the Veteran must not assume that the Board has overlooked pieces of evidence that are not discussed explicitly. Timberlake, v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000) (the law requires only that the Board address its reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the Veteran). 

Evidence and Analysis

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran provided lay statements within several VA claims forms. In the February 2020 VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran generally sought entitlement to a TDIU. A February 2020, Report of General Information shows the Veteran called VA requesting a TDIU and claiming unemployability due to his service-connected knee- and back disabilities as well as his non-service connected PTSD and sleep apnea. In the March 2020- and February 2021 VA 21-8940 forms, the Veteran claimed entitlement to a TDIU based on all service-connected disabilities, asserted he was last employed in December 2019 as a telecommunications pole climber, and had two years of college; however, the sections relating to the type of- or dates of training are blank. In a February 2021 VA Form 20-0995, the Veteran generally sought entitlement to a TDIU.

In the February 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran addressed several functional impairments related to various disabilities. Specific to PTSD and unemployability, the Veteran stated he used to like going out to dinner with his wife but cannot anymore because of the pain, does not have a desire to do anything, does not sleep well at all, wakes up regularly throughout the night; and his mood is low. The Veteran's wife takes care of him, helps with medications, and helps him shower; sometimes, she has to remind him to brush his teeth. He gets upset easily, can fly off the handle or sometimes just does not say anything. When the Veteran cannot physically do something on his own, it is very upsetting and makes his temper flare. The Veteran has trouble remembering some things from the past and people's names. Pain and being tired make his memory worse. The Veteran admits he thinks about suicide; he is upset he cannot do what he used to do because of his knees, ankle, and neuropathy.

In a September 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated he was unable to work due to his PTSD; he is hypervigilant, anxious, loses focus, gets distracted, emotionally detached, irritable, and depressed; and will only  interact with his wife. If the Veteran has to deal with authoritative figures, he has an outburst. The Veteran only leaves the house for a doctor's appointment, is unmotivated to do anything, can only bring himself to watch TV, and reiterated that his wife takes care of his needs and does the grocery shopping.

At a December 2019 VA examination, the Veteran reported his employment and educational history: he worked in high school as a dishwasher, graduated from high school, has some college, and served in the Army for 20 years with an MOS initially as a light-wheeled vehicle mechanic and, later, in communications. He retired honorably from the Army as an E8. From 2002 through 2018, he worked in telecommunications for a contractor. The Veteran informed the examiner that he stopped working in November 2018 (not 2019) because he could not do the job physically; and he reported one anger outburst in November 2018 after which he stopped working. He stated he was angry when a coworker asked him to climb up the tower when he was on light duty; and he almost had an accident. He cannot rest at night, jumps out of his sleep and out of bed, has nightmares about the shooting and seeing his friend injured. He has distressing intrusive thoughts, avoids talking about his experiences, avoids crowds, cannot handle the sound of helicopters, is always jumpy and startles easily; he does not trust people, is watchful and hypervigilant, hardly goes out of the house, stays depressed, experienced passive suicidal ideation without intent, decreased appetite, has no hobbies or interest or motivation to do things. The Veteran denied any psychiatric hospitalizations or suicidal behavior; he was prescribed psychiatric medications. He talked to his primary care provider about problems with anxiety, depression, and sleep issues and was referred to an outside mental health provider for twenty sessions. He had a few therapy sessions but stopped since it did not appear to help. The Veteran lives with his wife of 30 years; they have two adult children and two grandchildren.

The examiner indicated that the Veteran meets all the criteria for PTSD and suffers from: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and suicidal ideation. The examiner noted the Veteran was casually dressed, speech was soft in tone; thought processes were organized and goal directed. There were no hallucinations or overt delusions but described mistrust of others, hypervigilance and increased startle. The Veteran's mood was depressed, affect was restricted in range; he was alert and oriented x4, showed fair insight, and judgment was not impaired; he is capable of managing his own financial affairs. The examiner determined the Veteran has an occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner did not find the Veteran had an occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (i.e., work, school, family relations judgment, thinking, or mood) nor any total occupational and social impairment.

The examiner opined the PTSD was at least as likely as not connected to service and noted the stressors have made the Veteran fear for his life, become hypervigilant, emotionally detached, irritable, anxious, and depressed. 

A March 2020 VA knee and lower leg disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) shows the Veteran reported he was unemployed since December 2019, worked in telecommunications for fifteen years, and had to climb poles a lot. The Veteran reported functional impairments due to pain, specifically, he has trouble walking; cannot stand up for very long; and cannot climb steps, do housework or yard work. The examiner opined the Veteran cannot functionally engage in any physical work activities due to his service connected back condition but there were no apparent functional limitations in the Veteran's ability to perform sedentary work activities. 

A March 2020 VA back DBQ shows the Veteran reported he was unemployed since December 2019, cannot do any house chores or yard work, has trouble tying his shoes; and his wife helps him into the bathtub. The examiner opined the Veteran cannot functionally engage in any physical work activities due to his service connected back condition; and there are no apparent functional limitations in his ability to perform sedentary work activities.  

A June 2020 VA peripheral nerve condition DBQ shows the Veteran reported his peripheral neuropathy impacts his ability to work because it causes his legs to get aggravated from standing or walking of long periods of time. The examiner opined that the Veteran would have difficulty standing for long periods of time or walking long distances, but he can work a desk job because of his neuropathy. However, sitting for long periods of time aggravates the Veteran's back.

A June 2020 VA foot condition DBQ shows the Veteran's reported he is unable to stand for long periods or walk long distances, climb a lot of steps, jump, squat, or run impact his ability to perform any type of work. The examiner opined he was better suited for desk work where he would not have to put pressure on his feet. 

VA treatment records show that, in November 2019, the Veteran reported feeling down, depressed or hopeless nearly every day; suicide screening scores from 2019 to 2021 were all negative. At a December 2019 audiology visit, the Veteran reported his hearing aids were taken by mistake at work and had been unable to find them. A January 2020 record shows the Veteran's dress, hygiene, mood, affect were all appropriate; he suffered from nightmares and anxiety; medications were helpful; the exam was normal; and he denied suicidal- or homicidal ideations. 

VA treatment records further show that, in May 2022, the Veteran completed a mental health diagnostic study and indicated he lost interest in activities he used to enjoy; felt distant or cut off from others; had irritable behavior, angry outbursts, or acted aggressively quite a bit; and problems made it somewhat difficult to do work, take care of things at home, or get along with people. The Veteran stated he had psychotherapy and medications in 2019 and 2020 that were helpful; he did not have any suicidal or homicidal ideation. The Veteran reported he was retired; his relationships are good; and he gets along with kids and friends. The Veteran was neat, well groomed, casually dressed, and maintained good eye contact; his mood was within normal limits although he reported he was anxious, irritable, and depressed. Speech was logical coherent, fluent, and well organized. Recent and remote memory appeared grossly intact. The Veteran was alert and oriented; thought processes were organized; there was no loose association or flight of ideas, evidence of hallucinations, delusions, or distorted ideation. The Veteran denied suicidal- or homicidal ideation, plan or intent; he had adequate impulse control; judgment and insight were appropriate; and there was no evidence of dissociation.

October 2019 private treatment records from Dr. S. show that the Veteran's bilateral cervical-, lumbar-, and upper thoracic pain interfere with his ability to sleep, work, exercise, and activities of daily living. 

October- and November 2019 physical therapy treatment records show that the Veteran could not do usual work due to his neck disability; he was driving to work; and his back was fine. On most occasions, the Veteran reported he was able to concentrate fully when he wants to with no difficulty. 

Pain management treatment records from Dr. K show that from March 2018 to March 2021, the Veteran appeared healthy, well nourished, and well developed. He was in mild distress; with normal mood and affect, active and alert; and oriented to time, place, and person.

A June 2021 VA knee and lower leg DBQ shows the Veteran reported he cannot walk up and down stairs due to the intense pain in his knees and he can only walk for about 200-300 yards before he will have to stop due to the pain. The examiner opined the Veteran could not work due to bilateral knee pain; he cannot do either physical or sedentary work due to the pain medication he takes for knee pain. 

The Board finds that the VA examinations and treatment records, as a whole, are adequate and highly probative. Although the December 2019 medical opinion did note the functional impact of the PTSD on the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task, it is significantly probative that the examiner did not find the Veteran had a total occupational and social impairment. Entitlement to a TDIU is a factual determination and not a medical one. Accurate medical examinations are still necessary in order for the Board to properly assess the impact of a disability on the Veteran's ability to obtain and maintain employment. Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (citing 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a)).

Private treatment records from Dr. H shows that, through August 2021, the Veteran had no signs of depression, sleep disturbances, or alcohol abuse; felt safe in his relationship; and was oriented to time, place, and person. 

Private hospital records from May 2021 through August 2021 show the Veteran denied depression, anxiety, sleep disturbances, or alcohol abuse, and felt safe in a relationship and was able to care for himself. Speech was appropriate; there was no cognitive impairment; he verbalized understanding and asked questions and was alert and oriented. August 2021 surgical records show the Veteran had no depression, sleep disturbances, or alcohol abuse; he felt safe in relationship, was currently employed, was able to care for himself, and was oriented to time, place and person. The Veteran appeared healthy, well nourished, and well developed. 

In an August 2023 vocational evaluation, a private vocational counselor considered the claims file, the VA examination conducted in December 2019, and interviewed the Veteran. The counselor opined that the Veteran is as likely as not unable to secure or follow a gainful occupation as a result of his PTSD since July 2019. The counselor reasoned that the symptoms listed in the December 2019 VA examination were severe enough to eliminate all employment; and no employer would risk hiring such an individual. He has no skills to transfer to other employment and is restricted to unskilled work characterized by close supervision, rigid production demands, and strict absentee policies. 

The assessment has limited impact on the case at bar and is inadequate. First, the counselor does not fully discuss the Veteran's skills and training. Although the counselor indicated the Veteran has two years of college, there is no discussion about whether he obtained any occupational skills as a result. The record- and specifically the two VA 21-8940 Forms -- are silent on what type of education or training the Veteran obtained, the dates of training, or whether he obtained any employable skills in the process; and the counselor does not indicate that there was any further revelation made during the Veteran's interview. Second, the counselor either ignored or failed to mention the parts of the record where the Veteran reported to the VA- and private physicians that he could not work solely because of his physical disabilities. Moreover, a finding that the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a gainful occupation since July 2019 is controverted by the record. The Veteran stated he worked until December 2019; and, at least once, he informed a private physician he was still employed in 2021. An opinion not based on consideration of the veteran's prior history and that fails to describe the disability in sufficient detail does not adequately provide the Board with the information necessary for adjudication. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). 

Third, the counselor is not competent to opine on whether the Veteran's PTSD causes a functional limitation or impairment. The counselor's findings that the Veteran cannot tolerate close supervision, has concentration difficulties or memory problems that prevent prolonged focus on even simple tasks, or that some symptoms limit his ability to focus for the time necessary to be productive -- as a result of PTSD -- is without a basis in the medical evidence. No medical provider has opined that the Veteran's PTSD functionally limits or impacts his ability to work. Rather, the VA examiners opined that there were no apparent functional limitations in the Veteran's ability to perform sedentary work activities or a desk job. Furthermore, on most occasions, the Veteran reported to physicians that he was able to concentrate fully when he wants to with no difficulty and demonstrated an ability to care for himself.

Medical examiners, not vocational counselors, determine the effects of a disability upon the person's ordinary activity. See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 242 (2019) quoting 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. While a vocational counselor may assess how a functional impairment affects an individual's employability, the Board has the responsibility to make the findings of fact and law necessary to decide whether a claimant is entitled to a TDIU benefit. Accordingly, the Board finds the vocational counselor's opinion has little probative value.

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements describing his PTSD and finds they are credible and probative. However, the lay statements about the reasons he stopped working and the lack of detail on his college training are less than credible here. At various examinations, the Veteran claimed that he could not return to work because of his physical disabilities. 

The Board finds that the evidence, as a whole, supports a finding that the Veteran's unemployment is largely due to his physical disabilities. There is no evidence PTSD has a functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work, let alone as a singular disability supporting entitlement to a TDIU. The physician's opinions are consistent as a whole in that the functional limitations impacting the ability to work is due to the Veteran's service-connected back and knee disabilities.

The Board has considered the economic and noneconomic components of the Veteran's TDIU claim. Ray, 31 Vet. App. 58. The Board recognizes that the Veteran's PTSD presents certain functional limitations. Nevertheless, there is no evidence it precludes him from occupations performed in settings with opportunities for breaks, rest periods, and isolation. In the contemporary workplace, many employers offer reasonable accommodations pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended (ADAAA), to allow for downtime due to disabilities. In the Veteran's case, it would have been more than reasonable for an employer to provide breaks where the Veteran could rest during periods of symptoms associated with his service-connected PTSD. 

The rating schedule was created as a guide to evaluating disabilities resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered. The percentage ratings that are assigned represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.

The Board has considered the totality of evidence carefully. While the record shows the Veteran has limitations caused by PTSD, the evidence is not in relative equipoise as to whether these factors raise a "reasonable possibility" that the Veteran was rendered unemployable solely due to his service-connected PTSD. Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

Therefore, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and it is not at least in relative equipoise the Veteran's PTSD alone rendered him unable to obtain and sustain substantially gainful employment at any point during the period on appeal; and the claim is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (2021). 

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to a rating greater than 70 percent for PTSD. 

The Board need not repeat the evidence outlined above.

In resolving whether the Veteran is entitled to a rating in excess of 70 percent for his PTSD, disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.

Under the relevant laws and regulations, all psychiatric disabilities, to include PTSD, are evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders ("General Rating Formula"). Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, or mood due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence), spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like settings), and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) (including maintaining minimum personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but they are not meant to be exhaustive; and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

The Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements regarding his PTSD symptoms and the severity and frequency of his symptoms are competent and credible. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the symptoms do not manifest to the degree considered by a 100 percent rating.

The Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD most closely approximates a disability picture with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas as contemplated by the criteria for a 70 percent rating. Here, the VA examination and clinical records document that, as a result of his PTSD, the Veteran experienced: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; and suicidal ideation. These symptoms are considered by the 70 percent rating.

The analysis progresses as to whether a 100 percent rating is warranted. A psychiatric disability picture of less than total impairment is suggested by the level of functioning related to occupational and social relations. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran was oriented to all spheres; had a normal, logical, and coherent thought process; normal speech; intact language; and was able to provide relevant information to make himself understood. The December 2019 medical opinion offered that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner did not opine the Veteran suffered from total occupational and social impairment. Significantly, symptoms noted during the evaluation period do not suggest total impairment. 

The disorder resulted in no hallucinations, delusions, unusual thought content, or perceptual- or behavioral disturbances aside from one outburst when a coworker asked the Veteran to climb a pole when he was on light duty. While the Veteran reported suicidal ideation, there is no evidence he is or has been any persistent danger to himself or others. There is no evidence the Veteran cannot perform the activities of daily living due to his PTSD or that he has any disorientation. He is able to maintain relationships with family and friends, attend doctor's appointments, meaningfully participate in medical treatment, and can care for himself. Therefore, a PTSD disability picture of total occupational and social impairment is not shown during the period on appeal.

(Continued on the next page)

Based on the overall disability picture, the Board finds the evidence weighs persuasively against a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD; and the claim is denied. 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Treadwell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.