Citation Nr: A25030837
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-468881
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2005 to November 2008.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that rating decision, the RO denied service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Bilateral Hearing Loss 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds additional development is necessary for proper adjudication of the Veteran's claims.  

Under the AMA, VA has a duty to assist claimants in obtaining evidence to substantiate claims returned for readjudication by a higher-level adjudicator or the Board after identification of a duty to assist error, until the time VA issues notice of a decision on a claim or returned claim.  38?C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  Notably, unlike in the legacy system, VA's duty to assist ends when VA issues the notice of decision on a claim or returned claim and does not recommence unless a supplemental claim is submitted, or a claim is returned to the AOJ for correction of an error.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  The statute specifically provides that the Secretary's duty to assist shall not apply to review on appeal by the Board.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e)(2).  Thus, VA has no duty to assist an appellant in obtaining evidence to substantiate a claim during the period after issuance of the notice of a decision and before a claim is returned for correction of a duty to assist error on the part of the AOJ.

Given the limitations of when the duty to assist applies, remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

First, remand is required to obtain service records and medical records, including the Veteran's entry and discharge examinations.  Specifically, the Veteran's service treatment records note visits with audiology on December 8, 2005, and April 13, 2008, at which time threshold audiograms were recorded, however such audiograms are missing from the claims file.  VA has a duty to assist claimants to obtain evidence needed to substantiate a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  This includes making as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records from a Federal department or agency, including, but not limited to, military records.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  VA will end its efforts to obtain records only where it concludes that the records sought do not exist or that further efforts to obtain those records would be futile, such as where the Federal department or agency advises VA that the requested records do not exist, or the custodian does not have them.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  The RO has not made a formal finding regarding whether any additional records are unavailable or do not exist.  Accordingly, remand is required.

Second, according to the record the Veteran failed to report for the initial audiological VA examination in December 2023, because he "cancelled the request."  However, the December 11, 2023 "Exam Scheduling Request" notification letter states, "The Veteran does not need to report for all examinations for the following Contention: Hearing Loss."  See Exam Request, received December 11, 2023.  Additionally, the Veteran missed his first examination date in October 2023 and notified the VA he was working out of state at the time and requested a new examination.  Accordingly, the Board finds good cause to reschedule for a new examination, and that the AOJ failed to properly notify the Veteran of his last examination.  

As such, a remand is necessary in order to correct these pre-decisional errors.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's service treatment and examination records from his period of service, to include his December 8, 2005, and April 13, 2008, audiograms.  Document for the claims file which repositories were contacted and why.  If any requested records are not available, or the search for any such records otherwise yields negative results, that fact must clearly be documented in the claims file.  Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile.  The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified, and this should be documented for the record.  Required notice must be provided to the Veteran and his or her representative.

2. Obtain the Veteran's outstanding VA treatment records and all such relevant records from any other sufficiently identified VA facility. The non-existence or unavailability of such records must be verified, and this should be documented for the record.  Required notice must be provided to the Veteran and his or her representative.

3. After all efforts have been exhausted to obtain and associate with the claims file any additional treatment records, schedule the Veteran for a VA audiological examination to determine whether the Veteran has a current hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  The examiner must review the Veteran's claims file in conjunction with the examination, to include his assertions in his June 2023 Fully Developed Claim.

During the examination, the examiner should obtain a detailed medical history regarding the onset and course of any hearing loss, as well as any noise exposure before, during and after military service.  

Following review of the record and examination, the examiner should state whether the Veteran has hearing loss under 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

For any hearing loss found, the examiner should opine whether the Veteran's hearing loss at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) began during service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include the Veteran's conceded noise exposure therein.  Why or why not?

In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any statements regarding onset of symptomatology and any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service.  

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports of symptomatology, he or she must provide a reason for doing so.

The absence of evidence of treatment in the Veteran's service treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the basis for a negative opinion.

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ardalan, Nina

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.