Citation Nr: A25030317
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240212-417473
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right carpal tunnel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left carpal tunnel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include lumbar surgery, is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding the Veteran has had sleep apnea at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1989 to October 1996, June 2005 to August 2005, March 2006 to May 2006, and October 2006 to September 2007, with additional service in the Air National Guard. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for right carpal tunnel syndrome, left carpal tunnel syndrome, and a low back condition, including lumbar surgery, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Sleep apnea

The Veteran asserts that he suffers from sleep apnea that is the result of his time in active service. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Generally, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in service; and (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In adjudicating these claims, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of the Veteran. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection." Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 405 (1995) (lay person competent to testify to pain and visible flatness of his feet).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim. The Veteran's service treatment records are silent with regard to any complaints, symptoms, diagnosis, or treatment of any sleep apnea or sleep condition. 

There are no post-service medical records diagnosing the Veteran with sleep apnea or a sleep condition. However, the Board notes that consideration of the functional impairment of earning capacity resulting from the Veteran's claimed disability must be given if no diagnosis is of record. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

The Board finds the available medical evidence of record does not show any neck condition that has impaired the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks, and aside from the Veteran's bare assertion of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, he has not proffered any lay statements as to functional impairment caused by a neck condition. Thus, the Veteran's claimed neck condition has not demonstrated functional impairment of earning capacity. Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1368. 

The Board notes the Veteran's contention in his October 2023 claim that he has sleep apnea that is due to 22 years of performing aircraft maintenance. The Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to provide opinions on certain subjective medical issues and of observable symptomatology. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); see also, Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011). However, the Veteran has not demonstrated the medical training or experience required to provide a competent opinion regarding a specific diagnosis. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to this issue. However, as there is no competent and credible evidence of a current disability, a VA examination is not warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4); McLendon, supra.

The Board notes that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability benefits. See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1997). Therefore, in the absence of current disability, there can be no valid claim. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

Therefore, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim, service connection for sleep apnea must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

Right carpal tunnel syndrome

Left carpal tunnel syndrome

The Veteran asserts that his bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome is related to his time in active service. 

The Veteran suffered from right wrist pain after falling on his wrist during his time in active service. See March 2009 Service Treatment Records; April 2009 Service Treatment Records. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. The Veteran asserted that his symptoms began in approximately 2005. The Veteran was an airplane mechanic and repetitively used wrenches. His symptoms began in his 30s and worsened over time. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's carpal tunnel was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner noted there was a lack of complaints noted in active service suggesting a median neuropathy and lack of medical records since service stating such complaint. The VA examiner reported that in light of the decades of mechanic work since service, it was less likely that the in-service duties caused the current complaints. 

The Board finds the November 2023 VA examination to be inadequate because while the VA examiner found that there was a lack of complaints noted in active service, the examiner did not discuss the Veteran's 2009 right wrist injury, documented in his service treatment records. Therefore, the VA examiner's opinion is based, in part, on an inaccurate premise. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993). Additionally, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he began suffering from symptoms while he was still serving on active duty. As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service symptoms and all symptoms thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate). 

A remand is warranted for an adequate VA examination. 

Low back condition, to include lumbar surgery

The Veteran asserts that his low back condition is the result of his time in active service. 

The Veteran's service treatment records document low back pain and a lumbar strain. See March 1995 Service Treatment Records; May 1995 Service Treatment Records; January 1996 Service Treatment Records; July 1996 Service Treatment Record. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. The VA examiner found that the Veteran had a 1999 lumbar surgery. The Veteran asserted his symptoms began in approximately 1991 when he was hurt moving and towing planes and shoveling snow. The Veteran's symptoms worsened over time, and he had a L4-5 disc fusion in 1999. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed low back condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The VA examiner noted the Veteran's current residuals of lumbar surgery were less likely caused by the low back complaint during service as there was a lack of persistent complaint in the interim. There were no persistent back complaints at the Veteran's time of separation and a lack of notes with detail of the back procedure and rationale for performing it. The VA examiner reported that in light of the lack of notes about and around the procedure, it was less likely that the medical records support that the complaints years prior led to "disc fusion" alleged. 

The Board finds the November 2023 VA examination to be inadequate. The VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he began suffering from symptoms while he was still serving on active duty. As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service symptoms and all symptoms thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate). Additionally, the VA examiner relied on a lack of medical documentation in his opinion. Solely relying on the lack of medical documentation in service cannot serve as the basis for the opinion provided. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a Veteran's report of in-service injury and instead relied on the lack of evidence in the service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).

A remand is warranted for an adequate VA examination. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician(s) to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination. The examiner must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, has been reviewed.

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran. The examination should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation.

After eliciting a full history from the Veteran, conducting a complete review of the claims file (including all available medical treatment records), performing an examination of the Veteran, and completing any clinically indicated diagnostic testing, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome that manifested in or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology therein.

The VA examiner is asked to address the Veteran's contentions that he began having symptoms of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome while he was in active service, as well as the Veteran's March and April 2009 service treatment records that indicate he suffered a right wrist injury while in service. 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding his symptomatology and medical history, including statements regarding the onset, severity, and duration of his symptoms, must be specifically acknowledged, and considered in formulating any opinions concerning his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

2. The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician(s) to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed low back condition, including lumbar surgery.

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination. The examiner must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, has been reviewed.

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran. The examination should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation.

After eliciting a full history from the Veteran, conducting a complete review of the claims file (including all available medical treatment records), performing an examination of the Veteran, and completing any clinically indicated diagnostic testing, the examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a low back condition, including lumbar surgery, that manifested in or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology therein.

The VA examiner is asked to address the Veteran's contentions that he began having symptoms of a low back condition while he was in active service. 

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding his symptomatology and medical history, including statements regarding the onset, severity, and duration of his symptoms, must be specifically acknowledged, and considered in formulating any opinions concerning his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.