Citation Nr: A25030032
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-448404
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal fusion is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation of 40 percent, but no greater, for left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation of 30 percent, but no greater, for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation of 30 percent, but no greater, for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability evaluation based on individual unemployability (TDIU) based on a single service-connected disability is granted.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) at the "s" rate is granted.

The appeal of the award of continued entitlement to basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) is dismissed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At no point during the applicable period did the Veteran's lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome manifest by ankylosis or its equivalent.

2. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran's right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy manifested by no more than moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

3. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran's left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy manifested by no more than moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

4. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran's right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy manifested by no more than severe incomplete paralysis.  

5. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran's left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy manifested by no more than severe incomplete paralysis

6. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran was precluded from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment from a single service-connected disability.  

7. Throughout the applicable period, the Veteran had a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent disabling and additional disability independently rated as 60 percent or more disabling.

8. In the April 2022 rating decision, entitlement to basic eligibility for DEA was continued.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal fusion are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in of 40 percent, but no greater, are met for left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

5. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation of 30 percent, but no greater, for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

6. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

7. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation of 30 percent, but no greater, for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

8. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 30 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

9. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19, 4.25, 4.26.

10. The criteria for SMC at the "s" rate based on having one disability rated as 100 percent disabling and an additional disability or disabilities independently rated at least 60 percent disabling are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

11. As the benefits sought on appeal have been granted in full, there remains no question of law or fact on appeal, and the appeal is dismissed as to the claim for entitlement to basic eligibility for DEA.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d)(5); 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1977 to January 1978.  Unfortunately, he passed away in August 2022.  

The appellant is his surviving spouse and has been substituted in his place for purposes of this appeal.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in June 2023 (back and radiculopathy), July 2023 (SMC), and December 2023 (TDIU, and DEA).  

In December 2020, these matters were last before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board).  In a December 2020 rating decision, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) issued a rating decision effectuating the Board's adjudication of the matters.  

In December 2021, within one year of the Board decision, VBA received a VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim Application) covering these specific matters.  This claim has been continuously pursued since February 21, 2012.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(c).

In an April 2022 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) adjudicated the Veteran's claims for an increased evaluation of intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) and spinal fusion, as well as for increased evaluations of right sciatic radiculopathy, left sciatic radiculopathy, right femoral radiculopathy and left femoral radiculopathy, eligibility for DEA benefits, and entitlement to TDIU.  

In March 2023, the appellant, having been substituted, submitted a VA Form 20-0996 (Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review), requesting review of the April 2022 rating decision.  In the June 2023 higher-level review decision, the AOJ adjudicated the matters.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 decision for the back, radiculopathy, DEA, and TDIU issues.  

In July 2023, the appeal period having been tolled by the Veteran's death, the appellant submitted another VA Form 20-0996, again requesting review of the April 2022 rating decision to the extent that it denied entitlement to a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability, entitlement to DEA benefits, and entitlement to SMC at the "s" rate.  In December 2023, the AOJ issued a higher-level review decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 decision.  

The Board notes that with respect to the issue of SMC, this issue was adjudicated in the July 2023 rating decision and the December 2023 higher level review decision.  The Veteran identified both decisions on his 10182.  As the evidentiary window is more favorable for the July 2023 decision, this is the decision on appeal for the issue of SMC.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 AOJ decision for the back, radiculopathy, DEA, and TDIU issues, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, and the July 2023 decision for SMC.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal fusion.

The Veteran's lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome and spinal fusion (low back disability) is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5237.  

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine to 15 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  Id.  at Note (1).  

Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching."  Id.  at Note (5).  Additionally, fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) is "always" considered favorable ankylosis.  Id.  [Include any other relevant Note(s).]

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."  The spine has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.]

On VA examination in July 2013, the Veteran reported flare ups of the lumbar spine exacerbated with standing greater than five minutes or walking more than a few yards.  He related that he avoided these activities due to discomfort.  He takes ibuprofen as needed.  The examiner noted the Veteran was unable to perform range of motion testing in flexion or extension due to a fear of falling as a result of an inability to sense his lower extremities from knees to toes due to diabetic peripheral neuropathy, as opposed to any true inability to flex or extend.  Right lateral flexion was to 15 degrees and left lateral flexion was to 10 degrees.  Bilateral rotation was to 20 degrees.  Pain was noted at zero degrees for all range of motion testing.  The Veteran's additional functional loss after repetitive use included less movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, pain on movement, disturbance in locomotion, and interference with standing and/or weight bearing.  Muscle spasms resulted in abnormal gait and abnormal spine contour.  Reflexes were normal.  The Veteran was not found to have IVDS.

VA medical center (VAMC) and private treatment records are present in the period between the July 2013 VA examination and the March 2019 VA examination; however, there is no range of motion testing indicated.  The only treatment of note in the file shows treatment for upper low back pain in June and December 2018.

VA examination in March 2019 resulted in diagnoses of lumbosacral strain, IVDS, and spinal fusion.  The Veteran reported treatment with Aleve.  He stated he was prescribed muscle relaxants but stopped taking them.  The Veteran reported flare ups described as pain when climbing stairs or sitting or standing for too long.  The Veteran related that cold weather increased his pain.  During flare-ups, the Veteran stated pain was 10 out of 10, whereas his pain was 8 out of 10 during other periods.  Range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 50 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, right lateral flexion to 30 degrees, left lateral flection to 25 degrees, right lateral rotation to 15 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 25 degrees.  The combined range of motion was 160 degrees.  The examiner noted pain on range of motion testing which caused additional functional loss.  The examiner stated an opinion regarding functional loss during a flare-up could not be provided without directly observing the flare-up.  There was no evidence of ankylosis; however, the examiner found the veteran would be further limited by adhesions including an impaired ability to bend, flex, rotate, and perform prolonged standing, walk and climb stairs.  The examiner found the Veteran had IVDS but that he had not been prescribed periods of bedrest.

On VA examination in December 2019, the Veteran reported flare-ups of the low back disability that occurred constantly and that were severe, precipitated by any physical activity.  The Veteran was examined during a flare-up.  Flexion was to 30 degrees.  Extension was to 15 degrees.  Right and left lateral flexion were each to 15 degrees.  Right lateral rotation was to 10 degrees.  Left lateral rotation was to 10 degrees.  Each plane of range of motion was limited by pain, of which there was evidence in weightbearing.  The examiner ruled out ankylosis.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 40 percent for the Veteran's low back disability.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to pain, limited range of motion, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, repetitive use, pain during flare-ups, and pain during repetitive use over time, etc.  However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  Ankylosis or its equivalent has never been shown on objective examination.  On VA examination in March 2019 the Veteran could not flex or extend his spine due to a fear of falling secondary to non-service-connected disability, as opposed to true fixation of the spine.  

Consideration has also been given to assigning a rating under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, the evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  The Veteran was never prescribed bedrest by a physician for his IVDS.

In reaching this determination, the Board acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use," Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the beneficial effects of medication are not known and thus the Board has not considered it in the adjudication of this matter.  Moreover, at the most recent VA examination, the Veteran was examined during a flare-up.  The Board has resolved all reasonable doubt in the appellant's favor.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 40 percent for the Veteran's low back disability.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 40 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

Increased Evaluations for Radiculopathy

The sciatic nerve radiculopathy is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.  The femoral nerve radiculopathy is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

Under Diagnostic Code 8520, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild and incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate and incomplete paralysis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe and incomplete paralysis, and a 60 percent rating is warranted for severe and incomplete paralysis with marked muscular atrophy.

Under Diagnostic Code 8526, a 10 percent rating is warranted for mild and incomplete paralysis of the femoral nerve.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis and a 40 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the quadriceps extensor muscles.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions.  However, although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, it is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 and conduct its own analysis before determining whether the M21-1 provisions may be relied upon to support its decision, thereby fulfilling part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases for its decision.  See Overton v. Willkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263-64 (2018).

M21-1 offers the following guidance on cases where a peripheral nerve disability is only manifested by sensory impairment: "The mild level of evaluation would be more reasonably assigned when sensory symptoms are recurrent but not continuous, assigned a lower medical grade reflecting less impairment, and/or affecting a smaller area in the nerve distribution.  Reserve the moderate level of evaluation for the most significant and disabling cases of sensory-only involvement.  These are cases where the sensory symptoms are continuous, the symptoms are assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment and/or they affect a larger area in the nerve distribution."  This provision does not mean that if there is any impairment that is non-sensory (or involves a non-sensory component) such as a reflex abnormality, weakness or muscle atrophy, the disability must be evaluated as greater than moderate.  Significant and widespread sensory impairment may potentially indicate the same or even more disability than a case involving a minimally reduced or increased reflex or minimally reduced strength.  M21-1, III.iv.4.N.4.b.

"Moderately severe" incomplete paralysis is the maximum rating for sciatic nerve neuritis not characterized by the organic changes specified in 38 C.F.R. § 4.123. This term would be appropriate for "[m]otor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability.  Atrophy may be present.  However, for marked muscular atrophy, see the criteria for a severe evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520." M21-1, III.iv.4.N.4.c.

M21-1 further provides, for "severe" incomplete paralysis of a peripheral nerve, with which marked muscle atrophy is expected. "In general, severe incomplete paralysis of a peripheral nerve involves motor and/or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability."  Id. "Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve."  Id.

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy.

Upon VA examination in July 2013, sensory feeling was absent in the bilateral upper anterior thighs, knees, lower legs, and feet.  Severe paresthesias and numbness was found in the right lower extremity, but not intermittent or constant pain.  The examiner indicated the Veteran's sciatic nerve roots were involved bilaterally and resulted in moderate bilateral radiculopathy.  Hip flexion was 4/5, but motor examination was otherwise normal.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent in the knee and ankle.  

Upon VA examination in March 2019, the Veteran was found to have moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right lower extremity.  The examiner found the Veteran's sciatic nerve root was involved and resulted in overall moderate radiculopathy.  On motor examination, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle plantar flexion were 4/5.  Ankle dorsiflexion was 3/5 and great toe extension was 0/5, or absent.  Reflexes were absent.  Sensation was absent in the thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, feet/toes and decreased in the upper anterior thigh.  There was, however, no muscle atrophy.  The examiner indicated involvement of the femoral and sciatic nerves.

During VA examination in December 2019, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion were 4/5 bilaterally.  Also bilaterally, ankle plantar flexion and great toe extension were 3/5.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were 1+ (hypoactive), bilaterally.  Sensation was decreased in the upper anterior thighs, thighs/knees, lower legs/ankles and absent in the feet/toes.  The examiner noted constant (may be excruciating at times) moderate pain, as well as severe intermittent (usually dull) pain, severe paresthesias/dysesthesias and severe numbness, bilaterally.  The examiner characterized the condition as severe and indicated involvement of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifest by impairment of motor functions, sensory disturbance. loss of reflexes but not muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  The Board also finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by marked muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  Objective examinations have never shown any muscle atrophy, let alone marked muscle atrophy, or complete paralysis.  The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to moderately severe incomplete paralysis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim for a compensable rating in excess of 40 percent for sciatic radiculopathy of the right lower extremity.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 40 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, and in excess of 40 percent from that date.

Upon VA examination in July 2013, muscle strength was 4/5 (active movement against some resistance) in hip flexion on the left, but 5/5 (normal) in knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion and great toe extension.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent in the knee and ankle.  Sensation to light touch was absent.  There was not constant or intermittent pain.  Paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness were characterized as moderate by the examiner as was the overall severity of the sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  

The Veteran received another VA examination in March 2019.  On motor examination, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle plantar flexion were 4/5.  Ankle dorsiflexion was 3/5 and great toe extension was 0/5, or absent.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent.  Sensation was absent in the thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, feet/toes and decreased in the upper anterior thigh.  The examiner characterized the pain as mild and intermittent, usually dull, but not constant.  There were no paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, but there was moderate numbness.  The examiner indicated involvement of the femoral and sciatic nerves and characterized the severity as moderate.

During VA examination in December 2019, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion were 4/5 bilaterally on motor examination.  Also bilaterally, ankle plantar flexion and great toe extension were 3/5.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were 1+ (hypoactive), bilaterally.  Sensation was decreased in the upper anterior thighs, thighs/knees, lower legs/ankles and absent in the feet/toes.  The examiner noted constant (may be excruciating at times) moderate constant pain, as well as severe intermittent (usually dull) pain, severe paresthesias/dysesthesias and severe numbness, bilaterally.  The examiner characterized the condition as severe and indicated involvement of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

In resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that a 40 percent evaluation is warranted prior to October 15, 2019.  The only notable difference between the sciatic radiculopathy of the left extremity versus the right is that the pain in the left lower extremity was characterized as mild as opposed to moderate by the VA examiner in March 2019.  However, it is salient to the Board that VA examination nine months later in December 2019 showed that the clinical findings regarding the severity of the sciatic radiculopathy were identical.  Thus, the Board concludes that prior to October 15, 2019, a 40 percent evaluation is warranted for sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  

Because the Board has effectuated a 40 percent evaluation throughout the applicable period, the question now is whether an evaluation in excess of 40 percent is warranted.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifest by impairment of motor functions, sensory disturbance, loss of reflexes but not muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  The Board also finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by marked muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  Objective examinations have never shown any muscle atrophy, let alone marked muscle atrophy, or complete paralysis.  The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to moderately severe incomplete paralysis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, and in excess of 30 percent from that date.

Upon VA examination in July 2013, the Veteran's sensory feeling was absent the bilateral upper anterior thighs, knees, lower legs, and feet.  Severe paresthesias and numbness were found in the right lower extremity, but not intermittent or constant pain.  The examiner indicated the Veteran's sciatic nerve roots were involved bilaterally and resulted in moderate bilateral radiculopathy.  Hip flexion was 4/5, but motor examination was otherwise normal.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent in the knee and ankle.  

Upon VA examination in March 2019, the Veteran was found to have moderate intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right lower extremity.  The examiner found the Veteran's sciatic nerve root was involved and resulted in overall moderate radiculopathy.  On motor examination, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle plantar flexion were 4/5.  Ankle dorsiflexion was 3/5 and great toe extension was 0/5, or absent.  Reflexes were absent.  Sensation was absent in the thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, feet/toes and decreased in the upper anterior thigh.  There was, however, no muscle atrophy.  The examiner indicated involvement of the femoral and sciatic nerves and characterized the impairment as moderate.

During VA examination in December 2019, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion were 4/5 bilaterally.  Also bilaterally, ankle plantar flexion and great toe extension were 3/5.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were 1+ (hypoactive), bilaterally.  Sensation was decreased in the upper anterior thighs, thighs/knees, lower legs/ankles and absent in the feet/toes.  The examiner noted constant (may be excruciating at times) moderate constant pain, as well as severe intermittent (usually dull) pain, severe paresthesias/dysesthesias and severe numbness, bilaterally.  The examiner characterized the condition as severe and indicated involvement of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

Resolving any doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that a 30 percent evaluation is warranted prior to October 15, 2019, for the Veteran's right femoral radiculopathy.  Here, motor impairment has been present since the outset of the claim, along with severe sensory manifestations.  VA examination in March 2019 reflects significant motor impairment, e.g., loss of great toe extension, along with constant and intermittent pain.   Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifest by impairment of motor functions, sensory disturbance and loss of reflexes but not muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  

Now that the Board has effectuated a 30 percent evaluation prior to October 15, 2019, the question is whether an evaluation in excess of 30 percent is warranted throughout the applicable period.  

The Board finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by complete paralysis.  Objective examinations have never shown complete paralysis of the quadriceps extensor muscles.  The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to severe incomplete paralysis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy prior to October 15, 2019, and in excess of 30 percent from that date.

During VA examination in July 2013, muscle strength was 4/5 (active movement against some resistance) in hip flexion on the left, but 5/5 (normal) in knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion and great toe extension.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent in the knee and ankle.  Sensation to light touch was absent.  There was not constant or intermittent pain.  Paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness were characterized as moderate by the examiner as was the overall severity of the sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity.  

The Veteran received another VA examination in March 2019.  Motor examination, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle plantar flexion were 4/5.  Ankle dorsiflexion was 3/5 and great toe extension was 0/5, or absent.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were absent.  Sensation was absent in the thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, feet/toes and decreased in the upper anterior thigh.  The examiner characterized the pain as mild and intermittent, usually dull, but not constant.  There were no paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, but there was moderate numbness.  The examiner indicated involvement of the femoral and sciatic nerves and characterized the severity as moderate.

During VA examination in December 2019, hip flexion, knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion were 4/5 bilaterally.  Also bilaterally, ankle plantar flexion and great toe extension were 3/5.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were 1+ (hypoactive), bilaterally.  Sensation was decreased in the upper anterior thighs, thighs/knees, lower legs/ankles and absent in the feet/toes.  The examiner noted constant (may be excruciating at times) moderate constant pain, as well as severe intermittent (usually dull) pain, severe paresthesias/dysesthesias and severe numbness, bilaterally.  The examiner characterized the condition as severe and indicated involvement of the sciatic and femoral nerves.

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that a 30 percent evaluation is warranted prior to October 15, 2019, for the Veteran's left femoral radiculopathy.  Here, motor impairment has been present since the outset of the claim, along with severe sensory manifestations.  VA examination in March 2019 reflects significant motor impairment, e.g., loss of great toe extension, along with constant and intermittent pain.   Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifest by impairment of motor functions, sensory disturbance and loss of reflexes but not muscle atrophy or complete paralysis.  

Now that the Board has effectuated a 30 percent evaluation prior to October 15, 2019, the question is whether an evaluation in excess of 30 percent is warranted throughout the applicable period.  

The Board finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by complete paralysis.  Objective examinations have never shown complete paralysis of the quadriceps extensor muscles.  The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to severe incomplete paralysis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8526.

Entitlement to a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability.

A TDIU has been in effect throughout the course of the claim and appeal, i.e. since February 21, 2012, and a 100 percent disability evaluation will be in effect during the applicable period following the effectuation of the Board's awards herein.  Nevertheless, the appellant seeks the award of a TDIU based solely on the late Veteran's service-connected low back disability in order to maximize benefits and award SMC at the "s" rate.  VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether a veteran's disabilities establish entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114.  See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 293 (2008).

Resolving reasonable doubt in the appellant's favor, the Board concludes that a TDIU is warranted based on a single service-connected disability, particularly the Veteran's low back disability.  VA examination of the spine in July 2013 reflects that the "physical ailments" of the Veteran's back would prevent any active or sedentary employment at that time.  In support of the claim, the appellant submitted an October 2021 vocational assessment showing that the Veteran's low back disability alone would have precluded substantially gainful employment since February 2012.  The severity of the low back disability, evaluated at 40 percent disabling, is commensurate with significant disability.  Thus, in resolving reasonable doubt in appellant's favor, entitlement to a TDIU based on a single service-connected disability is granted.

Entitlement to SMC at the "s" rate.

The appellant asserts that SMC at the "s" rate is warranted on account of the award of a TDIU in conjunction with other separate disabilities rated at 60 percent or more disabling.   SMC benefits should be awarded when a veteran is eligible for them and without the need to file a separate claim.  Perciavalle v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 117, 122 (2019).  VA has a "well-established" duty to maximize a claimant's benefits.  See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).  This duty to maximize benefits requires VA to assess all disabilities to determine whether any combination of disabilities establishes entitlement SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114.  See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008).

A veteran may be entitled to SMC if, in addition to having a single permanent disability rated 100 percent disabling under the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, the Veteran has an additional disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, separate, and distinct from the permanent disability rated as 100 percent disabling and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).  The total disability requirement must be met by a single disability and a TDIU based on a single disability will satisfy this requirement.  The 60 percent requirement may be met by applying the combined rating of the Veteran's remaining disabilities.  See Bradley at 280 (noting that combined ratings satisfy the second requirement but not the first).

Here, a TDIU has been awarded based solely on the service-connected low back disability.  Also, throughout the applicable period, the Veteran had an additional disability rated at 60 percent or more separate from the service-connected low back disability.  Because the femoral and sciatic neuropathies result from a common etiology and affect a single body system, they are considered as one disability and, when combined, their evaluation exceeds 60 percent.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.25, 4.26.  Thus, entitlement to SMC at the "s" rate is granted.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Continued entitlement to basic eligibility for DEA.

The April 2022 rating decision continued entitlement to DEA.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the appeal as to this issue has been rendered moot because the benefits sought on appeal have been granted in full.  There remains no question of law or fact for the Board to resolve; therefore, the purported appeal as to this issue must be dismissed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(d)(5).

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Joseph R. Keselyak, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.