Citation Nr: A25030881
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 241002-479239
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to specially adapted housing is denied.

Entitlement to a special home adaptation is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for arthritis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a lung disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for vertigo is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tremors is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran served in the Army before September 11, 2001 and had no disability rated as permanent and total which included or was due to the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, was due to burns of any depth or thickness, residuals of an inhalation injury, loss or loss of use of both lower extremities, or the loss of use of one lower extremity with residuals of organic disease or injury or loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect balance and propulsion as to preclude unaided locomotion. The Veteran also had no disability of any rating due to blindness in both eyes.

2. The Veteran's skin cancer was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

3. The Veteran's GERD was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

4. The Veteran's arthritis was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

5. The Veteran's lung disability was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

6. The Veteran's sleep apnea was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

7. The Veteran's vertigo was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

8. The Veteran's tremors were not present in service or until many years thereafter and are not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

9. The Veteran's neck disability was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service. 

10. The Veteran's back disability was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

11. The Veteran's right upper extremity radiculopathy was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service or a service-connected disability.

12. The Veteran's left upper extremity radiculopathy was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service or a service-connected disability.

13. The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service or a service-connected disability.

14. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy was not present in service or until many years thereafter and is not otherwise related to the Veteran's active service or a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to specially adapted housing are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.350, 3.809.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a special home adaptation are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.350, 3.809a.

3. The criteria for service connection for skin cancer have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

4. The criteria for service connection for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

5. The criteria for service connection for arthritis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024).

6. The criteria for service connection for a lung disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

7. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

8. The criteria for service connection for vertigo have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

9. The criteria for service connection for tremors have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2024).

10. The criteria for service connection for a neck disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024).

11. The criteria for service connection for a back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2024).

12. The criteria for service connection for right upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310 (2024).

13. The criteria for service connection for left upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310 (2024).

14. The criteria for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310 (2024).

15. The criteria for service connection for left lower upper extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from October 1960 to April 1961.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from January 2024 and September 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In his October 2024 appeal to the Board, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the AOJ at the time of the decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Of note, in the September 13, 2024, rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudicating the claims of service connection for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. §3.104.

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that less than one year has elapsed since the October 1, 2024, mailing of notice of the rating decision on appeal. Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal prior to expiration of the one year period. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). However, this case has been advanced on the Board's docket and this constitutes a waiver of the Veteran's ability to request a docket switch. The assignment of advanced on the docket (AOD) status is sufficient for the Board to proceed with an adjudication in this appeal. See Clark v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 92 (2018) (allowing waiver of a right to a particular time period for submission of evidence to be waived if there is "a voluntary, knowing, and intentional waiver of that right").

Specially Adapted Housing and Special Home Adaptation

The Veteran submitted a claim for specially adapted housing or special home adaptation. He did not specify which disabilities necessitated the specially adapted housing or special home adaptation. 

Specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who is entitled to compensation for permanent and total disability due to:

(1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017;

(2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity;

(3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or

(4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.

Specially adapted housing is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to:

(5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities;

(6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or,

(7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which affect the functions of balance or propulsion.

38 U.S.C. § 2101 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 (a), (b), (d).

Specially adapted housing may also be available to a veteran who served on or after September 11, 2001, who has a permanent disability that was incurred during such service, and which results in loss or loss of use of one or more extremities which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulating without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair. See 38 U.S.C. § 2101 (a)(2)(C).

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran can qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if he has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees; such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature.

Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a veteran that has a permanent and total disability which:

(1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands;

(2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk;

(3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or,

(4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).

38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Generally, an eligible veteran will be provided one-time only assistance with a special home adaptation grant or specially adapted housing. However, issuance of a special home adaptation grant before a veteran becomes eligible for specially adapted housing under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 does not preclude a later grant for specially adapted housing. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a).

The Veteran is service connected for bilateral hearing loss rated as 30 percent and tinnitus rated as 10 percent, with a total rating of 40 percent.

As noted above, the Veteran served before September 11, 2001 and there is no evidence of any disability rated as permanent and total which included the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, was due to burns of any depth or thickness, residuals of an inhalation injury, loss or loss of use of one lower extremity with loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affects balance and propulsion as to preclude unaided locomotion, or loss or loss of use of both lower extremities. There is also no evidence of any disability (of any rating) due to blindness in both eyes. Nor did the Veteran make any such contentions.

Therefore, in light of all the above, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to specially adapted housing or special home adaptation are not met. Accordingly, entitlement to specially adapted housing or special home adaptation is not warranted.

Service Connection - Skin Cancer, GERD, Arthritis, Lung Disability, and Sleep Apnea

The Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea. Specifically, he testified that he hauled toxic chemicals during service and was exposed to the chemicals during transport in pickup trucks. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment reports (STRs) reveals a normal clinical evaluation of all relevant body systems at the August 1960 entrance examination. The records do not include any complaints, findings, or treatment for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea. Clinical evaluation of all relevant body systems was normal at the March 1961 separation examination. 

Associated with the claims file is a March 2023 memorandum which indicates that the Veteran did not participate in any toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service. The Veteran's DD Form 214 does not indicate any foreign service. 

Post-service treatment reports reveal diagnoses for skin cancer, possible GERD, arthritis of various joints including the wrist and knee, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthmatic bronchitis, pneumonia, and sleep apnea as early as 1996. 

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea is not warranted. 

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has contended that he was exposed to toxic chemicals while transporting them during service; however, the Board does not find these statements to be credible and further finds that the Veteran's claims are outweighed by the other evidence of record. As indicated in the March 2023 memorandum, the Veteran's service records do not indicate any TERA during service. Moreover, the Veteran is not competent to identify the substances which he transported during service. 

A review of post-service medical records revealed that the Veteran was first diagnosed with his claimed disabilities no earlier than 1996, many years after service. Additionally, none of the medical evidence includes an opinion linking any of the claimed disabilities to service. 

The Board acknowledges that VA examinations and/or medical opinions were not obtained in relation to the Veteran's claimed skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea. However, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is sufficient to decide the claims, and such development is not warranted. In this regard, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea that may be directly related to his active service. Further, the Veteran has provided nothing beyond a bare assertion to trigger VA's duty to assist. As such, there was no duty for VA to obtain an examination or medical opinion with regard to the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) (2024); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

While the Veteran believes his skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea are related to service, the Veteran is not competent to provide an etiology opinion relating skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea to service or any event, injury, disease, or toxic exposure during service because he is not shown to have the requisite medical training. Moreover, the Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence that relates skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea to service.

In sum, the Veteran did not complain of, receive treatment for, or have a diagnosis of skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea during active service and there is no competent evidence of record indicating that any currently present skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea were otherwise related to his active service.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for skin cancer, GERD, arthritis, a lung disability, and sleep apnea is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Service Connection - Vertigo and Tremors

The Veteran claimed entitlement to vertigo and tremors secondary to in-service toxic exposure. Specifically, the Veteran contends that he hauled toxic chemicals during service and was exposed to the chemicals while serving. 

A review of the Veteran's STRs reveals a normal clinical evaluation of all relevant body systems at the August 1960 entrance examination. The records do not include any complaints, findings, or treatment for vertigo and tremors. Clinical evaluation of all relevant body systems was normal at the March 1961 separation examination. 

As noted above, a March 2023 memorandum which indicates that the Veteran did not participate in any TERA during service. 

Post service VA treatment reports reveal diagnoses of vertigo and tremor, exertional tremor, and hand tremor in 2024. 

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for vertigo and tremor is not warranted. 

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has contended that he was exposed to toxic chemicals while transporting them during service; however, the Board does not find these statements to be credible and further finds that the Veteran's claims are outweighed by the other evidence of record. As indicated in the March 2023 memorandum, the Veteran's service records do not indicate any TERA during service. Moreover, the Veteran is not competent to identify the substances which he transported. 

A review of post-service medical records revealed that the Veteran was first diagnosed with his claimed disabilities no earlier than 2024, many years after service. Moreover, none of the medical evidence includes an opinion linking any of the claimed disabilities to service. 

The Board acknowledges that VA examinations and/or medical opinions were not obtained in relation to the Veteran's claimed vertigo and tremors. However, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is sufficient to decide the claims, and such development is not warranted. In this regard, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has vertigo and tremors that may be directly related to his active service. Further, the Veteran has provided nothing beyond a bare assertion to trigger VA's duty to assist. As such, there was no duty for VA to obtain an examination or medical opinion with regard to the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for vertigo and tremors. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) (2024); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

While the Veteran believes his vertigo and tremors are related to service, the Veteran is not competent to provide an etiology opinion relating vertigo and tremors to service or any event, injury, disease, or toxic exposure during service because he is not shown to have the requisite medical training. Moreover, the Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence that relates vertigo and tremors to service.

In sum, the Veteran did not complain of, receive treatment for, or have a diagnosis of vertigo and tremors during active service and there is no competent evidence of record indicating that any currently present vertigo and tremors were otherwise related to his active service.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for vertigo and tremors is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Service Connection - Back and Neck Disabilities, Bilateral Upper and Lower Extremity Radiculopathy

The Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for back and neck disabilities and bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy secondary to a neck disability and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy secondary to a back disability.

A review of the Veteran's STRs reveals a normal clinical evaluation of the neck, back, and upper and lower extremities at the August 1960 entrance examination. The records do not include any complaints, findings, or treatment for neck or back problems or radiculopathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities. Clinical evaluation of the neck, back, and upper and lower extremities was normal at the March 1961 separation examination. 

Post-service treatment reports reveal a diagnosis of arthritis and back pain in February 2000 and degenerative changes of the cervical spine in October 2002. The records do not include reference to radiculopathy of the bilateral upper or lower extremities; however, VA outpatient treatment reports note treatment for diabetes mellitus with sensory neuropathy. 

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for neck and back disabilities and bilateral upper and lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. 

A review of post-service medical records revealed that the Veteran was first diagnosed with his claimed disabilities no earlier than 2000 for the back disability and 2002 for the neck disability. As such, arthritis of the cervical and lumbar spine did not manifest within one year of service separation. The records do not include any diagnoses of radiculopathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities and neuropathy was associated with diabetes mellitus. Moreover, none of the medical evidence includes an opinion linking any of the claimed disabilities to service. 

The Board acknowledges that VA examinations and/or medical opinions were not obtained in relation to the Veteran's claimed neck and back disabilities and bilateral upper and lower extremity radiculopathy. However, the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is sufficient to decide the claims, and such development is not warranted. In this regard, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has neck and back disabilities that may be directly related to his active service and the Veteran has claimed the bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy was secondary to the claimed neck disability and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy was secondary to the back disability. Further, the Veteran has provided nothing beyond a bare assertion to trigger VA's duty to assist. As such, there was no duty for VA to obtain an examination or medical opinion with regard to the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for neck and back disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) (2024); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

While the Veteran believes his neck and back disabilities are related to service and the bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy is secondary to the neck disability and the bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is secondary to the back disability, the Veteran is not competent to provide an etiology opinion relating his neck and back disabilities to service or any event, injury, or disease during service because he is not shown to have the requisite medical training. Moreover, the Veteran has not submitted any competent evidence that relates back and neck disabilities to service. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the Veteran did not complain of, receive treatment for, or have a diagnosis of back and neck disabilities and bilateral upper and lower extremity radiculopathy during active service and there is no competent evidence of record indicating that any currently present back and neck disabilities and bilateral upper and lower extremity radiculopathy were otherwise related to his active service.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for back and neck disabilities and bilateral upper and lower extremity radiculopathy is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

David H. Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Cryan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.