Citation Nr: A25030854
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240606-447449
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran, who is the Appellant, served on active duty from February 1991 to February 2000.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision from the Regional Office (RO).  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for OSA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 2023 AOJ decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  A VA medical opinion is not sufficient to decide the matter on the merits.  In a May 2021 Statement in Support of the Claim, the Veteran reported that the service-connected low back and bilateral shoulder disabilities make it difficult for him to fall or stay asleep due to pain.  The Veteran reports that he weighed 170 pounds when he entered service, 195 pounds upon service separation, and he currently weighs 205 pounds.  The Veteran also asserts that the service-connected psychiatric disability causes weight gain, which contributes to the sleep apnea.

In an October 2021 opinion, a private examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by weight gain associated with the service-connected low back and bilateral shoulder disabilities.  The private examiner indicated that chronic pain from the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities is a contributing factor to the weight gain because chronic pain has led to less physical activities and a more sedentary lifestyle, which contribute to weight gain.  The examiner indicated that weight gain may also be associated with depression and reduced quality of life for physical function in chronic pain patients.  See October 2021 Private Treatment Record.

In November 2022, the VA examiner opined that the sleep apnea was not caused by the Veteran's chronic musculoskeletal pain.  The VA examiner noted that OSA occurs due to passive collapse of the oro - and/or nasopharynx during inspiration while asleep.  OSA is caused by anatomic abnormalities (obesity, redundant tissue in the soft palate, enlarged tonsils or uvula, low soft palate, large or posteriorly located tongue), as well as neuromuscular disorders, and alcohol or other sedative use before bedtime.  The examiner noted that, while chronic MS pain centers around difficulty falling/staying asleep or restless sleep, the sleep disturbance associated chronic musculoskeletal is not anatomic like the sleep disruption associated with sleep apnea.  Due to the lack of a pathophysiological relationship between sleep apnea and chronic musculoskeletal, the examiner opined it is unlikely that the anatomic condition of obstructive sleep apnea is a result of the service-connected chronic musculoskeletal pain conditions through mechanism of chronic pain-associated obesity.  See November 2022 VA Examination Report.  

In a March 2023 opinion, the VA examiner opined that the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities did not result in the Veteran's weight gain/obesity.  The VA examiner reasoned that obesity is first and foremost a direct result of dietary habits.  The examiner explained that chronic musculoskeletal conditions may limit certain physical activity, but they have no bearing on one's ability to make healthy nutritional decisions.  This is why lifestyle approaches such as portion control and intermittent fasting are mainstays of even the most physically active people.  Additionally, the examiner noted that there is a myriad of exercises that have little to no impact on one's joints or spine.  Several options exist for anyone seeking to increase their level of physical activity.  Thus, while physical activity can certainly improve one's cardiovascular fitness and help expend excess calories accumulated through food intake, proper diet is by far the most significant factor in weight management and the prevention of obesity and its clinical sequelae.  The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's weight gain/obesity is not an intermediate step between the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities and the OSA.  The weight gain/obesity is solely and exclusively a direct result of the Veteran's excess caloric intake.  

In an April 2023 VA addendum opinion, the VA examiner indicated that a relationship between the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities and OSA cannot be addressed without speculation because weight gain is due to excessive caloric intake and not caused from pain.

Service connection for depressive disorder with major depressive disorder (MDD), alcohol use disorder, and general anxiety disorder (GAD) was granted in a July 2022 rating decision.  The VA examiner in March 2023 did not consider the impact of the service-connected psychiatric disorder on the Veteran's weight gain and caloric intake.  As noted above, the private examiner in October 2021 noted that weight gain also may be associated with depression and reduced quality of life for physical function in chronic pain patients.  VA Treatment Records indicate that treating physicians have recommended reducing alcohol intake to help the Veteran lose weight.  See November 2021, October 2022 VA Treatment Records.  Additionally, during the April 2022 mental health VA examination, the Veteran lamented about his medical conditions impeding the ability to engage in physical activity.  The Veteran reported self-medicating physical and emotional pain with alcohol, reporting excessive alcohol use since service separation.  The VA examiner in November 2022 indicated that OSA is caused by anatomic abnormalities, as well as neuromuscular disorders, and alcohol or other sedative use before bedtime.  See April 2022, November 2022 VA Examination Reports.

The VA examiners did not consider the impact of the service-connected psychiatric disorder, particularly the caloric intake associated with the excessive alcohol use to self-medicate physical and emotional symptoms, on the Veteran's weight gain.  On remand, the RO should obtain a medical opinion to help assess if the Veteran's weight gain is related to the service-connected psychiatric disorder.     

The issue of service connection for sleep apnea is REMANDED for the following action:

Return the VA medical opinion report to the VA examiner who provided the medical opinion in March 2023.  

The examiner should offer opinion:

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain/obesity was caused by the service-connected depressive disorder with MDD, alcohol use disorder, and GAD (psychiatric disorder)?

Please discuss the likelihood that the psychiatric disorder affects the capacity for diet and exercise that would prevent weight gain/obesity.  The VA examiner should address the April 2022 VA Examination Report indicating excessive alcohol use since service separation and that the Veteran has utilized alcohol to self-medicate physical and emotional pain; the November 2022 VA Examination Report that indicates alcohol consumption can cause OSA; and the October 2022 VA treatment note suggesting a correlation between the Veteran's alcohol intake and weight gain.   

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.