Citation Nr: A25030498
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231127-397901
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

A rating of 50 percent, but no higher, from July 7, 2021, through August 27, 2022, for persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress (PDD), is granted. 

A rating in excess of 50 percent from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent thereafter, for PDD, are denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From July 7, 2021, to September 9, 2023, the Veteran's PDD with anxious distress manifested by psychiatric symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment with reduced liability and productivity.

2. From September 10, 2023, the Veteran's PDD with anxious distress manifested by psychiatric symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate total occupation and social impairment. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a 50 percent rating, but no higher, prior to August 28, 2022, for PDD are met. 38 USC § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9413-9433.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and a rating in excess of 70 percent from September 10, 2023, thereafter, for PDD are not met. 38 USC § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9413-9433.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from November 1984 to December 1988. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 decision. In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 decision.

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

In a concurrent decision, the Board granted an effective date of September 10, 2023, for the award of an increased rating of 70 percent for PDD. This decision has been recharacterized to incorporate that concurrent decision.

Increased Ratings.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

The appeal period before the Board begins on July 7, 2021, the date VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim for service connection for his psychiatric disability. The Veteran's persistent depressive disorder with anxious distress (PDD) is rated as 30 percent disabling from July 7, 2021, to August 27, 2022, as 50 percent disabling from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and as 70 percent disabling thereafter, from September 10, 2023, pursuant to DC 9434, which provides that such disability is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In this regard, a 30 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has, at some point, been diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder, mood disorder NOS, and alcohol use disorder, in addition to his service-connected PDD. In this regard, when it is not possible to separate the effects of a service-connected condition from a non-service-connected condition, reasonable doubt should be resolved in the claimant's favor with regard to the question of whether certain signs and symptoms can be attributed to the service-connected disability. See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998) (per curiam). Thus, where the symptoms and effects of the Veteran's nonservice-connected disabilities are not clearly separated from those associated with his service-connected PDD, the Board will attribute such to the service-connected disability.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent from July 7, 2021, to August 27, 2022, in excess of 50 percent from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and a rating in excess of 70 percent thereafter, for PDD. 

As previously indicated, the Veteran's PDD is rated as 30 percent disabling from July 7, 2021, to August 27, 2022, as 50 percent disabling from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and as 70 percent disabling thereafter, from September 10, 2023. The Veteran contends that his PDD is worse than is reflected by the currently assigned disability ratings. After a review of the record, the Board finds that, for the time period beginning July 7, 2021, and ending September 9, 2023, the Veteran's PDD manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, thus warranting a 50 percent rating. Thereafter, from September 10, 2023, the Veteran's PDD manifested in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Thus, a rating in excess of 70 percent from September 10, 2023, is not warranted.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, an opinion from a private psychologist was associated with the evidentiary record in March 2022. At the video examination, the examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, obsessive rituals and impaired impulse control. The examiner assessed that these symptoms equate to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

In April 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, at which time the examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. 

In December 2022 the Veteran had a video interview with a private licensed psychologist, C.M. At the interview the Veteran endorsed experiencing near continuous depression, poor appetite, insomnia, low energy and fatigue, low self-esteem, poor concentration, feelings of hopelessness, diminished interests, suicidal ideation, excessive anxiety and worry, feeling on edge, muscle tension, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work), and impaired impulse control. C.M. indicated that these symptoms cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment thinking or mood. See December 2022 Private Medical Opinion.

In January 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination, wherein the examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. Assessed symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work. 

The Veteran began receiving treatment for his psychiatric disability at the Gainesville VA Medical Center (VAMC) in approximately May 2022. The severity of the Veteran's symptoms varied month to month. Importantly, however, the Veteran self-reported that even when symptoms were at their worst, it was "extremely difficult to work" but that he was able to do so. Treatment records reveal that the Veteran had normal speech, linear/logical thought process, no suicidal or homicidal ideation, was oriented to time, place, and person, and had appropriate insight and judgment. See May 2022, June 2022, July 2022, August 2022, September 2022, and October 2022 VA treatment records. Notably, the Veteran consistently denied suicidal ideation. Id.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's PDD symptomatology resulted in, at worst, occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity from July 7, 2021 through September 9, 2023, thus warranting a 50 percent rating; based on symptoms that include, but are not limited to anxiety, panic attacks, depression, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, passive suicidal ideation with no intent, difficulty in adapting to stressful situations, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective relationships.

Despite the Veteran reporting symptoms contemplated by a higher, 70 percent rating, the evidence shows that the majority of the Veteran's reported and documented symptoms fall within a 50 percent rating, or lower, under the General Rating Formula, and that his PDD results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity only. Therefore, a higher 70 percent disability rating is not warranted prior to September 10, 2023. Similarly, the record does not support finding that the Veteran was totally socially or occupationally impaired, and, thus, a rating in excess of 70 percent from September 10, 2023, is likewise, not warranted.

Specifically, as noted previously, the Veteran reported suicidal thoughts at the March 2022 private telehealth examination, but then denied suicidal ideation a month later at the April 2022 VA examination. The December 2022 private examiner also indicated that the Veteran endorsed suicidal ideation, noting the Veteran's statement that he has "thought about suicide when things get to feeling so hopeless." See December 2022 Private Examination. However, the Veteran indicated that thinking about "my kids and wife" helps him in those instances. Id. He denied experiencing suicidal ideation again during a January 2023 VA examination. See January 2023 VA Examination. Importantly, the Veteran has denied active suicidal ideation during every other examination or psychiatry appointment during the period on review, has never had a plan or intent to harm himself, and has not made a suicide attempt since 1988. Again, suicidal ideation alone, whether passive or active, may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017). In this case however, the infrequent nature of the ideation tends to show it did not have a severe enough impact on his function to cause the impairment considered by a higher rating. Likewise, the presence of a single symptom is not dispositive of the particular disability level. Id. at 22. Here, the disability picture as a whole shows the Veteran's social and occupational function was not deficient in most areas, and rather he maintained relatively successful family, social, and occupational aspects of life.

The Veteran likewise reports having difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, as noted on the March 2022 Private Examination, December 2022 Private Examination, and January 2023 VA examination. He cites multiple incidents that have caused severe anxiety at work. Such incidents include increased anxiety when called into an administrator's office and anxiety associated with increased security measures on his workplace's campus. 

As above, the presence of a single enumerated symptom listed in the ratings criteria, or even a specific constellation of symptoms, does not necessitate a particular rating. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22. Notably, the converse is also true, in that the lack of a specific symptom or symptoms does not automatically preclude the assignment of a higher rating. Rather, the record and disability picture as a whole is contemplated, and the Veteran is assigned a disability rating commensurate with his occupational and social function.

The Board recognizes that symptoms such as suicidal ideation and difficulty adapting to stressful situations (as in work or worklike settings) could both have an impact on the Veteran's social and occupational functioning. However, in consideration with his disability picture as a whole, it does not rise to the severity and frequency to cause social and occupational impairment with deficiencies in most areas either on its own or in conjunction with his other symptoms, as the Veteran argues.

In that regard, he has maintained social relationships including a long-term marriage, as well as relationships with his children, mom, and some friends throughout the period on appeal. He reported impairments in his relationship with his wife, in the form of marital discord due to his tendency to self-isolate and lack of communication. See March 2022 Private Examination. The Veteran indicated that his relationship with his spouse has improved with time. See January 2023 VA Examination. The record reflects he attends the movies and parks with her, and that they went on a trip to Georgia together. See January 2023 VA Examination; see also October 2022 VA Treatment Record. He reported his children don't speak to him due to him getting "upset very quickly with things that he should not get upset about." See March 2022 Private Medical Examination. Despite the reported strains in those relationships, he has indicated that his wife and children are his "support system."

The Veteran indicated that he was close with his siblings as a child, but that those relationships have "disappeared." Importantly, he indicated that he did not have "time to communicate often with his siblings" once he joined the military, not due to his mental health disability, but because he was "busy making a career in the Navy." See March 2022 Private Examination. He reports socializing with friends "here and there" to include over the phone and by text message, although not as frequently as he has in the past, but also reports that he doesn't feel "like I need any new friends." Id.; see also January 2023 VA Examination. 

Similarly, the Veteran has maintained long-term employment; he has successfully held a job for at least the last 16 years, having worked as a physical education teacher since 2009. See January 2023 VA Examination. Despite reports that his job has become "increasingly stressful," the Veteran accepted a summer position in May 2023, working Monday through Thursday in a physical education program. See April 2022 VA Examination; see also May 2023 VA Treatment Note. Notably, this position was offered to him after needing to take a 2 week break from work due to his anxiety. Id. He reported that he loves "coaching and dealing with the kids" but that they are "getting annoying to him" before indicating that there are "more kids in my classes than I ever had." See March 2022 Private Medical Examination; see also April 2022 VA Medical Examination. Nevertheless, the Veteran attends work as scheduled and indicates missing work "more frequently" because of medical appointments. See January 2023 VA Examination.

Relative to his working relationships, the Veteran reported that he is unwilling, rather than unable, to form relationships with his colleagues, noting that he has "no interest." See January 2023 VA Examination. He reports keeping "conversations at a minimum" while at work because he is "not trying to make any new friends." See March 2022 Private Medical Examination; see also April 2022 VA Medical Examination. He further reported appropriate relationships with supervisors that are kept "strictly business." Id. The Veteran reported difficulty dealing with and having disagreements with administrators as he "lets them know his stance on everything" but reported he "does not get into arguments with people at work." See January 2023 VA Examination. 

While the Veteran reported he prefers to stay at home, he participates in activities outside of the home, which include running errands, like going grocery shopping, fishing, going to the movies, and visiting parks. See January 2023 VA Examination; see also May 2023 VA Treatment Record. He also remained active by coaching community sports, high school sports teams, and going for walks multiple times a week. The Veteran reported enjoying listening to jazz music and using it as a mechanism to cope with the symptoms of his psychiatric disability. See January 2023 VA Examination. 

The March 2022 private examiner indicated that the Veteran has "obsessive rituals which interfere with routine activities." See March 2022 Private Examination. However, the record does not support that finding. The general contention, noted only on the March 2022 private examination report and not otherwise supported by the evidentiary record, simply does not rise to the level of finding that the Veteran has an obsessive ritual that "interferes with routine activities," warranting a higher rating than what is currently assigned. In this regard, neither that examination nor the record shows such rituals or how they would further impair the Veteran to warrant a rating based upon deficiencies in most areas, when he is not deficient in nearly any of the areas considered.

Turning to his cognitive function, although he was noted to have mild memory difficulties, at no time has the Veteran's speech been illogical, obscure, or irrelevant. The record does not reflect that his thought processes are grossly impaired. Conversely, every examiner has noted that his speech and thought processes are normal or linear. Additionally, the record does not reflect that at any point has his memory issues become so severe to more closely approximate severe memory loss such as forgetting the names of relatives or his own name and occupation. He reported he has to "write things down" to remember them. See March 2022 Private Examination; see also December 2022 Private Examination. Notably, he has consistently been able to provide his own detailed history, and he has not been found to be an inaccurate historian. The January 2023 VA Examiner specifically noted that he followed his instructions well without the need for repetition. See January 2023 VA Examination. The Board finds that the Veteran has "mild memory loss" appropriately contemplated within the 50 percent disability rating. 

The Veteran and the Veteran's spouse have highlighted the angry outbursts and yelling the Veteran has had with his spouse and children. See March 2022 Lay Statement; see also March 2022 Private Examination; see also April 2022 VA Examination; see also December 2022 Private Examination. The Veteran also contends that he is becoming "short-tempered" with the kids he teaches at work. See October 2022 VA medical Record. However, there is no indication that the frequency, or severity of these outbursts or aggression were so severe as to warrant a higher rating or that they are equivalent to impaired judgement with periods of unprovoked violence. The record does not contain any references to specific incidents of impaired judgment or unprovoked violence. To that end, lay witnesses have reported that the Veteran "flies off the handle," "yells," "slams doors," and "becomes angry over things that he shouldn't," but do not indicate what the Veteran was acting in response to, nor do they indicate that the Veteran becomes violent. While these incidents do show some irritability, they do not rise to the level contemplate by the 70 percent disability rating. Rather, the Board finds that his behavior is more indicative of impaired judgment and mood disturbances listed in the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating. 

While the Veteran reported experiencing panic attacks in March 2022, April 2022, and December 2022 examinations, the Veteran did not report experiencing any panic attacks at the January 2023 VA Examination. The objective medical evidence of record reflects that his panic attacks, at their worst, occurred on a weekly basis. See March 2022 Private Examination. VA treatment records note at least six consecutive months where the Veteran reported not experiencing panic attacks. See May 2022, June 2022, July 2022, August 2022, September 2022, and October 2022 VA Treatment Records. In July 2022 he went to the emergency room on only one occasion for symptoms relative to an "anxiety attack," and reportedly believed he had another while sleeping in April 2023. See July 2022 and April 2023 VA Treatment Records. 

The Veteran himself did not report that panic attacks occurred on a near-continuous basis, or even more than once a week. However, the Veteran's spouse indicated that she witnesses the Veteran have what she describes as "panic attacks" 3 to 5 times a week. The Veteran's spouse is competent to provide testimony about things that she observed. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, she is not competent to diagnose the Veteran with psychiatric phenomena, such as panic attacks. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Taking into consideration the frequency and duration of any panic attacks, the Board notes that Veteran's episodes of panic result, at their worst, in social impairment that is more than adequately addressed by a 50 percent rating.

Importantly, the Veteran has appeared appropriately groomed, alert and oriented, with a linear and logical thought process throughout the appeal period. There is no evidence or allegation of persistent danger to others, self-harm spatial disorientation, delusions, or hallucinations. 

The Veteran's symptoms of PDD have been fluid; they regularly change in type, frequency, duration, and severity. As such, resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the symptoms commensurate with the 50 percent rating and the resulting impairment from these symptoms were present for the entirety of the appeal period, if not all at the same time or in the same severity. Therefore, given the frequency, nature, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms beginning July 21, 2021, through September 9, 2023, including his suicidal ideation and difficulty in adapting to stressful situations, the Board finds that they result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. While these symptoms affect his occupational and social functioning, he nonetheless maintains friendships and familial relations, and he has the focus and ability to maintain long-term employment working with children and thus, his PDD is not productive of impairment that more closely approximate deficiencies in most areas as contemplated by a 70 percent rating or higher during that time. Therefore, a 50 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the time period beginning July 2, 2021, and ending September 9, 2023. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 114.

Similarly, the evidence of record, discussed in detail above, does not support a finding that the Veteran's PDD more nearly approximates a rating higher than his currently assigned 70 percent rating from September 10, 2023, and thereafter. To that end, the evidence does not show that the Veteran is totally socially or occupationally impaired as he has never exhibited symptoms of gross impairment in thought process or communication, delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. Rather, all symptoms of record are adequately contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria, or lower.

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board has applied the benefit of the doubt doctrine and resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor, which has resulted in an award of an increased rating of 50 percent for his PDD beginning July 7, 2021. However, insofar as the Board has denied a rating in excess of 50 percent from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and a rating in excess of 70 percent from September 10, 2023, thereafter, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspect of the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard and increased ratings in excess of 50 percent from August 28, 2022, to September 9, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent thereafter must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

 

J.M. ESTES

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deal, Katie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.