Citation Nr: A25030246
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453647
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active-duty service in the United States Army from August 1969 to August 1971.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran contends that his hypertension is a result of his active-duty service or alternatively, his service-connected tinnitus. 

The Board finds that remand is warranted here in order for the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, the March 2024 VA examiner's medical opinion of record is inadequate. The March 2024 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with hypertension. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension in the 1990s and has been on medication ever since. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had primary or essential hypertension, which tends to develop gradually over many years. Since the Veteran had this diagnosis in the 1990s after his active-duty service, a medical opinion is needed on whether the Veteran's hypertension is due to or the result of his active-duty service. 

Further, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. However, the medical opinion did not address aggravation and, thus, is inadequate. The Veteran may establish entitlement to secondary service connection if the current disability was (1) caused by a service-connected disability; or (2) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995). The disjunctive language used in the regulation means that both causation and aggravation must be addressed when conducting a secondary service connection analysis in any claim for benefits, and both must be addressed in any medical opinion concerning secondary service connection. Id.; El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). However, in this case, the VA examiner only responded to the causation question and did not opine whether the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus. Accordingly, remand is necessary to obtain another medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his hypertension. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. A complete history should be elicited directly from the Veteran and the opinion should include a notation that this record review took place. The examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was caused or incurred as a result of the Veteran's active-duty service?

The examiner should address the March 2024 VA examiner noting the primary or essential hypertension of the Veteran tends to develop gradually over many years and the Veteran's lay statement of a hypertension diagnosis since the 1990s.

(b.) If not related directly to service, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension is due to or the result of his service-connected tinnitus? 

(c.) If not caused by the service-connected tinnitus, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus? The examiner is advised that a finding that the disability is aggravated due to a service-connected disability does not require evidence of permanent worsening and may encompass any additional impairment in earning capacity resulting from an already service-connected disability.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.

If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Fam, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.