Citation Nr: A25030415
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-448013
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of the left hip is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 1995 to June 1999.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket without a Board hearing under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)). Accordingly, the Board's current review is limited to the evidence at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction's (AOJ's) June 2023 rating decision. The Board cannot consider any evidence submitted by the Veteran after the rating decision on appeal.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of the left hip is remanded.

Under the AMA, remand is permissible only for: (a) correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors, to include examinations and medical opinions; and (b) correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

When VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, the examination or medical opinion must be adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Inadequate medical examinations include those that provide unsupported conclusions. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311. It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes probative value to a medical opinion. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304. VA must consider all lay and medical evidence of record. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

The Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability. He asserts that his left hip disability is secondary to his service-connected bilateral pes planus, plantar fasciitis, and hallux valgus.

The Veteran submitted a medical opinion from C.M.B., P.A.-C., dated in January 2023. Mr. B. opined that the Veteran's left hip disability is at least as likely as not "secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by" his service-connected foot disabilities. He also included medical literature in support of his opinion. Unfortunately, the Board cannot use Mr. B.'s medical opinion to grant service connection for the Veteran's left hip disability at this time, because he did not distinguish whether the Veteran's hip disability was caused or aggravated by his foot disabilities. This distinction is significant, because a secondary service connection award based on causation is a greater benefit than one based on aggravation. Thus, the Board cannot grant service connection on a secondary basis at this time because it is unable to determine whether such an award would be based on causation or aggravation. For these reasons, Mr. B.'s medical nexus letter is inadequate for the purpose of granting secondary service connection for the Veteran's left hip disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA hip examination in April 2023, and a medical nexus opinion was issued in May 2023. The examiner opined that the Veteran's left hip disability is less likely than not caused by his service-connected foot disabilities, stating that medical literature failed to demonstrate a nexus between the disabilities. 

The Board finds that the May 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate. First, the examiner failed to opine as to whether the Veteran's left hip disability was aggravated by his service-connected foot disabilities. Second, the opinion addressing secondary causation is unsupported by an adequate rationale. The examiner simply stated that the medical literature does not support a positive opinion, but she did not indicate what medical literature was reviewed or provide any meaningful discussion of the evidence of record. The examiner also did not indicate that she reviewed Mr. B.'s medical opinion or the medical literature discussed in that opinion.  Moreover, the VA opinion failed to address secondary aggravation. Therefore, the May 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate. The RO's failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum medical opinion from the examiner who conducted the April 2023 VA hip examination or, if that examiner is unavailable then another similarly qualified examiner may respond instead. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available for review by the examiner, and such review should be noted in the examination report. A new VA examination is only necessary if deemed so by the examiner. The examiner should respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left hip disability was caused and/or aggravated (any incremental increase in disability) by his service-connected bilateral pes planus, plantar fasciitis, and hallux valgus?

(b.) If aggravation is found, is there medical evidence created prior to the aggravation or at any time between the time of aggravation and the current level of disability that shows a baseline for the left hip disability prior to aggravation? If so, please identify.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for each proffered opinion. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion. 

If any opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the?state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the?record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.?As appropriate, the AOJ should conduct additional development or supplement the record.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Pratt

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.