Citation Nr: A25030133
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 220329-232257
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for depression is denied.

Service connection for anxiety is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

Service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

Service connection for asthma is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a diagnosis of depression or anxiety at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for depression are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for anxiety are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from July 1973 to December 1980. 

In the March 2022 VA Form 10182s, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2022 (asthma and COPD) and March 2022 (anxiety, depression, headaches, and  agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for service connection for depression and anxiety, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of for service connection for OSA, headaches, COPD, and asthma, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Service connection for depression is denied.

2. Service connection for anxiety is denied.

The Veteran contends that he suffers from anxiety and depression that is due to his service-connected tinnitus.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of anxiety or depression and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claims or recent to the filing of the claims.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The September 2020 VA examiner, after completing a mental health examination and a review of the record, determined that the Veteran's current depression and anxiety complaints were subclinical and normative reactions to some of his medical difficulties, such as difficulty breathing due to his respiratory disease, and that these symptoms did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder under the DSM-5.

The Board finds that this conclusion comports with the record, as the VA and private treatment records are negative for a diagnosis of depression or anxiety. Rather, depression and anxiety screenings in the VA treatment records are negative.

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of depression and anxiety, and is competent to report symptoms of sadness and other psychological symptoms, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized education and clinical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence. 

Specifically, there is no diagnosis of depression or anxiety in the record, a diagnosis of depression or anxiety was not found on VA psychiatric examination, and the Veteran has not provided any further contentions as to whether he suffers from depression or anxiety and, if so, symptoms thereof. The VA examiner considered the Veteran's symptoms but found that they did not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of depression or anxiety.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claims. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for depression or anxiety is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for OSA is remanded.

2. Service connection for headaches is remanded.

3. Service connection for COPD is remanded.

4. Service connection for asthma is remanded.

The Board finds a duty to assist error in that for the claims for service connection for OSA and headaches, a VA opinion was not obtained as to whether these disabilities were aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. The October 2020 and February 2022 OSA VA opinions did not provide such, and the February 2022 headaches VA opinion did not provide such, but rather provided only causative opinions.  Therefore, a remand for new VA examinations and/or opinions is needed.

As for all four claims, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran participated in TERA.  The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA during active military service, as in this case, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the toxic exposure risk activity.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168; see also Pub. L. No. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  Here, as a nexus has not been established between the Veteran's claimed toxic exposures and COPD, asthma, OSA, or headaches, and there is insufficient evidence to decide the claim, a remand is required.  The Board therefore finds that remand of this matter is necessary to correct the AOJ's error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty that, if corrected, would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his OSA, headaches, COPD, and asthma. The Veteran's claims file, to include a copy of this remand, must be reviewed by the provider.

The examiner should address the following:

a.	Whether the Veteran's OSA, headaches, COPD, and asthma at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had their onset in or are otherwise related to active service, to include his conceded toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

The clinician should note that the Veteran participated in TERAs, to include exposure to Shipboard asbestos, with probable exposure to diesel and gasoline fuels, industrial solvents, cleaning, solvents, paint fumes, carbon monoxide, engine exhaust, acids, adhesives, caulking compounds, glues, greases, oils, dusts, and lead.

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.

b.	whether the Veteran's headaches and OSA are at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus.

The examiner is advised that aggravation need not be permanent but can include temporary increases or flare-ups.

The VA medical opinion provider should discuss the particulars of this Veteran's medical history and relevant medical science as applicable to this case, which may reasonably explain the medical guidance in the study of this case.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and history, such as onset of symptoms, and such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner finds any medical reason to reject the lay reports, then the reviewing clinician must provide an explanation for such rejection.  

The examiner is reminded that the absence of a diagnosis in service is not fatal to a service connection claim and is insufficient as a rationale. A lack of evidence cannot be corroborating to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's current disability and his military service.

A fully articulated medical rationale for any opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report. If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question have been exhausted.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

R. Erdheim, Counsel 	Department of Veterans Affairs

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.