Citation Nr: A25030937
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240524-444269
DATE:             April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1999 to November 2002.

In December 2022, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for headaches.  In a March 2023 rating decision, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim.  

In April 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 (Supplemental Claim Application) seeking review of the March 2023 rating decision.  In an August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the previously denied claim and confirmed and continued the denial of the claim on the merits.  (The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) is bound by the AOJ's prior favorable finding that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the previously denied claim, which was not clearly and unmistakably erroneous.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The Board has phrased the appellate issue accordingly.)

In May 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the August 2023 rating decision to the Board via a VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  However, since the Board is remanding this appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

The Veteran primarily contends that his current headache disorder is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.  Remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

Before issuing the decision on appeal, the AOJ obtained multiple VA medical opinions, including opinions that addressed whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus caused his headaches condition.  See December 2022 and July 2023 VA medical opinions.  However, the AOJ failed to obtain a VA medical opinion that addressed whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus aggravated his headaches disability.  Remand is required for the AOJ to obtain a VA medical opinion that addresses this key issue.  See El Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran provided an April 2023 private medical opinion concluding that it is at least as likely as not (a 50 percent/50 percent probability) that the Veteran's current migraine condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus. The clinician also concluded that "it is plausible that this veteran's service-connected [t]innitus condition, at the very least, has aggravated his [h]eadache condition."  However, this opinion was inadequate for adjudication purposes because it contained an insufficient rationale.  The private opinion generally noted a review of medical and lay evidence in the claims file.  The opinion also generally summarized treatise evidence suggesting a possible relationship, association, and/or comorbidity between headaches and tinnitus.  However, the private opinion failed to explain how these general medical principles applied to the Veteran's specific medical history and case.  The clinician also appeared to conflate a possible association or comorbidity between tinnitus and headaches generally with the conclusion that this specific Veteran's headaches were caused or aggravated by tinnitus.  Also, to the extent that this clinician partially based this opinion on favorable findings regarding the credibility of lay evidence, this was beyond the purview of this clinician; rather, it is the VA adjudicator's role to weigh the probative value of evidence (see generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.6), including assessing the credibility of lay evidence.  

In summary, remand is required for an addendum VA medical opinion to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from a qualified examiner regarding the etiology of the Veteran's headaches condition.  After reviewing the complete claims file, including this remand, the clinician must address the following, with a full supporting rationale:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus aggravated (worsened to any degree, even if non-permanently) his current headaches disability?

It would be helpful if the examiner considers the following evidence when answering this question: Veteran's December 2022 lay statement; medical literature cited in April 2023 private medical opinion; July 2023 VA medical opinion (Although the examiner opined that the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus did not cause the headaches disorder, the examiner acknowledged that "tinnitus can exacerbate headaches;" the examiner also noted that tinnitus can be associated with multiple types of headache disorders, and that tinnitus and headaches may co-occur).  

If the clinician cannot provide the requested opinion for any reason, please explain why.

 

 

R. JANOFSKY

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Ferguson, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.