Citation Nr: A25030948
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-460741
 DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1989 to May 1993. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for GERD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.  In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the period when a docket switch permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has elapsed. This period ends either one year from the date the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever date is later.  Id.  In the present case, the rating decision on appeal was issued on June 4, 2024, and the Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182 on August 5, 2024. Thus, while 60 days after the August 2024 NOD receipt has elapsed, the one-year period following the June 2024 decision has not.  However, the decision below is a remand.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran, and the Board will proceed. 

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has GERD secondary to his service-connected PTSD disability.  He specifically contends his GERD is secondary to his PTSD symptoms and the Zoloft medication he takes.  The current VA opinions of record do not address the Veteran's contention that he has GERD secondary to the medication he takes for his PTSD.  Further, the current opinions of record do not address a secondary service contention theory of entitlement based on aggravation.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion is inadequate when it fails to adequately address the question of aggravation).

Additionally, another theory of entitlement raised by the record prior to the rating decision on appeal, is that the Veteran's GERD is secondary to his PTSD with obesity as an intermediate step.  See Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008) (VA has an obligation to develop and consider all theories of entitlement that are reasonably raised by the record or the veteran).

In a 2017 precedential opinion, the General Counsel held that that obesity may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability where a claimant establishes that the obesity was caused by a service-connected disability and caused his or her the current disability.  G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017.  Where obesity is asserted to be an obesity /s intermediate step intermediate step, the evidence must show that the service-connected disability "caused the veteran to become obese," that the obesity caused by the service-connected disability "was a substantial factor in causing" the current disability, and that the current disability "would not have occurred but for" the obesity caused by the service-connected disability. Id. 

In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020), the Court further held that the Board needs to consider the obesity-intermediate step theorem predicated on 3.310 (aggravation) also where appropriate.  In particular, the Court held that proper interpretation of G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability (caused the veteran to become obese/aggravated the veteran's obesity); (2) if so, whether the (obesity/aggravation of obesity) as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (obesity caused/obesity aggravated) by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.

The current VA opinions of record for this appeal do not address obesity as an intermediate step. 

As the evidence of these theories of entitlement was of record prior to the decision on appeal, remand is needed to obtain addendum opinions and cure the pre-decisional duty to assist defects. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand. 

2. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician as to the nature and etiology of his GERD disorder.  The examiner must opine as to whether any such disorder at least as likely as not:

(a.) Is proximately due to, or aggravated beyond its natural progression, by service-connected PTSD disability, to include medication taken for his PTSD disability?

(b.) If the answer to (a.) is negative, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain or obesity was either caused OR aggravated by his PTSD disability?

In responding to (b.) above, the examiner must, to the extent possible, make a determination as to whether the service-connected PTSD affected the Veteran's ability to limit caloric intake.

(c.) If the Veteran's weight gain or obesity was either caused or aggravated by his PTSD disability, was such resulting weight gain/obesity a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his GERD?

(d.) If so, is it at least as likely as not that his GERD would not have occurred but for the obesity/weight gain found to have been caused or aggravated by PTSD?

Notify the examiner that the Veteran, as a layperson, is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.

Notify the examiner that the standard "at least as likely as not" is defined as the "likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher." Conversely, "less likely than not" is defined as the "likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal."

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall explain why an opinion cannot be given.  In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

A rationale is required for all opinions in the report.

 

 

G. A. WASIK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Wade, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.