Citation Nr: A25030566
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417400
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to eligibility in acquiring specially adapted housing (SAH) or special home adaption (SHA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 1989 to October 2001.

On February 20, 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 5, 2023, claim decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the RO issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300,?20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of SAH and SHA, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to SAH or SHA

SAH is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total (P&T) service-connected disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d).

SAH is also available to a veteran with a P&T disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair dure to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d).  

The term "preclude locomotion" means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c).

In the case of Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66 (2017), the Court clarified that, under 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(B), a "loss of use" exists if a veteran has suffered a deprivation of his or her ability to use their lower extremity so severe that he or she is precluded from perambulating without one of the required assistive devices.  This definition indicates that locomotion is precluded even if a veteran is capable on occasion of moving about unaided.  Id. at 78.  In addition, function impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination.  Id. at 78-79.  However, this does not mean that every time an individual is prescribed an assistive device in conjunction with a lower extremity disability that he or she would automatically be eligible to receive SAH.  Id.  at 79.  In this regard, to receive SAH based on "loss of use," an individual must (1) have a permanent and total disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices.  Id. 

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptions if he has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees (such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature); a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss f use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the trunk; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Analysis

On February 1, 2023, the Veteran filed a formal claim for SAH or SHA.  

Development should have been performed prior to the issuance of the July 5, 2023, rating decision on appeal, therefore a remand is needed to remedy this pre decisional duty to assist error.  38?U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A).

The Veteran is service connected for several disabilities, to include those that impact his lower extremities.  He is service connected for thoracolumbar spine arthritis (DJD) with spinal fusion, right lower extremity radiculopathy- sciatic nerve, right lower extremity radiculopathy- femoral nerve, left lower extremity radiculopathy- sciatic nerve, left lower extremity radiculopathy- femoral nerve, right knee degenerative joint disease, left knee strain with degenerative joint disease, and right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.  His combined schedular, for all service-connected disabilities, is 100 percent.  The last examinations connected with his lower extremity disabilities were performed in August 2018 and September 2021.

The Veteran's VA treatment records were reviewed.  The Veteran is enrolled in the VA's Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC).  See October 2023, CAPRI.  On June 24, 2022, the Veteran reported he utilizes a cane to walk around and has a two-wheeled walker if necessary.  Id.  On February 22, 2023, the Veteran reported to a VA medical appointment, assisted with a cane, and reported he had taken a fall that weekend.  Id.  On March 24, 2023, the Veteran reported that he had 3 falls since he last had contact.  Id.     

The Board finds that additional development should have been performed prior to the issuance of the July 2023 rating decision, especially since there are no recent VA examinations of record pertaining to the Veteran's lower extremities, on the date the SAH or SHA claim was filed.  Therefore, the Board finds remand required to obtain medical evidence necessary to decide the claim, namely, examinations to assess the severity of those disabilities that impact the Veteran's lower extremities, and to clarify whether the Veteran's use of assistive devices are needed to ambulate, and if so if that need is due to his service-connected disabilities.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the severity of his service-connected disabilities as they related to his ability to use his lower extremities, as well how his other service-connected disabilities may be related to his balance and propulsion.

The examiner should be provided with a list of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  The claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.

Any essential tests and studies should be accomplished.  After reviewing the evidence of record, including lay statements, and the results of any testing performed at the examination, the examiner should provide opinions as to the following:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's service-connected lower extremity disabilities result in a loss of use of both lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair, or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury that so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.

(b.)  The examiner should address whether and how frequently the Veteran must use an ambulatory device (cane, wheelchair, crutches, brace, etc.) in order to walk and get around (both within and outside his home).  

(c.)  The examiner is asked to provide a detailed description of the type and extent of functional limitations due to the lower extremity disabilities as they affect the Veteran's ability to perform various activities of daily living and daily functions.

(d.)  The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran's other service-connected disabilities affect his functions of balance and propulsion.  

The examiner should consider all medical and lay evidence of record when making his or her determinations.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided.

 

 

A. Weis

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H.E. Toole, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.