Citation Nr: A25030930
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250311-518113
                 DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), or as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from May1969 to October 1970. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 7, 2025, rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO.  

In March 2025, the Veteran appealed by filing a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement and elected the direct review docket.  As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §20.301.

Procedural history

The Veteran filed a claim for service connection for hypertension on September 8, 2010.  An August 2011 rating decision denied service connection for hypertension.  The Veteran filed a new claim on June 18, 2019.  An October 2019 rating decision confirmed the denial of service connection for hypertension.  A November 2019 rating decision denied the claim denied a request to reopen the claim, finding new and relevant evidence had not been submitted.  The Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim on December 26, 2024.  The March 7, 2025, rating decision denied service connection for hypertension on the merits.  Therefore, the Board finds that it is unnecessary to address whether new and relevant evidence has been submitted to readjudicate the claim.  

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded

The Veteran has asserted that his hypertension is caused by or aggravated by a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) or by his service-connected PTSD.  

Favorable Findings identified in the November 2019 rating decision were: You have been diagnosed with a disability.  Private treatment records dated 2005 show a diagnosis of hypertension.  The claimed primary disability is service-connected. PTSD is service connected.

Favorable Findings identified in the March 2025 rating decision were: Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded.  TERA Memo dated December 5, 2024, shows participation in a TERA.  You have been diagnosed with a disability.  Your recent VA examination conducted January 16, 2025, provides a diagnosis of hypertension.

These favorable findings are binding on the Board.

A treatment record associated with the file in September 2010 and dated November 1998 notes that a past medical history of hypertension and that the Veteran's present medication include Norvasc that he takes for high blood pressure.  The November 1998 treatment records note diagnoses of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. 

In June 2011, an examination and medical opinion was submitted.  The Veteran reported that he served 17 months in the Navy, from May 1969 to October 1970.  He did not participate in combat activity.   The Veteran reported being diagnosed with hypertension in 1970.  The condition has existed for 36 year(s).  The Veteran described current symptoms of headaches, light-headedness, blurry vision, and loss of sex drive.  Currently he is receiving treatment for this condition: Norvasc but the response has been poor.  There are side effects of dizziness, fatigue, and loss of sex drive.  Treatment has also included Cardizem, but the response has been poor.  There are side effects of dizziness, fatigue, and loss of sex drive.  VA asked the question, "If diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not that the veteran's current hypertension is related to the service connected posttraumatic stress disorder?"  In response, the examiner found that during the Veteran's examination in October 1976, he was found to be normotensive with his B.P. recorded as 110/84.  The Veteran claims to have been diagnosed with and treated for hypertension since the 1970's, which he attributes to have been caused by medications he takes for treatment of PTSD.  No such cause/effect relationship is reported in the medical literature or veteran's medical record.  The diagnosis is essential hypertension and its etiology is undetermined.  It is less likely than not related or due to medications taken for the service-connected PTSD.  

In April 2023, a TERA Memorandum verified that the Veteran had toxic exposure, due to his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS), as an Aircraft Mechanic.

An August 8, 2024, VA primary care visit notes benign essential hypertension as an active problem, onset 2004. 

A December 2024 TERA Memorandum noted the Veteran participated in a TERA sufficient to trigger an examination/opinion under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).  His MOS was aviation structural mechanic.  The length of exposure was noted as approximately 1 year 5 months.  Toxic exposure noted as JP-5 jet fuel, hydraulic fluid, solvent, cleaning agents, and coolants.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2025.  The examiner reviewed the exposure information provided at https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/.  Length of exposure(s) noted as approximately 1 year, 5 months.  Toxic Exposure noted as JP-5 jet fuel, hydraulic fluid, solvent, cleaning agents, and coolants.  PPE was reportedly not used.  The frequency of exposure is reported as daily.  The route of exposure is described as inhalation.  The place of exposure is deployment.  The duration of exposure is described as May 1969 to October 1970.  The Veteran is diagnosed with hypertension.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The rationale was that there is no medical literature that support direct causal relationship of the TERA and the development of hypertension.  There is a risk factor outside of military service (hyperlipidemia) that far outweighs the factors identified in the TERA.  Dyslipidemia, a strong predictor of cardiovascular disease, causes endothelial damage, and the loss of physiological vasomotor activity that results from endothelial damage may become manifested as increased blood pressure (BP).  The examiner cited the following medical literature:  https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.hyp.0000196306.42418.0e#:~:text=Dyslipidemia%2C%20a%20strong%20predictor%20of%20cardiovascular%20disease%2C5%20causes%20endothelial,increased%20blood%20pressure%20(BP).  The examiner reviewed: https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/fuels/index.asphttps://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/solvents/index.asp

As an initial matter, the Board notes that November 1998 treatment records note diagnoses of both hypertension and hypercholesterolemia.  In addition, the Board observes that the January 2025 examiner opined that hyperlipidemia outweighed the TERA as a risk factor for the Veteran's hypertension.  However, given the asserted correlation drawn between hyperlipidemia and hypertension, the examiner did not make an effort to identify the onset of hyperlipidemia and whether it was caused or aggravated by a TERA.  The Board notes that hyperlipidemia is a laboratory finding and is not disability in and of itself for which VA compensation benefits are payable.  61 Fed. Reg. 20,440, 20,445 (May 7, 1996).  However, disabilities related to hyperlipidemia may be service connected if the hyperlipidemia is the result of a disability or has led to the development of a disability for which service connection could be granted.  As the VA examiner found that hyperlipidemia "far outweighs the factors identified in the TERA" as a cause of Veteran's hypertension, the Board finds that a remand is necessary for an addendum medical opinion addressing whether hyperlipidemia had its onset during service or resulted from service, to include TERA in service, and the failure to obtain such was a pre-decisional violation of the duty to assist.  

In addition, the VA examinations of record did not address whether the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  A secondary opinion which addresses a causal relationship, but which does not address the question of aggravation, is inadequate.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).  

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § § 3.310(a), 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Secondary aggravation exists when the nonservice-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the nonservice-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

Failure to provide adequate VA medical opinions as to nexus necessitates remand for addendum medical opinions to fulfill a regulatory or statutory duty.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should obtain addendum opinions addressing the following:

a.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hyperlipidemia had its onset during active service or resulted from service, to include toxic exposure risk activity in service.

b.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mcloughlin, Debra

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.