Citation Nr: A25030058
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-440956
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1985 to August 1989. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, as the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection or obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is related to toxic exposure during his active duty naval service. In the alternative, the Veteran contends that his OSA is due to or aggravated by his service connected disabilities, to include unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and traumatic brain injury. 

The AOJ made favorable findings in the July 2023 rating decision on appeal. Specifically, the AOJ found that the Veteran: 1.) is service connected for the claimed primary disability of unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and traumatic brain injury (TBI) (collectively hereinafter "acquired psychiatric disorders"); 2.) has a current OSA disability; and 3.) participation in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

The AOJ obtained an opinion on secondary service connection in March 2023. The Veteran was afforded an in-person examination, and the March 2023 VA examiner indicated that she reviewed the Veteran's records. The examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not due to or the result of his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorders. The rationale was that while the Veteran's diagnosed psychiatric disorders "can certainly affect the quality of sleep, there is no current research that delineates unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, and traumatic brain injury (TBI) as a cause of OSA." The examiner added that "there are some studies in the literature that have shown that heavy drinkers have a slightly higher chance of developing sleep apnea than people who are not heavy drinkers. However, the drinking does not greatly increase your changes of sleep apnea. The other way that heavy drinking can contribute to sleep apnea is drinking before bed because this can suppress the respiratory system. Veteran claims that he drinks 2-3 beers and does a shot of liquor prior to sleep." The examiner did not include any opinion for aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected disability. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 03/10/2023 (opinion). 

The Board finds that the March 2023 opinion is inadequate because the rationale is conclusory and did not include any opinion on aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected disability. Opinions regarding secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013). The rationale is conclusory because it did not incorporate objective medical evidence of record and although the examiner explained how OSA occurs and specifically alluded to alcohol use being a cause of OSA, the examiner did not explain why the Veteran's alcohol use disorder, which is associated with his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorders, was not at least as likely as not the cause of or aggravating to the Veteran's OSA. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 125 (2007) ("the mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion"). Accordingly, the Board finds that the March 2023 opinion is inadequate because it failed to render an opinion for aggravation and did not explain the rationale with sufficient detail from which the Board can properly adjudicate the claim.

In June 2023, the AOJ obtained an addendum opinion on service connection due to in-service TERA, to include asbestos exposure. The examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not caused by exposure to an in-service TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner noted that the Veteran's BMI is 30.0 and neck circumference is 41.9cm. The rationale was that "pharyngeal narrowing and closure during sleep is a complex phenomenon, and likely multiple factors play a role in the pathogenesis. Sleep related reduced ventilatory drive and neuromuscular combined with anatomic risk factors are likely to play a significant role in upper airway obstruction during sleep." However, the examiner then broke down risk factors into only "anatomical" and "non-anatomical" without defining or explaining "sleep-related ventilatory drive and neuromuscular" risk factors. The examiner then found that the Veteran's risk factors are obesity, male sex, advancing age, and neck circumference greater than 17 inches. The examiner concluded that "OSA is not a presumptive condition associated with the Veteran's TERA" and restated the opinion that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not caused by his in-service TERA, but did not provide any other rationale or otherwise explain why the Veteran's OSA is not caused by or related to his in-service asbestos exposure. See VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 06/22/2023.

The June 2023 VA opinion is also inadequate because although the examiner stated that OSA is not a presumptive condition associated with the Veteran's asbestos exposure and the rationale listed risk factors without defining their meanings or citing evidence of record that the Veteran possess those risk factors.  The lack of a presumption for a particular disability does not equate to a finding of no association or relation. Additionally, the Board finds that the June 2023 VA opinion on service connection based on exposure to toxic materials is inadequate because the opinion relied on the March 2023 TERA memorandum, which is incomplete as explained below, and did not consider evidence of additional potential exposures found in the Veteran's service record. As to the June 2023 rationale, the examiner cited the Veteran's neck circumference as a risk factor, noted as 41.9cm, but did not explain how 41.9cm is greater than 17 inches. In addition, the examiner noted that the Veteran's BMI was 30 at the date of OSA diagnosis, but did not cite evidence that the Veteran was diagnosed with obesity or whether a BMI of 30 is evidence of obesity. Furthermore, the examiner cited the Veteran's "advancing age" but did not explain how such risk applies despite evidence of record that his symptoms began many years prior to his diagnosis, when the Veteran was much younger. For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the June 2023 VA opinion is inadequate. 

The Board finds that the AOJ did not sufficiently develop the Veteran's claim prior to the July 2023 rating decision on appeal. In March 2023, the AOJ associated with the Veteran's file a TERA Memorandum finding that the Veteran' was exposed to asbestos during active naval service. However, evidence in the Veteran's military personnel records (MPRs) and service treatment records (STRs) reveal exposure to ionizing radiation and additional military occupational specialty (MOS) of fireman, "FN," from February 1987 to January or September 1988. There is no indication in the March 2023 TERA memorandum that the AOJ considered potential TERA related to ionizing radiation or to the Veteran's MOS duties as a fireman between February 1987 and January 1988. 

The Board finds that the Veteran's file does not contain sufficient evidence, to include a complete TERA memorandum, regarding the Veteran's asserted toxic materials exposure and as evidenced in his service records. Therefore, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to develop the record to determine if, while in service, the Veteran was exposed to toxic materials in addition to asbestos and ionizing radiation prior to adjudicating the claim on appeal. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Generate a new Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum that includes all conceded TERAs during service and any identified by development that considers the Veteran's military personnel records. Associate TERA documents with the claims file.

2. Following the aforementioned development, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as related to the new TERA memorandum.  

All evidence, including the new TERA memorandum and a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.

The clinician is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not related to service, to include the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity.

(b.) The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

When providing the opinion, the clinician must consider:

(a.) The total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 

(b.) The synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran including asbestos and exposures incurred through regular and documented in-service military duties and the new TERA memorandum.

3. Obtain addendum opinions from an appropriate clinician as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) regarding secondary service connection and aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability.

The clinician is asked to answer the following:

(a.)  Is the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not proximately due to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and traumatic brain injury?

(b.) Is the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to include unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and traumatic brain injury? Note that aggravation in this context means any additional impairment of the non-service-connected disability caused by the service-connected disability. It need not be permanent.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should also state, to the extent possible, the baseline level of disability prior to aggravation. This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time. 

In formulating the TERA memorandum and opinions, review of the following is necessary:

(a.) VBMS document titled, "DPRIS Response," receipt date 05/29/2020, pages 31, 32, 35, 37, 45, 46 of 87 (exposure to ionizing radiation, personnel record indicating military occupational specialty "FN;" duties related to damage control, shipboard security force, firefighting, etc.). 

(b.) VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 07/24/2020, page 6, 9, 11 of 16 (symptoms of acquired psychiatric disorders and alcohol consumption beginning during service, reported symptoms of chronic sleep impairment for many years).

(c.) VBMS document titled, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," receipt date 09/16/2021, pages 9, 10, 15, 16, 17 of 18 (private medical opinion for acquired psychiatric disorders includes reported sleep disorder symptoms onset and history).

(d.) VBMS document titled, "VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim," receipt date 04/12/2022 (Veteran's wife lay statement regarding alcohol use and onset of sleep issues). 

(e.) VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 11/25/2022, pages 2, 5 of 7 (symptoms of sleep disturbances related to acquired psychiatric disorders and alcohol use).

(f.) VBMS document titled, "C&P Exam," receipt date 12/20/2022, page 2 of 6 (sleep disturbance and symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease).

(g.) VBMS document titled, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," receipt date 01/24/2023 (private sleep study).

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webb, Katherine S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.