Citation Nr: A25030744
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231109-391587
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for a disability of the jaw is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for a stomach disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for a back disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, anxiety, and/or sleep disturbances, is dismissed.

The appeal with respect to entitlement to an initial compensable rating for status post left fifth metacarpal fracture is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

By correspondence received in January 2025, prior to the promulgation of an appellate decision, the Veteran indicated that he wished to withdraw the present appeal in its entirety.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from March 2015 to March 2021. His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2023 and May 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the February 2023 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for tinnitus, a disability of the jaw, a back disability, left and right knee disabilities, and an acquired psychiatric disorder. The RO also granted service connection and a 0 (zero) percent (noncompensable) rating for status post left fifth metacarpal fracture, effective March 18, 2021. In the May 2023 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for a stomach disability. The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in November 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

The Veteran's claim for service connection for depression, anxiety, and/or sleep disturbances has been combined and recharacterized to include all psychiatric disorders reasonably raised by the record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Dismissal

An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in an appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Only an appellant, or an appellant's authorized representative, may withdraw an appeal. Id. 

Appeal withdrawals must include the name of the veteran, the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the veteran (e.g., a veteran's survivor, a guardian, or a fiduciary appointed to receive VA benefits on an individual's behalf), the applicable VA file number, and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn. If the appeal involves multiple issues, the withdrawal must specify that the appeal is withdrawn in its entirety or list the issue(s) withdrawn from the appeal. Id. 

By correspondence received in January 2025, prior to the promulgation of an appellate decision, the Veteran indicated that he wished to withdraw the present appeal, identifying the appeal as having been filed on November 9, 2023. The correspondence included his name and VA claims file number. Under the circumstances, the Board finds that the requirements for a proper withdrawal have been satisfied.

As the Veteran has withdrawn his appeal, there remain no allegations of error of fact or law for appellate consideration. Accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Oldroyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.