Citation Nr: A25030598
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-430542
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

1. A higher rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle disability.

2. A higher rating in excess of 10 percent for left thumb strain. 

3. A higher rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity (LLE) sciatic nerve radiculopathy. 

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1986 to March 1992.

The case is on appeal from the July 2023 and February 2024 rating decisions.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the November 2022, VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error as to the claim of an increased rating for LLE radiculopathy and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. A supplement rating decision was issued in July 2023.

In the April 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  As to the claim of an increased rating for LLE radiculopathy, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 RO supplemental claim decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the RO issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  See 38 C.F.R.§§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

As to the claims of an increased rating for left thumb strain and left ankle, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 RO decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. A higher rating in excess of 20 percent for left ankle disability

The Veteran asserts that a higher rating is warranted for his left ankle disability, currently rated as 20 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5271.  

In July 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the left ankle.  He reported experiencing difficulty wearing closed toe shoes, maneuvering uneven surfaces/stairs, walking, standing, driving, running/jogging.  Also, he reported being immobile for extended periods.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with left ankle degenerative arthritis as a progression of a previous diagnosis.  She reported that passive range of motion testing was not conducted as it is medically contraindicated because "it may cause Vet severe pain or the risk of further injury."  She marked "yes" for ankylosis in plantar flexion between 30 degrees and 40 degrees and in dorsiflexion between zero degrees and 10 degrees. 

In May 2023, a VA opinion was obtained.  The examiner indicated that she reviewed the July 2022 VA examination.  She reported an active range of motion with plantar flexion at 30 degrees and dorsiflexion endpoint at 10 degrees.  Also, she denied ankylosis. 

The Board finds that the claims must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  The July 2022 VA examiner seemed to find ankylosis on examination.  While the May 2023 VA examiner, who was a different medical professional, found no ankylosis, this determination did not appear to be based on a physical examination of the Veteran.  Thus, a new VA examination is warranted to determine if the Veteran in fact has ankylosis or functional ankylosis.

Furthermore, the July 2022 VA examination reflects treatment with hydrocodone and acetaminophen, ice and heat application, and cream.  An examiner should assess the severity level without consideration of any ameliorative effects of medication.  See Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet Claims LEXIS 327 (U.S. Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025).

2. A higher rating in excess of 10 percent for left thumb strain.

In July 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the left thumb.  He reported experiencing worsening pain, "tingling," numbness, and spasm in the left thumb to the shoulder.  He also reported that he experiences difficulty gripping and grasping, lifting, pushing, pulling, and performing chores, including yard work.  Further, he reported the "thumb hyperextended, felt immediate pain and had swelling."  During the examination, the examiner found tenderness on palpation.  The examiner reported no gap between the pad of thumb and fingers on active and passive range of motion and estimated 0 cm between the thumb and finger during repetitive use over time and flare-ups testing.  Also, the examiner reported use a brace for the left thumb strain.

In May 2023, a VA opinion was obtained for the left thumb.  In response to an RO request on the relationship between the left thumb strain and the left thumb "neurological involvement" per the Veteran reports of numbness and tingling in the thumb to shoulder, the examiner reported that neurological involvement is not a symptom that is supported by the medical literature as related to thumb strain and that the reported numbness and tingling in the thumb to shoulder are medically unrelated to left thumb strain.

The Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  In this regard, the May 2023 VA examiner's response to the RO request in regarding to neurological involvement and the left thumb strain, as described above, was conclusive with little rationale.  As such, a remand is warranted to correct this deficiency and obtain another VA opinion to adequately address and discuss the "neurological involvement" as it pertains to the severity of the left thumb strain."

Furthermore, the July 2022 VA examination reflects treatment with hydrocodone and acetaminophen, ice and heat application, and cream.  An examiner should assess the severity level without consideration of any ameliorative effects of medication.  See Ingram, 2025 U.S. App. Vet Claims LEXIS at 327.

3. A higher rating in excess of 20 percent for LLE sciatic nerve radiculopathy.

In July 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for the back.  His LLE radiculopathy was also assessed.  He reported experiencing worsening radiating pain, numbness, and "tingling" in the LLE.  The examining physician found lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms, including severe LLE numbness, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and intermittent pain.  

In the same month, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for peripheral nerve conditions, including LLE radiculopathy.  The examiner found that the Veteran's LLE sciatic nerve radiculopathy has mild incomplete paralysis and uses a regular cane.

In an October 2022 addendum for the right LE radiculopathy, an examiner reported that the Veteran's "LLE also as the knee/thigh sensory loss." 

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination for the back.   The examining physician found LLE moderate constant pain, severe numbness and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, but denied intermittent pain.  

The Board finds that the claims must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  In this regard, the VA examinations of record do not show an adequate determination of the severity of the Veteran's LLE radiculopathy.  The examinations noted the Veteran's radiculopathy symptoms as mild, moderate, and severe, showing mixed findings with regard to an overall severity of the Veteran's LLE radiculopathy.  As such a remand is warranted to corrected this deficiency.

Furthermore, the July 2022 VA examination reflects treatment with hydrocodone and acetaminophen, ice and heat application, and cream.  An examiner should assess the severity level without consideration of any ameliorative effects of medication.  See Ingram, 2025 U.S. App. Vet Claims LEXIS at 327.

The claims are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the Veteran's left ankle with degenerative arthritis.  All indicated tests and studies should be performed and all findings should be reported in detail.  The examiner should review the claims file and copy of this remand.  

The examiner should explain if there is left ankle ankylosis (or functional ankylosis). and if so, to what degree, or if there is functional ankylosis.  Also, the examiner should reconcile any contrary findings.

The examiner should also assess the severity level without consideration of any ameliorative effects of medication.

If the examiner cannot provide some or all of the requested opinions, he or she should explain why such opinions cannot be provided.  The examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

2. Also, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of Veteran's service-connected left thumb strain and LLE radiculopathy in accordance with the rating criteria.  An in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner should review the claims file and a copy of this remand.  Then, the examiner should:

As to the left thumb strain, address and discuss the "neurological involvement" and reported symptoms of worsening pain, "tingling," numbness, thumb hyperextended," swelling, and spasm in the left thumb to the shoulder, difficulty gripping and grasping, lifting, pushing, pulling, and performing chores, including yard work.

As to the LLE sciatic nerve radiculopathy, opine whether the severity manifested in mild incomplete paralysis, moderate incomplete paralysis, moderately severe incomplete paralysis, severe incomplete paralysis, or complete paralysis from a medical standpoint.

The examiner should also assess the severity level without consideration of any ameliorative effects of medication.

If the examiner cannot provide some or all of the requested opinions, he or she should explain why such opinions cannot be provided.  The examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nevarez-Myrick, Nancy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.