Citation Nr: A25030398
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433775
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an eye/vision disorder is denied.

Service connection for a sinus disorder is denied.

Service connection for a right knee disorder is denied.

Service connection for a left knee disorder is denied.

Service connection for a disorder manifested by loose teeth is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had an eye/vision disorder other than loss of visual acuity at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The Veteran's sinus disorder, diagnosed as acute sinusitis, did not originate in service and is not otherwise etiologically related to his active service, to include as due to his exposure to exhaust from military jets and aircrafts.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a disorder of the right knee at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a disorder of the left knee at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The Veteran does not have loose teeth or loss of teeth due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an eye/vision disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 4.9.

2. The criteria for service connection for a sinus disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a left knee disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for a disorder manifested by loose teeth have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.381, 4.150.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1983 to April 1987 and from August 1989 to July 1991. He served during the Persian Gulf War era, but his military personnel records do not show that he had any foreign service.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Finally, it is acknowledged that in the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran also requested review of an October 2021 rating decision, which granted service connection for bilateral hearing loss, rated 0 percent, effective August 5, 2021; and of an April 2022 rating decision, which denied service connection for headaches. As addressed in a May 2024 letter from the Board, the Notice of Disagreement was not received within the time allowed by law for these issues.  The Veteran was afforded 60 days from the date of the May 2024 letter to respond, if he believed his Notice of Disagreement should be considered timely as to his bilateral hearing loss and headaches issues. The Veteran did not respond and, therefore, the Board considers this matter closed and these issues will not be addressed herein.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection for an eye/vision disorder is denied. 

Initially, the July 2023 rating decision rendered no favorable findings for any of the issues on appeal. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis related an eye disorder. In the April 2023 claim for benefits, the Veteran indicated that he had an "Eye (Vision)" disorder due to flying debris and exposure to gun powder while firing weapons in service. He is competent to describe his experiences. Therefore, the criterion of an in-service incurrence is met. 

For purposes of entitlement to benefits, the law provides that refractive errors of the eyes are considered congenital or development disorders and are not a disease or injury within the meaning of applicable legislation. In a May 2023 VA eye examination, the Veteran reported having developed blurry near and distance vision six years earlier. The examiner did not diagnose any disorder of the eye stating that there were no objective findings for an eye disorder and that the Veteran more likely than not had refractive errors that were not corrected at distance and near. Tests of visual acuity revealed decreased near and distance vision. Loss of visual acuity reflects refractive errors of the eye. In the absence of superimposed disease or injury, service connection is not allowed for refractive error of the eyes, even if visual acuity decreased in service, as this is not a disease or injury within the meaning of applicable legislation relating to service connection. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(c), 4.9. 

The post-service treatment evidence also does not establish any current disability of either eye. No post-service treatment evidence relevant to the Veteran's eyes was received during the evidentiary period of the current appeal, and the Veteran has not offered any specific arguments or evidence demonstrating a current eye disorder other than loss of visual acuity. Therefore, the criterion of a current disability is not met. 

Regarding the Veteran's general claim for service connection, he is competent to attest to his symptoms. However, he is not competent as a lay person to provide a diagnosis. Diagnosing a disorder of the eye requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. See Jandreau, supra. Moreover, the Veteran has not offered any specific contentions or arguments as to his current symptoms and diagnosis. Therefore, the Board finds the medical evidence of record to be more probative than the lay evidence. As indicated above, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any current diagnoses, to include any symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for an eye/vision disorder is not warranted. There is no evidence to show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with or treated for an eye disorder at any time during the pendency of the claim or contemporaneous to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The Veteran has not presented any evidence to demonstrate that he has had symptoms of an eye disorder other than impaired visual acuity that have reached the level of functional impairment of earning capacity sufficient to be reasonably interpreted as a current disability under the governing statutes and regulations. See Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1365-68. 

In the absence of competent evidence of a current disability, there is no basis upon which service connection may be granted. See Brammer, 3?Vet. App.?at 225. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for an eye/vision disorder must be denied.

Service connection for a sinus disorder is denied.

Regarding the sinus disorder, no favorable findings were stated by the AOJ in the July 2023 rating decision. In a July 2023 VA examination, the clinician diagnosed acute sinusitis, indicating that X-ray findings at that time were consistent with that diagnosis. Therefore, the criterion of a current disability is met. 

Moreover, the Veteran contends that as a Security Specialist he was exposed to exhaust from military jets and aircrafts. See April 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; July 2023 VA examination report. While STRs do not show any complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis associated with sinus symptoms or diagnosis, the Veteran is competent to speak to his experiences. Therefore, the criterion of an in-service incurrence is also met. 

Nevertheless, a medical nexus is not established. Prior to providing an opinion, a July 2023 VA examiner reviewed the claims file and examined the Veteran. The examiner stated that the Veteran's disability pattern was not related to his toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) or individual longitudinal exposure record (ILER). After considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military duties of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran, the examiner determined that the sinus disorder was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner noted that the STRs revealed no information regarding the sinus disorder and that there was no direct medical evidence the Veteran had a history of sinus problems originating while in or after service. The examiner indicated that STRs, as well as civilian/VA records, were notably silent regarding a diagnosis of sinus problems. Further, the examiner observed that there were no diagnostic tests, similar disease or illness, or treatment exclusively consistent with the diagnosis of sinus problems. The examiner concluded that the complaint of a sinus disorder as related to in-service TERA/ILER exposure could not be medically correlated at that time. The examiner found that the Veteran's statements that the symptoms began while in service or directly after could not be taken as clinical evidence of a diagnosis in the absence of any medical assessment as they were subjective statements and concluded that a nexus could not be established. The examiner further emphasized that the X-ray performed in conjunction with the VA examination showed evidence of acute sinusitis of the left frontal and maxillary sinus, which was not consistent with chronic sinusitis.

Regarding the Veteran's general claim for service connection, he is competent to attest to his symptoms. However, he is not competent as a lay person to provide a diagnosis or opine as the etiology of his acute sinusitis. The ability to diagnose a disability and state whether it is related to an in-service event requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the Board finds the medical evidence of record to be more probative than the lay evidence. As indicated above, the July 2023 VA examiner determined the Veteran's current sinus disorder was not related his military service. There is no competent evidence (to include any medical opinions) to the contrary in the claims file.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for a sinus disorder is not warranted. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a sinus disorder is denied.

Service connection for right and left knee disorders is denied.

The July 2023 rating decision rendered no favorable findings regarding either the right or left knee claims. Nevertheless, STRs show that the Veteran was treated for mild right knee strain in March 1984. Also, in the April 2023 application for benefits, he claimed that he had knee disorders due to standing too long at entry points and jumping from military trucks and aircraft. The Veteran is competent to describe his experiences and symptoms. Therefore, the criterion of in-service incurrence is met for both the right and left knees. 

However, the competent evidence does not reflect a currently diagnosed disorder of either the right or left knee. Medical evidence of record does not document any complaint of, treatment for, or diagnosis associated with any disorder of the knee. Further, the Veteran has not offered any lay or medical evidence that describes symptoms or diagnoses of either the right or left knee.  

Regarding the Veteran's general claim for service connection, he is competent to attest to his symptoms. However, he is not competent as a lay person to provide a diagnosis. Diagnosing knee disorders requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. See Jandreau, supra. Moreover, the Veteran has not offered any specific contentions or arguments as to his current symptoms and diagnosis. Therefore, the Board finds the medical evidence of record to be more probative than the lay evidence. As indicated above, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are silent for any current diagnoses, to include any symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for a right or left knee disorder is not warranted. There is no evidence to show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with or treated for a disorder of either knee at any time during the pendency of the claims or contemporaneous to the filing of the claims. Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 29; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321. The Veteran has not presented any evidence to demonstrate that he has had symptoms of a right or left knee disorder that have reached the level of functional impairment of earning capacity sufficient to be reasonably interpreted as a current disability under the governing statutes and regulations. See Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1365-68. 

In the absence of competent evidence of a current disability, there is no basis upon which service connection may be granted. See Brammer, 3?Vet. App.?at 225. Accordingly, the claims for service connection for right and left knee disorders must be denied.

Service connection for a dental disorder is denied. 

Initially, a claim for service connection for a dental disorder is also considered a claim for VA outpatient dental treatment. See Mays v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 302 (1993). However, VA treatment notes show that the Veteran has been found ineligible for VA dental treatment. That decision is not before the Board, and the Board need not further address such a claim.

The dental conditions for which service-connected compensation benefits are available are set forth under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Codes 9900-9916. These conditions include loss of whole or part of the mandible, nonunion or malunion of the mandible, loss of whole or part of the ramus, loss of whole or part of the maxilla, nonunion or malunion of the maxilla, loss of the condyloid or coronoid process, or loss of any part of the hard palate.

Compensation is also available for loss of teeth only if such is due to loss of substance of body of maxilla or mandible. See Simmington v. West, 11 Vet. App. 41 (1998). For loss of the teeth, bone loss through trauma or disease, such as osteomyelitis, must be shown for compensable purposes. 

Absent a demonstration of dental trauma, service connection may be considered solely for the purpose of determining entitlement to dental examinations or outpatient dental treatment. See Woodson v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 352, 354 (1995). Treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease will be considered service connected solely for establishing eligibility for outpatient dental treatment as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 17.161. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381(a).

Replaceable missing teeth, treatable carious teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease are not disabling, and may be considered service connected solely for the purpose of determining entitlement to VA dental examination or outpatient dental treatment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381. In addition, to be compensable, the lost masticatory surface for any tooth cannot be restorable by suitable prosthesis. The loss of the alveolar process as a result of periodontal disease is not considered disabling. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, Diagnostic Code 9913, Note. 

The Veteran asserts that he lost teeth due to a root canal and lead fillings he received in service. However, the evidence does not show that he has a currently diagnosed dental disorder compensable under VA regulations. Medical evidence received during the evidentiary period does not show loss of substance of the mandible or maxilla, or loss of teeth due to bone loss from trauma or disease. Therefore, he does not have a dental disability for which monthly compensation may be granted. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Replaceable missing teeth, treatable carious teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses, and periodontal disease are not disabling, and may be considered service connected solely for the purpose of determining entitlement to VA dental examination or outpatient dental treatment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381.  Compensation for a dental disability is warranted only when due to trauma with resultant loss, malunion, or limited motion of the mandible, maxilla, ramus, condyloid process, or hard palate, or loss of substance of the maxilla or mandible. Compensation is specifically not warranted for loose or missing teeth. As such, the claim seeking compensation for a dental disorder manifested by loose teeth is precluded by the regulation and must therefore be denied as a matter of law. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. M. Schaefer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.