Citation Nr: A25030805
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-419883
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for left big toe condition, claimed as secondary to left ankle strain, is remanded.

The claim for service connection for right big toe condition, claimed as secondary to left ankle strain, is remanded.

The claim for service connection for plantar fasciitis, claimed as secondary to left ankle strain, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from August 2013 to July 2015.

He seeks service connection for bilateral big toe disabilities and plantar fasciitis, all claimed as secondary to his service-connected left ankle disability. 

In a May 2023 rating action, the Regional Office (RO) denied, in part, service connection for bilateral big toe disabilities and plantar fasciitis.  In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), requesting review of the May 2023 rating decision.  The June 2023 HLR rating decision continued the denial of the Veteran's claims for service connection.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.  A rating decision later that month denied the claims as it determined that relevant evidence was not submitted.  The Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 HLR request and in a January 2024 HLR rating decision, duty to assist errors were found as medical examination and/or medical opinions were not obtained prior to adjudication.

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations of the feet and VA etiological opinions were obtained.  While diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis and bilateral hallux valgus were confirmed, negative nexus opinions of the secondary theory of entitlement were provided.  However, the Board finds that the opinions were not supported by any medical reasoning or evidentiary support that the nature of the disabilities stemmed from service.  A bare conclusion, even one reached by a medical professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record.  Miller v. Brown, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998).

Because the VA examiner's opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes, it is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to the February 2024 VA examination regarding the Veteran's secondary theory of entitlement to service connection for bilateral big toe disabilities, to include hallux valgus.  If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. 

The VA examiner is asked to address the following:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's bilateral big toe disabilities, to include hallux valgus, were caused by his service-connected left ankle disability.  Why or why not?

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's bilateral big toe disabilities, to include hallux valgus, were aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected left ankle disability.  Why or why not?

If aggravation is found, the VA examiner should identify a baseline level of severity of the disability by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the disability.  If such cannot be done, it should be explained why.

The VA examiner is asked to provide a clear rationale, with any supporting medical evidence, to the opinions.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion to the February 2024 VA examination regarding the Veteran's secondary theory of entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis.  If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled. 

The VA examiner is asked to address the following:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis was caused by his service-connected left ankle disability.  Why or why not?

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis, was aggravated (made worse) by his service-connected left ankle disability.  Why or why not?

If aggravation is found, the VA examiner should identify a baseline level of severity of the disability by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of the disability.  If such cannot be done, it should be explained why.

The VA examiner is asked to provide a clear rationale, with any supporting medical evidence, to the opinions.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Yoo, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.