Citation Nr: A25030244
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433282
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 2007 through June 2011, as a machine gunner and infantryman.  He deployed to both Afghanistan and Iraq and was awarded the Combat Action Ribbon and Purple Heart Medal, among numerous others.  

Applicable Evidentiary Window

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The April 2024 rating decision denied service connection for the Veteran's sleep apnea.  In April 2024, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  There, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 VA rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Preliminary Matters

In the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was received by VA and readjudicated the Veteran's claim on the merits.  The AOJ also made favorable findings that the Veteran has an OSA diagnosis and participated in a TERA. See April 2024 rating decision and December 2023 TERA Memo.  The Board is bound by such favorable findings and will proceed to review the Veteran's appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Service connection for OSA is remanded.

The Board finds that remand is required for new VA opinions as to direct and secondary service connection as a result of pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Veteran contends his OSA was caused by burn pit exposures during his deployments.  See November 2023 Veteran Correspondence.  

Turning to the evidence, although the Veteran was not diagnosed with OSA during service, there is contemporaneous evidence supporting sleep issues during and after service.  Specifically, the Veteran noted sleep concerns beginning on active duty in 2009 during his second deployment to Afghanistan, in April 2011 at his separation physical and at an August 2011 VA examination, and a March 2012 VA provider note.  He was diagnosed with both chronic sleep impairment and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in a 2012 VA mental health exam.  In a February 2024 VA OSA exam, he reported symptoms including snoring, interrupted sleep, daytime sleepiness, and witnessed cessation of breathing in January 2009, and noted he was diagnosed with OSA and provided a CPAP machine in May 2016.  See VA OSA DBQ February 5, 2024; June 2016 CAPRI records; January 2016 sleep study.

The record contains November 2016, December 2023, February 2024, and April 2024 VA medical examination reports and opinions evaluating the Veteran's OSA.  

The November 2016 VA OSA exam and medical opinion were provided without an examination of the Veteran, confirming his OSA diagnosis, noting post-service weight gain, service-connected psychological and musculoskeletal conditions, and concluding that his OSA was unrelated to toxic exposures during deployments.  However, the examiner did not discuss any theories of service connection.

The December 2023 VA OSA exam and medical opinion was also completed after a review of the Veteran's VA claims file, without an examination of the Veteran.  Despite acknowledging the Veteran's sleep difficulties, the opinion cited to a January 2024 Home Sleep Study Interpretation Report finding no OSA diagnosis, but failing to address the 2016 sleep study, diagnosis, and OSA exam and opinion. The examiner opined the given the 2024 negative sleep study, that the Veteran had no OSA diagnosis and therefore his sleep difficulties were not related to his service.  

The February 2024 VA Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire confirmed that the Veteran was previously diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2016.  As previously mentioned, this examiner noted the Veteran had reported his OSA onset in service in January 2009 when he began snoring, suffering from interrupted sleep, daytime sleepiness, and cessation of breathing while sleeping.  The Veteran further reported that his symptoms had progressed since military service, and he now required a breathing assistance device.  However, the examiner did not offer an opinion on service connection.  

The April 2024 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (Sleep Apnea Diagnosis) reviewed the conflicting medical evidence of record and opined that the Veteran suffered from obstructive sleep apnea. However, again, the examiner did not discuss or offer an opinion on service connection.  

Finally, the April 2024 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (Toxic Exposure) examined whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by deployment related environmental hazards, or any other toxic exposures, that Veteran experienced in service, ultimately opining that sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's in-service exposures.  The examiner explained that medical literature failed to identify any causative relationship between the Veteran's exposures and sleep apnea.   

While these examinations and opinions provide some helpful information regarding the lack of a nexus between the Veteran's OSA and his TERA exposures, they do not provide the information necessary to render a decision regarding the Veteran's claimed relationship between his OSA and military service.  The examiners did not consider or address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the in-service etiology of his sleep apnea symptoms, nor did they discuss the Veteran's in-service, and immediately post-service reports, of sleep difficulties and coughing at night contained within his service treatment records and other contemporaneous medical records.  Further, no examiner directly addressed the Veteran's service-connected PTSD (and related chronic sleep impairment) and any relationship to his non-service connected OSA.

In order to be entitled to probative weight, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodrigues v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Further, the examiner must consider whether any lay evidence was satisfactory.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lastly, the absence of a documented diagnosis or symptomology in service or at separation cannot be the basis for a negative opinion for service connection.  See Ledford v. Derwinksi, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Dalton at 23.  Accordingly, an inadequate medical examination or opinion may be assigned low probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993) (Board may properly reject medical opinion where it is based on facts contradicted by the record).  

Because the November 2016, December 2023, February 2024 and April 2024 opinions did not contain a thorough rationale to support their opinions or failed to address direct or secondary service connection entirely, the Board finds them inadequate for service connection adjudication purposes.

While the Board regrets the additional delay this remand causes, there is no adequate medical opinion of record regarding direct service connection for the Veteran's sleep apnea and the AOJ's reliance on inadequate medical opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802; Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes to provide an examination, it must be adequate).  

Mindful that it must construe a Veteran's claim sympathetically and that the scope of a disability claim encompasses the claimant's description of claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record, the Board considers both direct and secondary service connection as theories of entitlement falling within the scope of the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a); Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Accordingly, remand is therefore required to obtain addendum opinions regarding service connection on a direct and secondary basis.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion by an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's OSA.  The claims file and this remand should be made available to the examiner.

The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following: 

Direct service connection

a. Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was caused by active service.    

In providing the above opinion, the examiner is requested to address the Veteran's reports of sleep difficulties in active service as noted in this decision and the Veteran's treatment records to include April and August 2011 STRs, August 2011 and 2012 VA records and the prior OSA and TERA examinations.  

Secondary service connection

b. Opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  In other words, would the Veteran's OSA have occurred "but for" the Veteran's service-connected PTSD/psychiatric disorders or whether "but for" the Veteran's service-connected disability, the functional impairment would have improved/worsened. 

If the clinician opines that the OSA would result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected PTSD, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

TERA

c. Opine whether the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not caused by the Veteran's TERAs considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.  

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report his sleep related symptoms and their history, and that the Veteran's lay reports must be specifically considered in formulating a medical opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  If the clinician is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so.

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Stanley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.