Citation Nr: A25030010
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240521-442137
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for testicular cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2001 to September 2003.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 15, 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

On the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran referenced the March 15, 2024 decision and elected the Board's Direct Review docket. Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of March 15, 2024-the date of the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after March 15, 2024, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.2501.

The March 2024 rating decision includes favorable findings of currently diagnosed disabilities of cancer of the kidney and testicle. The Board sees no reason to disturb these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104(c). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed testicular and kidney cancer were caused by in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). 

After a review of the evidence of record, a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error in VA's failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion regarding the likely etiology of the claimed testicular and kidney cancer. 

A November 2023 VA TERA memorandum notes that the Veteran was exposed to radiation due to his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) as a munitions systems and exposure to PFOAs on the flight line.

VA requested VA medical opinions concerning the etiology of the Veteran's testicular and kidney cancer to include as due to TERA that were completed in December 2023. The VA examiner determined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's prostate and kidney disability were related to active service to include TERA. The provided rationale was that Based on the cumulative scientific data which noted that at doses below 10 rems (100 mSv) there is not a statistically significant increased risk in disability/disease from radiation, the likelihood of such disability/disease being due to ionizing radiation in service (for a Veteran with less than 10 rems of exposure) was not likely. The VA examiner also reported that there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the claimed cancer and the TERA to include that the Veteran's MOS as in munitions systems and PFOAs used on flight line at this time.

The Board finds that the VA examiner's opinions and rationales and inadequate. The examiner generally reasoned that no medical literature shows a relationship between radiation exposure and PFOAs failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. The examiner did not cite to any specific medical literature. The Board finds the opinions to be inadequate. In each instance, the examiner's rationale is essentially limited to a conclusory statement without any supporting rationale other than vaguely referencing medical literature. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (stating that a medical rationale based solely on general medical literature without discussing the specific facts pertaining to a veteran's condition or individual circumstances is inadequate). The examiner failed to discuss the specifics of the Veteran's case. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2013); see also Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000) (noting that factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion include the thoroughness and detail of the opinion). Therefore, this matter must be remanded for new VA medical opinions to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for an opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician with a background, preferably in oncology, for the Veteran's testicular cancer and kidney cancer. The clinician is to review the Veteran's claims file to become familiar with his relevant medical history. Then, the clinician is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Opine whether the Veteran's testicular cancer is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset during active-duty service or was otherwise etiologically related to service.

(b.) Opine whether the Veteran's kidney cancer is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset during active-duty service or was otherwise etiologically related to service.

(c.) Opine whether the Veteran's testicular cancer is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(d.) Opine whether the Veteran's kidney cancer is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) was caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In providing the above opinions, the examiner must pay attention to and consider the Veteran's TERA to include exposure to radiation and PFOAs in relationship to MOS.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided. All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Dworkin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.