Citation Nr: A25030607
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230518-363522
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) prior to September 12, 2023 is denied.

Entitlement to a 70 percent rating for PTSD is granted from September 12, 2023, subject to the law and regulations regarding the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to total rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) prior to July 10, 2024 is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to September 12, 2023 the Veteran's PTSD was not productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

2. From September 12, 2023 the Veteran's PTSD symptoms have included suicidal and homicidal ideation, impaired impulse control and social isolation.  

3. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities were not of sufficient severity to produce unemployability prior to July 10, 2024.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD are not met prior to September 12, 2023.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

2. The criteria for a 70 percent rating for PTSD are met since September 12, 2023.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

3. The criteria for entitlement to TDIU prior to July 10, 2024 are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1965 to December 1967 and from May 1991 to December 2004.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 14, 2019 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

A January 2024 Board decision denied the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for PTSD and his claim for TDIU.  The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In October 2024, the Court granted a joint motion for remand (JMR) and vacated the January 2024 Board decision.

The JMR states that the Board erred by concluding that it could only consider whether the Veteran's symptoms warranted an increased rating as of the September 2019 RO rating decision.  The JMR pointed out that the rating period under consideration was not limited by the limitations on the evidentiary record.  

The evidentiary record is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the September 2019 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as the evidence submitted by the Veteran and his attorney at the September 2023 hearing and within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD prior to September 12, 2023.

The Veteran submitted his claim for service connection for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD in September 2018.  The Veteran's service-connected PTSD was rated as 50 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9411, under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).

Under the General Rating Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A rating of 70 percent is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id. 

A 100 percent rating is assigned when the condition results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id. 

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Importantly, evaluations under § 4.130 are symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  The Board notes however that the list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating and are not meant to be exhaustive.  The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21; Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  If the evidence shows the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.

An October 2017 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran was screened for PTSD and depression, and that he was not found to have either.  July 2018 and June 2019 VA depression screenings were also negative.  These VA treatment records noted that the Veteran denied suicidal thoughts and denied thoughts of harming others.

On VA examination in September 2019 the Veteran reported that he had lived alone since his spouse died but that he had close relationships with his three children and six grandchildren.  He disclosed being closely connected to all his family members and being very involved in church and church related activities, such as bowling.  Occupationally, the Veteran reported employment after the National Guard as a record keeper for six years, a pay roll clerk for five years and most recently a business manager at his church for six years.  He also reported doing a few odd jobs here and there.  The Veteran denied receiving any mental health treatment since 2008.  He also denied suicidal or homicidal ideations and hallucinations, but he did endorse nightmares and occasional PTSD flashbacks.  He reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, hypervigilance, being triggered by loud cues, pervasive fatigue, sleep disturbances, mild memory loss, difficulty in understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, impaired impulse control, social isolation and occasional difficulties with memory and sustained concentration.  The examiner observed that the Veteran was well dressed and well groomed.  He was oriented, with logical and linear speech with a normal rate, volume, and tone.  His affect was depressed but insight and judgment were fair.  He denied any cognitive impairments but reported intermittent and mild difficulties with memory and sustained attention.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

At the September 2023 Board hearing, the Veteran described being unable to be near individuals of Asian descent and having impaired impulse control that required him to leave situations if he became triggered.  He also reported road rage.  He testified that at night he had a ritual of doing a perimeter search of his home before going to bed and keeping his shotgun by the front door.  He reported that he is obsessive compulsive about hygiene and will sometimes bathe two to three times a day.  During the hearing the Veteran's representative inquired about suicidal ideation and the Veteran stated that it was something that happened a long time ago but will creep up when something happens that he could not control.  He also reported that he sometimes worked at a friend's barbershop to make extra money.  Upon inquiry, the Veteran clarified that his current symptoms are worse than his symptoms in 2019, but that he did periodically experience suicidal ideation in 2019.   

The Veteran submitted a September 2023 private psychological evaluation within 90 days of his hearing.  The Veteran was described as alert and oriented, but the clinician explained that he expressed irritability about examiners and going through multiple examinations.  The clinician also described the Veteran's irritability about this particular examination to include his initial resistance to attend.  The psychologist concluded that the Veteran had zero tolerance for mistakes and reacted with very disproportionate levels of anger that took him a significant period of time to resolve.  While his speech was within normal limits, he was irritable, at times tangential, and his overall manner of relating was limited.  The Veteran reported poor sleep, nightmares, and sudden intense feelings of homicidal and suicidal ideation but denied a history of attempts or an intention of doing either.  He reported choosing isolation to avoid triggers.  The Veteran underwent the PCL-5 and received a score indicative of severe PTSD symptoms.  He reported a lost interest in activities, superficial relationships outside of his family, and that he had disrupted church services due to being triggered.  He denied psychosis and hallucinations.  The clinician reported anxiety that crosses a line to paranoia; however, his thought processes were reported to be generally clear and linear.  The psychologist concluded that the Veteran's insight was limited, judgment poor and impulsivity high.  The psychologist found that the Veteran continued to endorse and display symptoms of severe PTSD, which appeared to have worsened over time.  He opined that the Veteran was presently disabled with a total occupational and social impairment due to PTSD.

Based on the above evidence, the Board finds that the criteria for a higher rating in excess 50 percent was not warranted prior to September 12, 2023.  In that regard, prior to September 12, 2023, the Veteran did not demonstrate symptomatology commensurate to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood (i.e., the criteria for a 70 percent rating).  The September 2019 VA examination report and VA treatment records are the most probative evidence regarding the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms during the period prior to September 12, 2023.  Notably, the examination was based on evaluation of the Veteran and a review of the Veteran's claims file.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran stated at his September 2023 hearing that he had had suicidal ideation in 2019 but finds that the Veteran's denial of such symptoms in VA treatment records and at a VA examination in 2019 is more probative as to the Veteran's symptoms at that time.  The Board notes that prior to September 12, 2023 the Veteran was not shown to have any of the symptoms listed in the criteria for the assignment of a 70 percent rating or any symptomology which approximates this.  The Board further notes that the Veteran reported that he occasionally worked odd jobs, that he was active in church related activities, and he was in a church related bowling group.  These activities suggest that the Veteran had adequate social functioning.  As such, the Veteran was not shown to suffer from psychiatric symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration to cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to a 70 percent disability rating prior to September 12, 2023.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.  Rather, the Veteran's symptoms, were most adequately contemplated by the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  As such, a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD prior to September 12, 2023 was not warranted.

2. Entitlement to a 70 percent rating for PTSD from September 12, 2023.

Considering all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent rating for PTSD from September 12, 2023.  At his September 12, 2023 hearing the Veteran reported periodically having some suicidal thoughts.  He also reported impaired impulse control and that sometimes he would be at a family gathering and something happened to trigger him and he would have to leave early so he would not do anything he should not do.  Additionally, the private psychologist opined on September 18, 2023 that the Veteran had severe symptoms of PTSD.  In light of the evidence showing some impaired impulse control and some suicidal ideation the Board finds that the criteria for a 70 percent rating have been met since September 12, 2023.  

The Board finds that the Veteran has not met the criteria for a higher, 100 percent, rating for his PTSD, based on the evidence described above.  The most probative of this evidence shows that the Veteran did not have gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  

The Board has considered the September 2023 medical opinion from the private psychologist concluding that the Veteran is presently 100 percent disabled due to his psychiatric condition; however, greater weight is given to the Veteran's September 2023 hearing testimony that did not reflect such severity.  The psychologist stated that the Veteran had gross impairment of his thought processes and communication as well as grossly inappropriate behavior which is not shown by the hearing testimony or other evidence.  He also stated that the Veteran had periods of violence which is not shown by the record.  To the contrary the Veteran reported at his hearing that he was still working occasionally as a barber.  This not only shows that the Veteran was not 100 percent disabled due to his PTSD, but in addition it shows frequent contact with others in a job that involves communicating clearly with many people.  As such, the Veteran was not shown to suffer from psychiatric symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration to cause total occupational or social impairment and a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.  

3. Entitlement to TDIU prior to July 10, 2024.

A November 2024 rating decision granted the Veteran TDIU from July 10, 2024.  Consequently, the Board's must consider whether the Veteran is entitled to TDIU prior to July 10, 2024.  However, in making this determination the Board may consider only the evidence that was of record at the time of the September 2019 rating decision on appeal, any evidence submitted by the Veteran during his September 2023 hearing, or within 90 days after the hearing.  

At the hearing the Veteran raised the issue of TDIU.  In the case of Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 455 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that a claim for a TDIU due to service-connected disabilities is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when such claim is raised by the record.

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Id. 

During the appeal period, prior to July 10, 2024, the Veteran had a 50 percent rating for PTSD and additional ratings for right shoulder degenerative joint disease, hypertension, bilateral onychomycosis of the toenails, degenerative disc disease of the lumbar and cervical spine, tinnitus, right knee strain, tinea versicolor and asthma resulting in a combined 70 percent rating prior to April 27, 2023, and a combined rating of 80 percent from April 27, 2023 to July 10, 2024.  Thus, the Veteran met the schedular requirements for a TDIU prior to July 10, 2024.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training.  See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014).  It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability.  Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  The ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

At his September 2023 hearing the Veteran reported that he retired in 2005 and that he now occasionally works as a barber to supplement his income.  He said that he could sit on a stool if needed and that he could leave after three or four hours if needed.  

The Veteran provided a VA 21-8940 within 90 days of his hearing.  He reported that he last worked full-time in 2005 doing administrative work for the National Guard after which he worked no more than 10 hours a week as a barber.  No additional employment information was provided.  For education, he disclosed attending four years of college and not having any additional training or education since becoming too disabled to work.

Also, within 90 days of his hearing, the Veteran submitted a vocational assessment conducted in October 2023, on which he reported an employment history of being a parts handler from 1969 to 1985, a nurse's aide from 1985 to 1988 and writing credit reports from 1988 to 1991.  After 2005 he worked part time odd jobs as well as working as a barber.  He received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Business Administration.

At the vocational assessment, the Veteran reported difficulty with things such as lifting his arm overhead, driving, lifting over five pounds, opening items, being able to sit, walk and/or stand for 30 minutes and looking up and down or right to left.  He also reported numbness in the feet, dizziness, use of a cane for ambulation and balance, sciatica, history of falls due to his knee giving out, ringing in the ears that causes issues with focus and concentration, difficulty hearing, headaches which cause him to need to lay down, and shoulder popping out of place, among other complaints.  The evaluator opined that the Veteran has been unemployable since 2005 as due to his numerous limitations he has the capacity for less than sedentary work based on the definition used by the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT).  The evaluator asserted that the opinion provided was supported by the medical evidence alone and substantiated by the Veteran's interview.

Based on the available evidence of record, the Board finds that a TDIU is not warranted prior to July 10, 2024.  First, there is conflicting evidence regarding the Veteran's employment status during the period at issue.  At the vocational assessment in 2023 the Veteran reported employment as a parts handler for 16 years, nurse's aide for three years and credit report writer for three years prior to his retirement in 2005, after which he claimed to work odd jobs and part time work as a barber.  However, at the VA examination in September 2019 the Veteran reported that after he retired from the National Guard in 2005 he was employed as a record keeper for six years, a payroll clerk for five years and as a business manager at his church for six years as well as doing a few odd jobs here and there.  Thus, the record establishes a pattern of inconsistent reporting, which calls into question the Veteran's overall credibility and the reliability of the statements offered in support of his claim for benefits.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (the Board can consider bias in lay evidence and conflicting statements of the veteran in weighting credibility).

As noted above the Veteran only reported his employment with the National Guard and part time work as a barber on his VA 21-8940.  As the Veteran failed to disclose all his employment on the VA 21-8940 and the record reveals inconsistent statements regarding his employment status, the Board is unable to determine whether any of these positions were held during the period on appeal and/or constitute substantial gainful employment.  A complete VA Form 21-8940 is necessary to establish entitlement to a TDIU because it gathers relevant and indispensable information regarding a claimant's disabilities and employment and educational histories.  Here, the Veteran did not provide the information needed to adjudicate his claim.  As the Veteran raised the issue of TDIU after the rating decision on appeal, there is no duty to assist error that warrants a remand.

Second, while the vocational assessment concluded that the Veteran has been unemployable since 2005, the evaluator relied, in part, on disabilities that are not service connected, the Veteran's statements and selective portions of the medical records, which reduces its probative value.  For instance, the Veteran is not service connected for headaches, hearing loss or sciatica; however, the effects of these conditions were included in the rationale supporting the conclusion that he is unemployable.  In addition, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus interfered with sleep, focus and concentration but the medical records reveal that in 2018 he denied that tinnitus interfered with his sleep or quiet daily activities.  During the interview the Veteran also indicated that he needs a cane for ambulation and has a history of falls but the medical records report that he is ambulatory without assistance and does not have a history of falls.  He was also noted to walk a lot despite his reports at the 2023 assessment that he had difficulty walking for 30 minutes.  These inconsistencies reduce the probative value of the Veteran's statements regarding the effects of his service connected conditions.

Additionally, the evaluator included a selection of records deemed most relevant, which consisted predominately of examinations in 2008 and 2009, prior to the period on appeal, along with the September 2019 VA examination.  However, the examiner failed to discuss the relevant parts of the records that are inconsistent with the finding of unemployability.  For example, the evaluator referenced the July 2009 VA examination for the shoulder noting constant burning pain that is more severe at night, cited from the medical history provided by the Veteran to support her conclusion.  However, the evaluator did not include that at that examination the Veteran also reported that he did not experience any overall functional impairment from his condition and the VA examiner concluded that the only effect from his shoulder was difficulty with heavy lifting.  For these reasons, the Board finds the October 2023 vocational assessment is not persuasive.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board also notes that at the hearing the Veteran testified that he was not very good at jobs that require sitting and working on a computer because he does not have the knowledge; however, the record reflects a collective 17 years of experience as record keeper, payroll clerk or business manager, which would most certainly require the use and knowledge of a computer.  Furthermore, the Veteran reported having a Bachelor of Arts degree in Business Administration, which would indicate he has the requisite knowledge for sitting and working at a computer as that tends to be the primary task associated with administrative work.  Again, based on the inconsistencies the Board gives little weight to the Veteran's testimony and statements.  See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995) ( In weighing credibility, VA may consider internal inconsistency, facial plausibility, and consistency with other evidence of record).

Accordingly, the available evidence of record does not support TDIU as there is conflicting information about the Veteran's employment status and the functional limitations caused by his service connected conditions.  Furthermore, the Veteran has reported that he still works occasionally as a barber which indicates that he is not totally unemployable due to his service-connected disabilities.  Thus, there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that he was unable to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment prior to prior to July 10, 2024 due to his service-connected disabilities alone.  Consequently, the claim for TDIU is denied.

 

 

G. A. WASIK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jones, R. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.