Citation Nr: A25030014
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-468828
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Prior to January 4, 2024, an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits. 

As of January 4, 2024, an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, claimed as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals and/or secondary to service-connected other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, claimed as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals and/or secondary to service-connected other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to January 4, 2024, the Veteran's other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder is manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment.

2. As of January 4, 2024, the Veteran's other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder is manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to January 4, 2024, the criteria for an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9499-9410.

2. As of January 4, 2024, the criteria for an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9499-9410.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1967 to November 1971. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in July 2024 and August 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In August 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decisions by filing a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested a Board hearing, which was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge in December 2024. A transcript of the hearing is associated with the record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 and August 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

With respect to the adjudication of the Veteran's claim for a higher initial rating for his psychiatric disability, if he would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, as the Board is remanding the service connection claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to initial compensable rating prior to April 8, 2024, and in excess of 30 percent thereafter for other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id. 

For the entire appeal period stemming from November 30, 2017, the date of service connection, the Veteran's other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder is evaluated as noncompensably disabling prior to April 8, 2024, and 30 percent disabling thereafter pursuant to DC 9499-9410, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In this regard, such provides that a noncompensable rating is warranted where a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

A 10 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). 

Turning to the evidence of record, in November 2017 statement, the Veteran reported experiencing ruminating thoughts, nightmares, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, difficulty falling and staying asleep, anxiety, anger and irritability with low frustration tolerance without physical violence, depression, excessive worry, and difficulty with comprehension. He also noted that his spouse had been with him for over 48 years.

VA treatment records dated throughout the appeal period reflect the Veteran's ongoing participation in therapy with reports of varying symptoms, to include anxiety, guilt, ruminating thoughts, nightmares, flashbacks/intrusive thoughts, irritability, sleep disruption, avoidance, feeling detached from non-family members, lack of motivation, and remaining vigilant in public. However, he consistently reported that he was doing okay with good appetite and sleep and engagement in activities, denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, and had normal mental status examinations with the occasional exception of an anxious, depressed, and/or irritated mood and congruent or constricted affect. In February 2023, the Veteran indicated that he was experiencing some struggles with his short-term memory, although such was not affecting his daily routine. He also reported that he lived with his spouse, who was identified as his support system, had 1 son and 4 step/biological grandchildren, and volunteered at the American Legion.

At a January 4, 2024, private psychiatric evaluation, Dr. Q.A.-S., a psychologist, noted that mental status examination revealed that the Veteran was anxious and down with a constricted affect. It was observed that he experienced considerable survivor guilt, reported that he felt sad much of the time, and did not enjoy things the way he used to. Dr. Q.A.-S. also noted that the Veteran has crying spells, high levels of irritability and agitation, difficulty with falling and staying asleep, nightmares, and increased appetite. The Veteran also reported a history of passive suicidal ideation, but denied any active suicidal ideation or history of homicidal ideation. 

Dr. Q.A.-S. observed that the Veteran endorsed and displayed significant symptoms of anxiety and trauma-related symptoms, to include avoidance of discussing his military service, high levels of anxiety, and considerable worry about his health. It was noted that the Veteran was hypervigilant, patrolled at night for danger, and did not travel. Psychological testing revealed moderate distressing memories, flashbacks, and avoidance. It was also noted that the Veteran endorsed a mild loss of interest in activities he used to enjoy, feeling distant and cut off from others, irritability, difficulty with concentration, and hyperstartle response, and moderate difficulties with having positive feelings, hypervigilance, and falling and staying asleep.

There was no evidence of psychosis, a thought disorder, or auditory or visual hallucinations. The Veteran's thought processes were clear and linear, he had average intelligence, intact short- and long-term memory, fair insight and judgment, and low impulsivity. Dr. Q.A.-S. found that the Veteran had mild to moderate depression symptoms, to include persistent guilt, sadness, restlessness, and irritability with trouble with overeating and sleep, and significant anxiety and trauma symptoms, to include nightmares, intrusive memories, significant avoidance, and some heightened physiological responses and startle effect.

Dr. Q.A.-S. noted that the Veteran was employed testing electric meters in the field where he worked alone, which was the only way he was capable of holding a job. In this regard, it was indicated that he did well working in the field as he was able to schedule his own day and did not have to have contact with supervisors, co-workers, or customers. He was also able to take breaks without his supervisor noticing when he became overwhelmed by anxiety. Dr. Q.A.S. observed that the Veteran was promoted to supervisor and began to have considerable difficulties at work as he struggled to manage the interpersonal demands of the position as well as persistence and pace in the job as he was no longer to take breaks as necessary, and retired in 2010. While Dr. Q.A.S. stated that the Veteran's interpersonal functioning is limited, it was noted that the Veteran's spouse and his brother, whom he moved to be closer to, were his main sources of support, he was close with his spouse, and had some friends, but it was a very small circle and mostly people he had known since childhood.

Ultimately, Dr. Q.A.S. found that the Veteran is 50 percent disabled by his psychiatric disability in that he endorses and displays persistent moderate issues with occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to his chronic anxiety and disturbances of motivation and mood. He further indicated that the Veteran had difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and struggles with a limited social and behavioral repertoire and often does not engage in activities besides the most routine and well-known.

At an April 8, 2024, VA examination, the examiner, a psychologist, found that the Veteran's psychiatric disability resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication, which is commensurate with a 10 percent rating under the General Rating Formula. At such time, the Veteran reported that his son lived nearby; enjoyed Sudoku puzzles, golf with friends, and card games; and attended the American Legion. He also indicated that, after service, he worked for the power company for 38 years and retired in 2010. The Veteran reported that he also volunteered at the American Legion.

The Veteran indicated that he slept 6 to 7 hours a night, but does not feel rested and needs a nap during the day. He also had nightmares with occasional night sweats, but denied panic attacks. The Veteran indicated that his mood was pretty good with medication, but he would be very anxious and depressed without it. He was bothered by loud, sudden noises and avoided crowded places, but denied suicidal ideation. His symptoms were noted to include anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss, and mental status examination was normal with the exception of an anxious mood with a congruent affect.

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he experienced depression, anxiety, nightmares, and survivor's guilt. He further reported that he was married, but avoided going out as he has difficulty with crowds, and stated that work helped his psychiatric symptoms as he had to remain focused, but he had a little bit of an issue with co-workers due to disagreements with other supervisors and was able to manage his anxiety/panic and ruminations due to a flexible daily scheduled. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that, prior to January 4, 2024, his psychiatric disability is manifested by survivor's guilt, ruminating thoughts, avoidance of triggering stimuli, hypervigilance, nightmares, flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, difficulty falling and staying asleep, anxiety, anger and irritability with low frustration tolerance without physical violence, depression, excessive worry, feeling detached from non-family members, lack of motivation, and subjective reports of difficulty with comprehension and short-term memory, resulting in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, thereby warranting a 30 percent rating.

In this regard, the totality of the Veteran's symptomatology is full contemplated by such rating, with the possible exception of his report of a lack of motivation, which may be indicative of a 50 percent rating under the General Rating Formula; however, regardless of the classification of such symptoms, the Board finds that the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of such symptoms do not result in a greater degree of occupational and social impairment. Specifically, during such time period, the Veteran remained married to his spouse of approximately 50 years, whom he identified as his support system, had a relationship with his son and grandchildren, and volunteered at the American Legion. Additionally, while he has been retired since 2010, the record reflects that the Veteran had a long career with the power company, with promotions, which he indicated helped his psychiatric symptoms as he had to remain focused, with only a little bit of an issue with co-workers due to disagreements with other supervisors and he was able to manage his anxiety/panic and ruminations due to a flexible daily schedule. Thus, the Board finds that, for such period, the Veteran's psychiatric disability did not result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Rather, it was not until January 4, 2024, at Dr. Q.A.-S.'s psychiatric evaluation that the Veteran reported additional and increased psychiatric symptoms resulting in a greater degree of occupational and social impairment, thereby warranting a 50 percent rating. In this regard, while the Veteran's representative argues that such evaluation supports such a higher rating throughout the appeal period, Dr. Q.A.-S. makes no such representation and such contention is unsupported by the Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records detailing his aforementioned reported symptoms and related functional impairment.

Specifically, at Dr. Q.A.-S.'s evaluation, the Veteran reported, for the first time, feeling sad much of the time, a lack of enjoyment in things he used to, crying spells, a high level of irritability and agitation, and passive suicidal ideation, and what Dr. Q.A.-S. classified as "significant" symptoms of anxiety and trauma-related symptoms, to include avoidance of discussing his military service, nightmares, intrusive memories, high levels of anxiety, considerable worry about his health, some heightened physiological responses and startle effect, and hypervigilance with night patrols and a lack of travel. Furthermore, Dr. Q.A.-S. found that the Veteran's psychiatric disability resulted in difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, as he struggles with a limited social and behavioral repertoire and often does not engage in activities besides the most routine and well-known. Ultimately, based on the foregoing, he opined that such disability resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to his chronic anxiety and disturbances of motivation and mood, which is commensurate with a 50 percent rating under the General Rating Formula.

In this regard, the Board notes that the April 2024 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's psychiatric disability resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication, due to symptoms of anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and an anxious mood with a congruent affect, which is commensurate with only a 10 percent rating under the General Rating Formula. However, she also noted therein that he had nightmares with occasional night sweats, would be very anxious and depressed without medication, was bothered by loud, sudden noises, and avoided crowded places.

Consequently, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that, as of January 4, 2024, his psychiatric disability results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, thereby warranting a 50 percent rating. 

In this regard, the totality of the Veteran's symptomatology is full contemplated by such rating, with the possible exception of his report of passive suicidal ideation, which may be indicative of a 70 percent rating under the General Rating Formula; however, regardless of the classification of such symptoms, the Board finds that the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of such symptoms do not result in a greater degree of occupational and social impairment. Specifically, during such time period, the Veteran's spouse and his brother, whom he moved to be closer to, were noted to be his main sources of support, he was close with his spouse, his son lived nearby, and he had some friends, but it was a very small circle and mostly people he had known since childhood, and, while he remained retired with the above noted impact on his occupational functioning while working, he enjoyed Sudoku puzzles, golf with friends, and card games, and attended the American Legion. Thus, the Board finds that, for such period, the Veteran's psychiatric disability did not result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

In reaching such determinations, Board has considered whether additional staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout each period on appeal. Thus, assigning additional staged ratings for such disability is not warranted. Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, in regard to the initial rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing decision, the Board has resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor, which has resulted in the partial award of higher initial ratings for his other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder. However, to the extent that higher initial ratings are denied herein, the Board finds that the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of his claim. Consequently, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard, and the Veteran's initial rating claim must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. 5107; 38 C.F.R. 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, claimed as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals and/or secondary to service-connected other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder.

3. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II, claimed as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals and/or secondary to service-connected other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder.

In his April 2024 claim, the Veteran contended that his hypertension and diabetes mellitus, type II, are related to in-service exposure to hazardous chemicals or, in the alternative, secondary to his service-connected psychiatric disability. 

The Board notes that, in documents of record and at the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran alleged that he was exposed to herbicide agents coincident with his service at Dover Air Force Base (AFB), Delaware. In this regard, he reported that his duties as a C-141 crew chief included processing the deceased service members aboard aircraft returning from Vietnam and, thereafter, cleaning the aircraft, and he believes he was exposed to residual herbicide agents present on the bodies and associated personal items and/or aircraft. 

However, in May 2017, the AOJ determined that the Department of Defense has not identified Dover AFB as a location where Agent Orange was used, tested, stored, or transported. In this regard, it was noted that Agent Orange was developed for jungle combat operations in Vietnam and was used there from 1962 to early 1971, but there were no combat operations at Dover AFB during such years so there was no need for Agent Orange use there. The AOJ further observed that such AFB was not on the Agent Orange shipping supply line, which went directly from storage at Gulfport, Mississippi, to South Vietnam via merchant ships. The AOJ further stated that there is no scientific evidence available to VA showing that being in the vicinity of aircraft or equipment previously used in Vietnam can be considered as exposure to active Agent Orange or can result in long-term health effects. It was also noted that there is no record of C-141 aircraft transporting or being associated with Agent Orange. Consequently, the AOJ found no evidence to support the Veteran's claim of exposure to herbicide agents.

In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's representative submitted a February 2024 opinion from Dr. R.P., which offers etiological opinions on matters separate from this appeal, wherein he finds that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents coincident with his service at Dover AFB as previously described. However, such determination is based solely on the Veteran's statements, which are directly contradicted by the foregoing official documentation. Thus, his opinion on such matter is not probative and, therefore, does not establish the Veteran's in-service exposure to herbicide agents.

However, in April 2024, the AOJ found that, due to the nature of the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as an aircraft maintenance specialist, he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), described as exposure to jet fuels, solvents, and hazardous noise.

In light of the foregoing, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in April 2024, which confirmed diagnoses of hypertension and diabetes mellitus, type II; however, the examiner opined that such disorder were less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. In support thereof, she noted that his TERA details an MOS with work on aircraft, which did not cause such disorders; rather, such were more likely caused by exposure to herbicide agents, which had not been conceded. Similarly, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension and diabetes mellitus, type II, were not proximately due to or the result of his psychiatric disability as there was no objective evidence to support such a relationship, and no medical mechanism by which a psychiatric disorder causes hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus, type II. Rather, she again noted that such disorders were more likely caused by exposure to herbicide agents, which had not been conceded.

However, as detailed previously, the Veteran's alleged in-service exposure to herbicide agents has not been acknowledged, so the April 2024 VA examiner's opinion appears to be based on an inaccurate factual premise. Moreover, she did not address whether his hypertension and diabetes mellitus, type II, are aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disability. Therefore, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an addendum opinion addressing such matters.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate VA examiner in order to obtain an opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension and diabetes mellitus, type II. Following a full review of the record, the examiner should address the below inquiries: 

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus, type II, are caused by his acknowledged in-service TERA, described as exposure to jet fuels, solvents, and hazardous noise coincident with his MOS as an aircraft maintenance specialist, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran? 

In this regard, the examiner should consider exposure to all pertinent materials related to such MOS, to include, as alleged by the Veteran, deicing chemicals, which are glycol-based fluids, and dust.

(B) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's that the Veteran's currently diagnosed hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus, type II, are caused or aggravated by his other specified stressor and trauma related disorder and persistent depressive disorder? For any aggravation found, the examiner should state, to the best of their ability, the baseline of symptomatology and the amount, quantified, if possible, of aggravation beyond the baseline symptomatology by the aggravation.

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's report that, when he is anxious, his blood pressure is elevated and, as a result of his psychiatric disability, he does not exercise, thereby resulting in weight gain.

In offering such opinions, the examiner is advised that the Veteran's alleged exposure to herbicide agents has not been established.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Spielmann, Jill F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.