Citation Nr: A25030625
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-451328
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served a period of active duty for training in the United States Marine Corps from July 1980 to September 1980, and he served on active duty in the United States Army from February 2003 to June 2004, to include service in Southwest Asia.  The Veteran also has additional periods of inactive service in the Army National Guard of Maryland and the United States Army Reserve.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Achievement Medal and the Army Reserve Components Achievement Medal. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider may be considered on readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities

The Veteran generally contends that he has obstructive sleep apnea secondary to his service-connected disabilities.  See September 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim; see also June 2024 VA Form 10182, NOD.  Specifically, the Veteran reports having dry mouth upon awakening because of his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), as well as leg kicks during sleep.  He also contends his service-connected right knee, left knee, left shoulder, and right shoulder disabilities keep him from exercising.  The Veteran states his musculoskeletal conditions prevent him from being able to sleep on his side, and make it difficult to fall or stay asleep.  He reports waking three to four times per night, snoring or tossing and turning.  In addition, he reports experiencing the following sleep apnea symptoms: pauses in breathing while sleeping, snoring, trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings, headaches upon awakening, daytime fatigue, poor concentration, and difficulty completing tasks.  See September 2023 VA Form 21-4138. 

Direct Service Connection

Although the Veteran argues he is entitled to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea on a secondary basis, the Board observes that entitlement on a direct basis is reasonably raised by the record.  See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (2008).

In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  See also October 2023 VA Examination for Sleep Apnea.  The RO also conceded the Veteran's in-service participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), given that the evidence of record shows he served in Iraq and Kuwait (i.e., the Southwest Asia theater of operations).  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first and second criteria for direct service connection, a current disability and an in-service incurrence, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to his active service, to include his conceded toxic exposure from participation in a TERA. 

To that point, in October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for sleep apnea, in which his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea was confirmed.  The October 2023 VA examiner determined the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  As rationale, the examiner concluded that, in the absence of toxic exposures the Veteran is still at a significant risk for development of obstructive sleep apnea based on a history of obesity.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's medical records reveal a history of obesity, and according to medical literature, obesity is probably the most important among the risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea.  As a result, the examiner provided a negative nexus. 

The October 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because it is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  Instead, the examiner heavily relies on the historical presence of obesity as a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea, without stating whether, given her expertise, her examination of the Veteran led to any evidence regarding a relationship between his obstructive sleep apnea and his active service, to include his participation in a TERA.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 125 (2007) (holding that a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion).

In the January 2024 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiency above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Secondary Service Connection

Turning to the secondary service connection framework, as discussed, the RO found the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in the January 2024 rating decision.  In addition, the RO found the Veteran is service connected for PTSD.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first and second criteria for secondary service connection, a current disability (not already service connected) and a primary service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Board observes the Veteran is also service-connected for right knee osteoarthritis (status post total knee arthroplasty), left knee osteoarthritis (status post meniscal repair), left shoulder degenerative arthritis, and right shoulder degenerative arthritis.  

Given the RO's favorable findings, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by, or aggravated by, his service-connected disabilities.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

To this point, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for sleep apnea in October 2023.  The October 2023 VA examiner provided a nexus opinion addressing the relationship between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and his aforementioned service-connected disabilities collectively (i.e., PTSD and right knee, left knee, left shoulder, and right shoulder disabilities).  

The October 2023 VA examiner determined the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected conditions.  As rationale, the examiner stated that, at this time, no study shows a definitive causative etiology between PTSD and sleep apnea.  The examiner acknowledged the private medical opinion, discussed below, shows a link between sleep apnea and the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, but concluded the opinion is more of a statement and that it does not give an explanation of the relationship between these conditions.  

Then, the examiner provided information about medical studies that essentially indicate further research is necessary to explore the potential causal relationship between sleep problems and PTSD.  Additionally, the examiner stated obstructive sleep apnea being a comorbidity with PTSD is not consistent with a direct causation between PTSD and the development of obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner also concluded there was no direct correlation between the Veteran's orthopedic conditions and the development of obstructive sleep apnea, and stated the conditions do not inhibit his ability to maintain a diet with caloric restriction that would prevent weight gain.  

The October 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for two reasons.  First, the VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because the incorrect standard for causation is applied.  In March 2023, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) invalidated the requirement of "proximate cause."  In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection.  The Federal Circuit explained that "but-for causation" is a broader standard than proximate causation and can include multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Pursuant to Spicer, secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  

The VA examiner's opinion is also inadequate because the nexus discussion is limited to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  The examiner did not address whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.  Therefore, the opinion is inadequate because it does not address both the "caused by" and "aggravation" avenues of secondary service connection associated with the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Furthermore, the Board notes that the October 2023 VA examiner implied the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was associated with obesity in her direct service connection opinion.  Yet, the examiner did not provide a secondary service connection opinion addressing the Veteran's contention that his obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected disabilities based on the theory of obesity as an intermediate step.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  

In the January 2024 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Board acknowledges that, in September 2023, a positive opinion was provided by Dr. Z.M. who concluded that the Veteran's weight gain, due to his service-connected disabilities, led to, caused, and/or aggravated his current obstructive sleep apnea.  As rationale, Dr. Z.M. generally indicated the opinion was based on pertinent medical records, lay statements inclusive of obstructive sleep apnea symptomatology, and an obstructive sleep apnea screening tool (i.e., the STOP-BANG questionnaire).  Then Dr. Z.M. provided two medical journal articles discussing the usefulness of the STOP-BANG test, as a screening tool for obstructive sleep apnea and for predicting the severity of the condition.  However, the Board notes that Dr. Z.M.'s opinion is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 125 (2007).  Accordingly, Dr. Z.M.'s opinion cannot support a grant of service connection.    

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner as to the questions below.  If the reviewing examiner determines that it is not possible to offer an opinion without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

Direct Service Connection

(A)	Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset during his active service, or is otherwise related to his active service, to include his participation in a TERA.

In answering this question, the examiner must consider the following: (1) the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable deployments, and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

Secondary Service Connection

PTSD

(B)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected PTSD.

(C)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

Right Knee Osteoarthritis, status post Total Knee Arthroplasty

(D)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected right knee osteoarthritis, status post total knee arthroplasty.

(E)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected right knee osteoarthritis, status post total knee arthroplasty.

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

Left Knee Osteoarthritis, status post Meniscal Repair

(F)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected left knee osteoarthritis, status post meniscal repair.

(G)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected left knee osteoarthritis, status post meniscal repair.

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

Left Shoulder Degenerative Arthritis

(H)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected left shoulder degenerative arthritis.

(I)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected left shoulder degenerative arthritis.

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

Right Shoulder Degenerative Arthritis

(J)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected right shoulder degenerative arthritis.

(K)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected right shoulder degenerative arthritis. 

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

Obesity

(L)	The examiner is to state:

a.	Whether a service-connected disability (or any combination of service-connected disabilities) caused the Veteran to become obese.

b.	Whether a service-connected disability (or any combination of service-connected disabilities) aggravated his obesity.

c.	If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity (whether obesity was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities) was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea?

d.	If the answer to (a) or (b) is yes, is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for the Veteran's obesity?

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  

The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.