Citation Nr: A25030588
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-438865
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps from August 1972 to November 1973.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ during the adjudication of the remanded claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that the period to change AMA dockets per?38 C.F.R. § 20.202?(c)(2) has not yet elapsed. However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to?Williams?v. McDonough,?37 Vet. App. 305?(2024) is not necessary because the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence to be considered on remand and this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal. Accordingly, there is no?prejudice?to the Veteran in proceeding with the remand. ?Id.? 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for bilateral hearing loss. Specifically, he contends that his hearing loss was caused by exposure to loud noise during service. 

The AOJ favorably found that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as a Rifleman carries a high probability of noise exposure. See May 2024 Rating Decision. 

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA audiological examination. However, due to testing inconsistencies, the audiometric results were not recorded, and were marked as "Could Not Test" (CNT). The examiner noted that the results were invalid and should not be used for rating purposes. Although the Veteran was re-instructed and retested, the examiner was unable to render a diagnosis or medical opinion.

As a result, the Board finds that the February 2024 VA examination is inadequate and that a remand is necessary to correct this predecisional duty-to-assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street, and that cooperating during the examination is necessary to obtain reliable results. If the Veteran does not cooperate with the examiner, the Board may be required to base its decision on the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a new VA examination with an audiologist to determine the nature and etiology of any bilateral hearing loss disability. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner, and the examiner must confirm that the file was reviewed. All findings should be documented in detail. The examiner is asked to provide an opinion regarding the following:

(a)	Determine whether the Veteran has hearing loss in either ear for VA purposes. If audiometric results continue to be inconsistent or invalid, the examiner should indicate whether further re-tests would be futile.

(b)	If the Veteran has hearing loss in one or both ears for VA purposes, then the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hearing loss had its onset during service or is otherwise related to service, including the Veteran's conceded in-service noise exposure.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Veteran is reminded that the duty to assist is not a one-way street. Cooperation during the examination is required in order to obtain reliable results. If the Veteran fails to cooperate with the examiner, the VA may have no alternative but to decide the claim on the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hatcher, Valerie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.