Citation Nr: A25030974
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231021-386613
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cervical strain is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression and anxiety is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is REMANDED.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is REMANDED.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served in the United States Army from December 2004 to January 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Cervical Strain, Acquired Psychiatric, and TBI Disabilities

The Veteran contends he has cervical strain, acquired psychiatric, and TBI disabilities due to a 2006 motor vehicle accident during service.  See April 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

For the claimed disabilities, the RO requested and scheduled VA cervical spine, psychiatric, and neurocognitive disorder examinations, but May 2023 exam requests state that the Veteran did not report for any of the examinations.

In a June 2023 VA 21-2507a Request for Physical Examination, the RO noted that the Veteran is homeless, and requested rescheduling of the psychiatric examination, but did not reschedule cervical spine and neurocognitive disorder examinations.  In July 2023, a VA examiner reported that the Veteran failed to report to a scheduled psychiatric examination.

The Veteran has a duty to cooperate with VA in developing a claim. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (noting that the duty to assist is not a one-way street). VA regulations provide that when a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for examination or reexamination scheduled to establish eligibility for entitlement to a benefit in conjunction for an original compensation claim, the claim is to be decided based on the evidence of record. If the missed examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a supplemental claim for a benefit previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim must be denied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b). Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, and death of an immediate family member. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).

Here, while the Veteran has not provided that his failure to report to the scheduled examinations was due to an example listed above, VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran was homeless during some or all of this time.  May 2023 Salem VA medical records note that the Veteran was admitted to a domiciliary care program for substance use disorder at Martinsburg VA Medical Center (VAMC) until August 2023.  Based on VA treatment records, the Veteran moved from Virginia to West Virginia during scheduling of examinations.  Further, in a June 2023 VA scheduling request, the RO noted that the Veteran was homeless.

The claims file contains no phone call records, or appointment confirmation letters, that the Veteran was notified of scheduled VA cervical spine, psychiatric, or neurocognitive disorder examinations.  In June 2023, the RO requested rescheduling of the VA psychiatric examination, but did not attempt to reschedule VA cervical or neurocognitive disorder examinations.  

Because the record supports a finding that due to his lack of fixed address, the Veteran may not have received adequate notice of VA cervical spine, psychiatric, and neurocognitive disorder examinations, the Board concludes that good cause has been shown. While 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a) provides examples of good cause for failing to report for an examination, the list is not exhaustive. Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 569 (2008); Engelke v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 396, 399 (1997) (whether a claimant has established good cause is a factual determination).  Here, there is no documentation that the Veteran received appointment confirmation letters or phone calls.

The Board finds that the failure to provide examinations with appropriate notification is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  As such, to ensure compliance with the duty to assist, the Board finds that RO should reschedule VA examinations for cervical spine, psychiatric, and TBI service connection claims.

The Veteran is advised that on remand he must fully cooperate with his RO in the development of the claims and that it is his responsibility to report for any scheduled examination. The consequences for failure to report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Additionally, pertinent to the psychiatric claim, outstanding VA treatment records should be associated with the claims file.  May 2023 Salem VA medical records note that the Veteran was admitted to a domiciliary care program for substance use disorder at Martinsburg VAMC, however, at the time of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, Martinsburg VAMC records were not associated with the claims file.  A pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified.  On remand, these records should be associated with the claims file. 

Allergic Rhinitis

The Veteran seeks a compensable disability rating for his service-connected allergic rhinitis.

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 6522 allergic or vasomotor rhinitis. A 10 percent rating is warranted for rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. A 30 percent rating is warranted for rhinitis with polyps.

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA sinusitis rhinitis examination, during which he complained of nasal stiffness and ocular pruritus that worsens during Spring and Summer treated with Claritin.  On examination, there was evidence of permanent hypertrophy, but no obstruction greater than 50 percent on both sides or complete obstruction of either side due to rhinitis.  There were also no nasal polyps. No imaging studies of the sinuses were performed. 

The Board finds the June 2023 VA examination inadequate for failing to obtain any imaging studies or diagnostic testing. While the Board acknowledges that diagnostic testing is not required in most cases, here, such testing is necessary to rate the Veteran's allergic rhinitis condition. The applicable diagnostic code, DC 6522, rates rhinitis on the presence of polyps or nasal obstruction that cannot be seen with the naked eye, and therefore, can only be ascertained through diagnostic testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

Because imaging studies were not conducted, the examiner was unable to adequately assess the severity of the Veteran's allergic rhinitis. A medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate for the Board to consider and weigh against other evidence of record. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 102, 124-25 (2007). 

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the severity of the Veteran's allergic rhinitis because the June 2023 VA examination is inadequate. Consequently, VA has not complied with its duty to assist the Veteran prior to the September 2023 decision on appeal. A remand is necessary to obtain an adequate examination.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain the outstanding VA treatment records from Martinsburg VAMC for the period when the Veteran was admitted to its domiciliary care program for substance use disorder and associate them with the claims file. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to address the nature and etiology of cervical spine disability.

The electronic claims file, including a copy of this remand decision, must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is asked to opine as to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that a cervical spine disability had its clinical onset during service and is due to any incident of service, to include a 2006 motor vehicle accident.

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions and conclusions reached.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to address the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disability, to include anxiety and depression.

The electronic claims file, including a copy of this remand decision, must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is asked to opine as to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any acquired psychiatric disability, to include anxiety and depression, had its clinical onset during service and is due to any incident of service, to include a 2006 motor vehicle accident.

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions and conclusions reached.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to address the nature and etiology of TBI.

The electronic claims file, including a copy of this remand decision, must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is asked to opine as to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that a TBI had its clinical onset during service and is due to any incident of service, to include a 2006 motor vehicle accident.

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions and conclusions reached.

5. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and severity of his service-connected allergic rhinitis. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

The electronic claims file, including a copy of this remand decision, must be made available to the examiner for review.

The examiner is directed to ensure imaging tests are conducted to determine whether there is presently any obstruction in the nasal passage, to include nasal polyps. 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Amanda Baker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.