Citation Nr: A25030134
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 230703-363586
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal as to whether the appellant's character of discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, exclusive of health care benefits under Chapter 17, Title U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served on active duty from November 1968 to June 1970. He was discharged under other than honorable (OTH) conditions from his period of service in lieu of court martial due to several acts of misconduct; this character of discharge is the subject of this appeal.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 administrative decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the July 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Hearing docket. On October 8, 2024, the appellant's representative withdrew the hearing request and, in December 2024, submitted a memorandum in support of his claim.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant [or representative] within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. The appeal as to whether the appellant's character of discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, exclusive of health care benefits under Chapter 17, Title U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a) is remanded.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, the appeal must be remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a medical opinion regarding the appellant's mental state at the time of his misconduct in order to adjudicate the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the appellant's service treatment records (STRs) were associated with the claims file after the decision on appeal, which raises the issue of a mental or cognitive impairment, as discussed below.

The appellant essentially seeks "veteran" status. He contends his character of discharge should not be a bar to VA compensation benefits. He also contends that he had been suffering from psychiatric impairment in service which contributed to his misconduct.

Turning to the evidence of record, the appellant's service personnel records indicate that he enlisted in November 1968 for a period of four years.

The appellant's service personnel records also show that he was discharged in June 1970 with an under OTH discharge. 

The service records indicate the following misconduct:

In August 1969, the appellant was subjected to nonjudicial punishment for seven days of unauthorized absence, in violation of Article 86, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He was found guilty and sentenced to 14 days of extra duty, forfeiture of $50.00 pay per month for one month, and reduction to E1, which was suspended for six months.

In December 1969, the appellant was subjected to nonjudicial punishment for unauthorized absence from his place of duty, in violation of Article 86, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He was found guilty and sentenced to 30 days of correctional confinement.

In December 1969, the appellant was returned to his unit due to further misconduct and subjected to nonjudicial punishment for failure to obey lawful orders on five occasions, in violation of Article 91, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He was found guilty and sentenced to 60 days of restriction.

In January 1970, the appellant was tried at a Special Court Martial for five violations of Article 91, UCMJ, for failing to obey lawful orders on four occasions, and being disrespectful to a noncommissioned officer. He was found guilty and sentenced to confinement at hard labor for two months, reduction to the rank of E1, and forfeiture of $50.00 pay per month for two months.

In May 1970, the appellant was returned to his unit due to further misconduct and subjected to nonjudicial punishment for failure to obey lawful order, in violation of Article 91, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He was found guilty and sentenced to 60 days of restriction.

On May 20, 1970, the command preferred court-martial charges against the appellant. The appellant was charged with being disrespectful to a commissioned officer, in violation of Article 89, UCMJ, failing to obey a lawful order, in violation of Article 90, UCMJ, failing to obey a lawful order, in violation of Article 91, UCMJ, breaking restriction, in violation of Article 134, UCMJ, and a uniform violation, in violation of Article 134, UCMJ.

On May 21, 1970, the appellant submitted a request for discharge in lieu of standing trial at Special Court Martial. 

On June 11, 1970, the command approved the appellant's request, and he was discharged with an under OTH characterization of service.

There is no evidence that the appellant has filed a request to upgrade his character of discharge, with the Navy Discharge Review Board or Navy Board of Correction of Naval Records.

Based on the above, the AOJ has determined that the character of the appellant's discharge from service is a bar to his entitlement to VA compensation benefits due to willful and persistent misconduct. 

However, the law provides that such a discharge will not be considered a bar to receipt of VA monetary benefits if it is found that the person was insane at the time of committing the offense(s) causing such discharge or, for willful and persistent misconduct, as applies in this case, if there are "compelling circumstances to warrant the prolonged unauthorized absence." 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12(b), (c)(6) and 3.354(b). 

In this case, the bar to benefits for prolonged AWOL under paragraph (c)(6) and the two types of misconduct described in paragraph (d)(2) (crime of moral turpitude and willful and persistent misconduct) will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the AWOL or misconduct at issue. 

The following factors will be considered in a determination on this matter: 

(1) Length and character of service exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct. Service exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  

(2) Reasons for AWOL or misconduct. Factors considered are as follows: 

(i) Mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the prolonged AWOL or misconduct, to include but not limited to a clinical diagnosis of (or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities. 

(ii) Physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication. 

(iii) Combat-related or overseas-related hardship. 

(iv) Sexual abuse/assault. 

(v) Duress, coercion, or desperation. 

(vi) Family obligations, or comparable obligations to third parties.  

(vii) The person's age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity.  

Regarding insanity, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b), "if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, at the time of the commission of an offense leading to a person's court-martial, discharge or resignation, that person was insane, such person shall not be precluded from benefits under laws administered by the Secretary based upon the period of service from which such person was separated."

For purposes related to the character of discharge, an insane person is one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides. 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a).

In May 1997, the VA General Counsel discussed the intended parameters of the types of behavior which were defined as insanity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). It was indicated that behavior involving a minor episode or episodes of disorderly conduct or eccentricity does not fall within the definition of insanity in that regulation. It was further indicated that a determination of the extent to which an individual's behavior must deviate from his normal method of behavior could best be resolved by adjudicative personnel on a case-by-case basis in light of the authorities defining the scope of the term insanity. VAOPGCPREC 20-97, 62 Fed. Reg. 37955 (1997).

The opinion provided guidance with regard to the phrases "interferes with the peace of society," "become antisocial," "accepted standards of the community," and "social customs of the community." Generally, insane behavior includes a persistent morbid condition of the mind characterized by a derangement of one or more of the mental faculties to the extent that the individual is unable to understand the nature, full import, and consequences of his acts; he is a danger to himself or others. He is rendered incapable of managing himself or his affairs, a concept akin to the level of incompetency generally supporting appointment of a guardian. The term "constitutionally psychopathic" refers to a condition that may be described as an antisocial personality disorder. The term "become antisocial" refers to the development of behavior that is hostile or harmful to others in a manner that deviates sharply from the social norm and that is not attributable to a personality disorder. Id.

The appellant has not specifically claimed to be insane at the time that he committed his criminal offenses. However, the appellant alleges that he had suffered from psychiatric symptoms in service. In a December 2024 statement, the appellant stated that he was dealing with a mood disorder which contributed to his misconduct. See December 2024 statement and December 2024 Representative Memorandum of Law.

The Board notes that the appellant's service treatment records (STRs) were associated with the claims file after the decision on appeal, as discussed above. These records indicate that the appellant was diagnosed with a personality disorder in service. Specifically, the STRs indicate the following:

In a December 1969 evaluation, the examiner diagnosed the appellant with "passive aggressive personality with sociopathic traits."

In a May 1970 evaluation, the examiner concurred with the findings of the December 1969 examiner and recommend that the appellant be discharged. The examiner noted that the appellant wound not "benefit from therapy, punitive actions will be ineffective in rehabilitating him - in fact, the chances for his becoming a useful Marine is zero."

In an October 2023 VA examination, the examiner noted that the appellant had a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood related to his service. However, the VA examiner did not provide an opinion on the issue of insanity at the time of the appellant's misconduct.

The Board is cognizant that a serviceman applying for an insanity exception has the burden of presenting competent evidence of insanity at the time of commission of the offenses leading to discharge. See Stringham v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 445, 449 (1995). However, the Court has also held that the Board is required to obtain a medical opinion to determine whether a claimant's behavior during the offenses that led to his discharge was due to psychiatric disability. Gardner v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 415 (2009), see also Beck v. West, 13 Vet. App. 535, 539 (2000) (although insanity need not be causally connected to the misconduct that led to the discharge, it must be concurrent with that misconduct and requires competent medical evidence to establish a diagnosis). Personality disorders, including antisocial personality disorder, do not satisfy the definition of insanity as contemplated at 38 C.F.R. § 3.354. VAOPGCPREC 20-97. In addition, mere manifestations or diagnoses of psychiatric disorders are not synonymous with the definition of insanity that governs the analysis of an appellant's character of discharge. Beck v. West, 13 Vet. App. 535, 539 (2000).

Furthermore, recent changes to 38 C.F.R. 3.12 allow for the consideration of "compelling circumstances," to include mental and cognitive impairment due to personality disorders, to mitigate in-service misconduct. Notably, the changes do not preclude consideration of personality disorders, unlike the VA definition of "insanity," under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a).

Accordingly, given the contentions raised, and a recent change in law, the Board finds that development is warranted regarding the appellant's mental state at the time of the misconduct that led to his June 1970 discharge.

Furthermore, the Board finds that remand is appropriate to satisfy a statutory or regulatory duty that has a reasonable possibility of substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, 38 C.F.R. 3.12, which governs eligibility to VA benefits based on the character of a claimant's discharge, was amended effective June 25, 2024. 89 Fed. Reg. 32361 (2024). The Supplementary Information to this regulatory change states that "When this rule becomes effective, any claimant with a prior unfavorable COD determination, to include the no longer used undesirable discharge, may request a new COD determination under new §?3.12." In this case, the appellant may request a new COD determination. 

However, given the foregoing and the development directed below, the Board finds that a new character of discharge determination, to include eligibility for Chapter 17 healthcare benefits, must be issued under the revised 38 C.F.R. § 3.12.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for a VA examination in order to obtain a medical opinion by an appropriate clinician addressing whether the appellant had mental or cognitive impairment or was insane under VA regulations at the time of the misconduct which led to his June 1970 discharge under other than honorable conditions. After examination of the appellant and a review of the claims file, to specifically include the appellant's lay statements, service treatment records, and any post service treatment records, the examiner must answer the following:

a. Does the evidence, either lay or medical, indicate the appellant exhibited mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the in-service misconduct? If so, to what extent? Please explain why or why not.

b. Discuss the appellant's mental state during service, to include consideration of his age, cultural background, educational level, and judgmental maturity at the time of the offenses that resulted in his other than honorable discharge.

c. At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the appellant, due to disease, exhibit a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior?

d. At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the appellant, due to disease, interfere with the peace of society?

e. At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge did the appellant, due to disease, depart (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides?

f. Was the appellant otherwise insane at the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge?

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the appellant's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition. The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the appellant's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence. The examiner may not dismiss the appellant's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

In providing an answer to these questions, the examiner is advised that, for the purposes of this matter, an insane person is one who, due to disease, exhibits a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides. An individual exhibiting such behavior solely as a result of antisocial personality disorder is not considered to be insane.

The examiner must provide a complete, well-reasoned rationale for any opinion offered. If a requested opinion pertaining to service connection cannot be rendered without speculation, the examiner must state in the examination report whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge, i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts, or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner, i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training.

2. Issue new character of discharge determination, compliant with the new amendments of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e), determining whether the character of the appellant's discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of VA compensation benefits.

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. O'Connor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.