Citation Nr: A25030378
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-451134
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Service connection has been established for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease, and erectile dysfunction. 

2. The Veteran's weight gain has been associated with the service-connected PTSD.

3. Obstructive sleep apnea has been shown to be related to the documented weight gain and service-connected PTSD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from May 2002 to December 2006.  He served in Iraq.  The Veteran had additional duty with the Navy Reserve.  

In July 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

Service Connection for Obstructive Sleep Apnea

The Veteran contends that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted as the claimed disability is related to the service-connected PTSD.  He states that his weight gain should be considered as an intermediate step between the service-connected PTSD and the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea. 

Service connection may be established for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Service connection shall be established on a secondary basis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) where it is demonstrated that a service-connected disability has aggravated a nonservice connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Service connection has been established for PTSD, lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease, and erectile dysfunction.  

Under the obesity-intermediate step theory predicated on aggravation, consideration must be taken as to (1) whether the service-connected disability or disabilities caused a veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the claimed disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.  Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

The service treatment records do not refer to sleep apnea or other recurrent sleep disability. 

A December 2022 written statement from Z. Morcos, M.D., states that the available medical and lay evidence was reviewed.  The doctor noted the various ways in which PTSD "leads to and/or promotes weight gain" and that "[t]he medical literature has documented that weight gain is known to predispose patients to and directly cause obstructive sleep apnea."  Dr. Morcos concluded that "it is at least as likely as not (a 50% / 50% probability) that this veteran's weight gain is due to their service-connected condition of PTSD, and that overweight condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current obstructive sleep apnea."  

A January 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) treatment record states that the Veteran reported being overweight in the abdominal area.  

A January 2023 polysomnography study from Valley Sleep Center notes that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  

The report of an January 2023 sleep apnea examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner concluded that the "claimed condition is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition" as "obstructive sleep apnea and PTSD are not medically related;" "obstructive sleep apnea is a separate entity entirely from the PTSD and unrelated to it;" and "[a] thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship."  The examining nurse practitioner did not advance any findings as to the relationship between the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea, the Veteran's weight, and the service-connected PTSD.  Considering such deficiency, the examination report is of limited probative value. 

A May 2023 sleep apnea evaluation conducted for VA conveys that "[t]he relationship between [obesity and PTSD] has been analyzed in scientific literature, obtaining significant associations but also contradictory results" and "[t]he most current data demonstrates that there is a relationship between both entities, although there is no unanimity when it comes to establishing the meaning of this association."

The record is in at least equipoise as to whether the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service-connected PTSD.  The Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea by a sleep study.  Dr. Morcos concluded that the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is related to the Veteran's weight gain secondary to the service-connected PTSD.  A VA examiner noted the association between weight and PTSD.  Upon resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C.C., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.