Citation Nr: A25030649
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241022-484130
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that GERD began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a left foot disability began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army from August 1968 to August 1971. 

This appeal comes from September 2024 rating decision, wherein the claims listed on the title page were denied. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board. In a November 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) hearing was held on December 4, 2024.

In an AMA hearing docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing, which is March 4, 2025. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision here. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Within the Veteran's October 2024 VA Form 10182, he included appeals for the denial of service connection for a bilateral hip disability, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and identified September 2024 rating decisions related to these claims. However, the Board notes that the rating decisions for these claims are from August 2023 and September 2023. There is no other VA Form 10182 received within one year of the August 2023 and September 2023 rating decisions to establish a timely appeal for these claims. The undersigned relayed these facts to the Veteran and his representative at the hearing, and the representative responded that he understood. Thus, there is no pending appeal for the claims for service connection for a bilateral hip disability, anxiety, and PTSD.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

The Veteran asserts that GERD had its onset during service or is otherwise related to service. During his Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he began having symptoms around 1970. The Veteran said that the amount of stress that soldiers were under during that period of time was tremendous. Additionally, the Veteran said that there were protestors near where he was stationed, and it added to the continual stress he experienced during the two-and-one-half year stretch he was at Presidio. The Veteran said that the GERD came about due to the mental and emotional stress that he found himself constantly under.

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's GERD had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service. The reasons follow.

As to evidence a current disability, within the August 2023 VA examination report, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with GERD. Thus, the facts establish that the first element of a service-connection claim is met.

Regarding the second element of service connection of an in-service disease or injury, the Board notes that the Veteran was treated for gastrointestinal symptoms during service. For example, in July 1971, he complained of an upset stomach and had diarrhea six times that day. The Veteran was diagnosed with gastroenteritis. Thus, the Board finds that the facts support that the second element of a service-connection claim is met.

However, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus between the Veteran's current GERD and service. First, during the June 1971 Report of Medical Examination, the Veteran was found to be clinically normal in all areas, including his abdomen and viscera. Within this document, the Veteran wrote, "I am in good health," and signed his name under the statement. The Board understands that this document was completed prior to his July 1971 gastrointestinal symptoms; however, in August 1971, the Veteran signed a document that stated he underwent a separation examination in June 1971 and to the best of his knowledge, since his last separation examination, there had been no change in his medical condition. This would tend to show that the Veteran did not perceive his July 1971 symptoms as being indicative of a more chronic disability.

Although the Veteran testified during the Board hearing that he went to the doctor in 1972 or 1973 regarding his GERD symptoms, the Veteran's private treatment records include a notation of GERD, which "[s]tarted 5/6/2008." This would seem to indicate that GERD started more than 35 years after the Veteran separated from service and does not lend to a finding of chronic symptoms since 1971. This same document shows that benign essential hypertension started in June 1998, sickle cell trait started in January 2005, and sleep apnea started in December 1999, which would further support the finding that GERD started in 2008, as, if GERD had started prior to 2008, an earlier date would have been documented like it was for these other diagnoses, where one of these diagnoses was 10 years earlier. Thus, to the extent that the Veteran alleges chronic GERD symptoms since service, the Board does not find this allegation credible. 

The August 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's medical records explicitly detail chronologically consistent evidence of GERD throughout the time of service or shortly thereafter. The examiner wrote that upon consideration of available evidence, the Veteran's report and physical assessment, "no nexus can be established at this time." 

VA sought clarification from the examiner due to the internal inconsistency of the medical opinion. In September 2023, the VA examiner clarified his opinion to say that the available medical records do not explicitly detail chronologically consistent evidence of GERD throughout the time of service or shortly thereafter. 

The Board finds the September 2023 VA examiner's opinion to be adequate and probative, as it was provided by a medical professional who personally examined the Veteran, reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including the service treatment records, and provided a reasoned rationale for the conclusion provided, supported by the evidence of record, distinguishing the Veteran's current condition from the symptoms documented during service. The facts relied upon by the examiner are the same facts that the Board finds are accurate in that the Veteran did not experience chronic GERD symptoms in the years following service discharge. Again, the private treatment records document the onset of GERD in 2008. This medical opinion is evidence against a finding that GERD had its onset in service.

The Veteran submitted a December 2024 letter from Doreen Fowlkes, MSN, APRN, FNP-C. Ms. Fowlkes stated that it is not uncommon for individuals who have served in the military to experience both physical and emotional health challenges that can be interconnected. Ms. Fowlkes said that the Veteran has mentioned experiencing GERD and anxiety symptoms, which are a concern, as stress can increase the production of stomach acid, which can worsen GERD symptoms. Additionally, Ms. Fowlkes said that anxiety related to traumatic or stressful experiences doing military service can contribute to a wide range of physical symptoms, which can include gastrointestinal distress and sleep disturbances. Ms. Fowlkes said that the Veteran's care will require a multidisciplinary approach, including GERD medication, dietary, and lifestyle strategies to minimize triggers, along with psychological support for anxiety.

The Board does not find Ms. Fowlkes' opinion probative because she did not provide a conclusion and rationale that the Veteran's GERD was due to or otherwise related to the Veteran's military service. While Ms. Fowlkes noted that there was a connection between the Veteran's anxiety and his GERD, the Board notes that the Veteran is not service connected for any disabilities, including anxiety or a psychiatric disorder.

The Board notes that GERD is not a chronic disease where service connection may be presumed if manifested within one year following service discharge.

To the extent that the Veteran alleges that his in-service gastrointestinal complaints were indicative of GERD, he is a lay person without appropriate medical training and expertise, and thus, is not competent to make an etiological conclusion that the one-time treatment in service for gastroenteritis is indicative of the onset of GERD during service. The Board notes there is no competent and probative evidence to weigh against the September 2023 VA examiner's opinion.

For all the reasons stated herein, the Board finds that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for GERD is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against entitlement to service connection. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis

The Veteran contends that service connection for a left foot disability is warranted. During the Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he had an incident while getting out of his bunk. He said he was on the top bunk and while he was coming down, he injured his foot and had to go to sick call. The Veteran noted that is when he had a laceration on his foot in April 1971. He stated that after service, the pain continued. The Veteran said that in 1972, his foot gave him tremendous amount of problems such that he went to McGuire Hospital to get treatment. The Veteran said that he developed a hard core on his foot that remained for a number of years and the nerves continue to be a problem and caused pain even after the hard core resolved. The Veteran said that it precipitated a problem with his hip and walking.

After a careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that service connection for a left foot disability is warranted. The reasons follow.

As to evidence of a current disability, during the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with plantar fasciitis of the left foot. Therefore, the facts establish that the first element of the service-connection claim is met.

Regarding the second element of service connection of an in-service disease or injury, the Board notes that the Veteran was treated for hyperextension of the left foot in November 1970 and laceration on his foot in April 1971. Thus, the Board finds that the facts support that the second element of a service connection claim is met.

However, the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of a nexus between the Veteran's current left foot disability and service. First, during the June 1971 Report of Medical Examination that was performed near service discharge, the Veteran was found to be clinically normal in all areas, including his feet. Within this document, the Veteran wrote, "I am in good health," and signed his name under the statement. In August 1971, the Veteran signed a document that stated he underwent a separation examination in June 1971 and to the best of his knowledge, since his last separation examination, there had been no change in his medical condition. This shows that the Veteran did not have a chronic left foot disability in service.

Private treatment records showed that the Veteran's plantar fasciitis had its onset in April 2023, which is more than 50 years after the Veteran separated from service. This was the same document that showed GERD started in May 2008 and other diagnoses starting in 1998, 1999, and 2005. Thus, like GERD, the Board finds that had the Veteran been experiencing chronic left foot symptoms in the years following service discharge, the start date would have been much earlier than 2023. This is supported by May 2017 and August 2017 private treatment records showing that the examiner performed a physical examination, and the Veteran's musculoskeletal system was noted to be normal. The examining physician noted that the Veteran had normal range of motion in the lower extremities and a normal gait. In May and October 2019 private treatment records, the Veteran was noted to have normal range of motion of the musculoskeletal system upon physical examination. An April 2020 private treatment record shows that the Veteran denied muscle aches and pains. These treatment records show that the Veteran was not reporting ongoing foot symptoms from 2017 to 2020, which refutes chronic foot symptoms since service discharge. 

When seen in May 2021, the examiner wrote that the Veteran was there for a follow-up appointment and listed multiple diagnoses, which did not include a foot disability or foot symptoms. The examiner then described symptoms the Veteran was experiencing, such as dyspnea, and then listed symptoms the Veteran affirmatively denied and added that he denied "any other symptoms or complaints at this time." Not included in the symptoms the Veteran was experiencing was foot symptoms. 

What the private treatment records show is that the Veteran sought treatment for various medical concerns he had, which, prior to 2023, did not include concerns about a left foot disability or left foot symptoms, to include plantar fasciitis. The Board finds that had the Veteran been experiencing chronic left foot symptoms during these years, he would have reported them, as he regularly sought treatment for other chronic conditions he was experiencing. Thus to the extent that the Veteran alleges chronic left foot symptoms since service, the Board does not find such allegation credible. 

The August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left foot disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's medical records showed the Veteran had foot pain on the left side during service without explicit workup or diagnosis. The examiner also noted that a left-sided plantar wart was found in 1971. However, the examiner wrote that the available records did not explicitly detail any chronologically consistent evidence suggestive of chronic foot condition over the course of time. Thus, the examiner stated that no nexus could be established.

The Board finds the August 2023 VA examination opinion to be adequate and probative, as it was provided by a medical professional who personally examined the Veteran, reviewed the Veteran's claims file, including the service treatment records, and provided a reasoned rationale for the conclusion provided. The examiner's finding that there was no continuity of symptomatology in the years following service discharge is the same finding that the Board has concluded. Thus, the examiner's opinion is based on an accurate set of facts. This medical opinion is evidence against the claim that a left foot disability had its onset in service.

To the extent that the Veteran alleges that his in-service left foot complaints were indicative of a current left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, he is a lay person without appropriate medical training and expertise, and thus, is not competent to make an etiological conclusion that the treatment in service is indicative of the onset of a current left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, during service. The Board notes there is no competent and probative evidence to weigh against the August 2023 VA examiner's opinion.

For the above reasons, the Board concludes that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection for a left foot disability, to include plantar fasciitis, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Griffin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.