Citation Nr: A25030844
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-454709
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran has obstructive sleep apnea is due to, the result of, or caused by service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by service-connected disabilities, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2002 to February 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In July 2024, the Veteran requested direct review of the appeal by the Board on VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  As the current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket by a Veterans Law Judge, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based upon the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the previous RO decision on the issue on appeal, only evidence of record on the date of the July 2023 rating decision will be considered.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, caused by service-connected disabilities, is granted.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that an injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active service or, if pre-existing service, was aggravated during service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.310.

To establish service connection for a disability, a veteran must show (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship, or nexus, between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case, with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked evidence that is not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

Analysis

The Veteran contends that currently diagnosed sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected disabilities.  Alternatively, the Veteran states that diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea is the result of service.

In March 2004, the Veteran reported feeling tired after sleeping, a symptom which developed during his deployment.  The Veteran's service medical records showed no other reports of trouble sleeping or sleep disturbances.

A July 2023 rating decision found that the Veteran has a sleep apnea disability, performed service in Kuwait, and has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary of any of these favorable findings, the Board is bound by such.  

A July 2023 VA medical examination found that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with anxiety.  The examiner stated that there was no conclusive evidence in medical literature that showed an adjustment disorder with anxiety caused obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner did not provide an analysis of aggravation.

VA then conducted a medical review later in July 2023, when the AOJ deferred the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea in order to obtain an additional VA medical opinion which specifically considered the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).

The subsequent July 2023 VA medical opinion concluded that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by a TERA.  The examiner stated that obstructive sleep apnea had several common risk factors, but medical and scientific literature did not demonstrate a definitive causal relationship between the Veteran's TERA and obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner specifically considered the total potential exposure through all of the Veteran's applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

A March 2023 private sleep study found that the Veteran had mild to moderate obstructive sleep apnea.  Dr. H.S., a private physician, recommended the Veteran have surgery or use a CPAP machine or oral appliances.

In a March 2023 medical opinion, C.B., a certified physician assistant, opined that it was at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the service-connected disabilities, including anxiety with adjustment disorder and left patellofemoral joint syndrome of the knee status post arthroscopy with well healed puncture scars, in conjunction with subsequent weight gain and obesity.  C.B. referred to medical literature and studies throughout the March 2023 medical opinion.  Specifically, C.B. stated that obesity was significantly associated with mood or anxiety disorders, which are directly related to weight gain.  Further, C.B. affirmed that it was well documented that anxiety predisposes an individual to weight gain.  Additionally, C.B. concluded that the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities were major reasons that he gained weight because the Veteran was unable to be active as a result of those disabilities.  C.B. included the excerpts of the medical literature which were cited throughout the March 2023 opinion.

The Board notes that, although obesity is not a disability for which VA may establish service connection, it may act as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

While the Board appreciates the analysis and discussion of the VA examiners, the examinations are inadequate.

When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  A medical opinion that does not address whether a service-connected disability aggravated the claimed disability is inadequate to inform the Board on the issue of secondary service connection.  El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Although the July 2023 VA examiner provided an opinion regarding the lack of causation of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea disability by his service-connected adjustment disorder with anxiety disability, the examiner did not offer an opinion regarding whether the obstructive sleep apnea disability was aggravated by his service-connected disability.  Both are opinions are needed.

Additionally, both VA examinations are conclusory because they do not provide an adequate rationale to support the opinions.  A mere conclusion without an underlying rationale is of no probative value.  Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345 (1998).  The examiners state that medical literature did not support a causal relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and an adjustment disorder with anxiety or the Veteran's TERA but offer no explanation or discussion concerning the Veteran's specific circumstances, claimed disability, potential causation or aggravation by a service-connected disability or the TERA.

Although the VA medical opinions are inadequate concerning the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea, the Board finds that is it not necessary to obtain a new VA medical opinion.  The Board finds H.S.'s diagnosis and C.B.'s medical opinion to be credible and persuasive.  The Board assigns great probative weight to the March 2023 private medical opinion in conjunction with Dr. H.S.'s sleep study because of the training, experience, and thoroughness of the reports.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the provider's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility and weight to be given the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is based on the provider's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the ultimate medical conclusion reached.  As is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The private March 2023 opinion is consistent with the evidence in the case and provides adequate reasons and bases in support of the conclusion.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was more likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  C.B.'s opinion is highly probative because it is supported by rationale and provided by a trained medical professional.  The examiner specifically identified and discussed the Veteran's contention that obstructive sleep apnea was caused by anxiety and musculoskeletal disabilities.  Thus, the Board finds the private March 2023 medical opinion to be competent and credible.

The Board cannot ignore the medical evidence opining that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to service-connected disabilities.  Because of the private medical opinion, the Board finds the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is related to active service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be contradictory evidence of record, such as the VA medical opinions from July 2023 that found that obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood less than approximately balanced of nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities or a TERA.  However, the Board cannot ignore the medical evidence finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to his service-connected disabilities.  Because of the detail and thoroughness of the March 2023 private opinion and citation to medical research, the Board finds that the evidence is, at least, in approximate balance regarding whether obstructive sleep apnea is related to the service-connected disabilities.

Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the competent medical evidence supports a finding that a current obstructive sleep apnea disability is due to, the result of, or caused by anxiety with adjustment disorder and left patellofemoral joint syndrome of the knee status post arthroscopy with well healed puncture scars.  Therefore, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, secondary to anxiety with adjustment disorder and left patellofemoral joint syndrome of the knee status post arthroscopy with well healed puncture scars is warranted and granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

As a final matter, the Board wishes to underline that this appealed issue is being granted based on the causation prong of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 and Allen without concession of aggravation of the nonservice-connected disability by the service-connected disability. As such, the award downstream from this allowance shall not be subject to a rating offset upon implementation by the AOJ.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marissa R. Harper

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.