Citation Nr: A25030518
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 220723-261415
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

An annual clothing allowance for the 2022 calendar year for clobetasol topical medication is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the year 2022, the Veteran was not prescribed, and did not use, clobetasol topical medication for any skin condition due to a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a clothing allowance for the 2022 calendar year for clobetasol topical medication are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.810.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1995 to November 1996.

This appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2022 decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Health Administration (VHA).  In his July 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Clothing Allowance

The law provides for payment of an annual clothing allowance for each veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including a wheelchair) which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the clothing of the veteran, or uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments.  38 U.S.C. § 1162.

The implementing regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.810, provides, in pertinent part, that an annual clothing allowance may be granted when the Under Secretary for Health or a designee certifies that a veteran, because of a service-connected disability or disabilities, wears or uses one qualifying prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair) which tends to wear or tear clothing, or that a veteran uses medication prescribed by a physician for one skin condition, which is due to a service-connected disability, that causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments.  38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1)(ii).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the claimant is given the benefit of the doubt.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

An annual clothing allowance for the 2022 calendar year for clobetasol topical medication is denied.

As reflected in his January 2022 application for benefits, the Veteran is claiming a clothing allowance for 2022 for clobetasol propionate topical medication, which he asserts affects the area of his arms, legs and thighs.  The Veteran filed his claim using the VA Form 10-8678, "APPLICATION FOR ANNUAL CLOTHING ALLOWANCE."  However, the form appears to be a printout with missing text.  In Box 8 of the form, where the heading states, "List of Service-Connected Disability/Disabilities Requiring Use of Appliance(s) or Skin Medication(s)," only the word "Service-Connected" appears on the Veteran's submitted form; the Veteran, under this heading, responded, "Yes 80%."  He did not identify what service-connected disability he was purporting to use his claimed medication for.  

VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran was prescribed clobetasol topical medication on June 20, 2017, after developing an intermittent rash on the bilateral upper extremities.  He was assessed with eczematous dermatitis, counseled of sensitive skin methods, encouraged to avoid contact with harsh chemicals or substances on the affected area, and prescribed clobetasol cream, .05%, twice a day as needed.  Such records further reflect that, on February 17, 2018, the Veteran's clobetasol prescription-noted at that time to be for treatment of psoriasis-was discontinued.   

In its June 2022 letter denying the Veteran's claim, the AOJ identified the basis of the denial as the fact that the claimed medication of clobetasol had been discontinued on February 17, 2018.

In his July 2022 appeal, the Veteran argued that, while he recognized that VA had discontinued coverage of clobetasol, this was the only product he felt helped his skin, and that he still received clobetasol from his non-VA doctor overseas, where he lived.  He argued that VA was the first to prescribe the medication, and that it damaged his clothing.  

However, even assuming, without conceding, that the Veteran continued to be prescribed clobetasol following VA's discontinuance of the product in February 2018, the record does not reflect that the Veteran ever used, or was prescribed, clobetasol for a skin condition due to a service-connected disability.

Throughout 2022, the Veteran had several service-connected skin disabilities including malignant melanoma, stage III, left lower extremity, status post-excision, rated noncompensable (0 percent), and five scars.  However, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran has not asserted, that his eczematous dermatitis or psoriasis-the disabilities for which he was prescribed clobetasol, according to the medical records-was ever service-connected.  There has been no assertion that clobetasol-a topical corticosteroid medication used to treat inflammatory skin conditions such as eczema and psoriasis-was ever used to treat the Veteran's scars or any other skin condition due to a disability that is actually service-connected.  See Clobetasol Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information, https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a686008.html (last revised Feb. 15, 2018). 

Given the above, the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that, during the year 2022, the Veteran was prescribed or used clobetasol topical medication for any skin condition due to a service-connected disability.  Accordingly, an annual clothing allowance for the 2022 calendar year for clobetasol topical medication must be denied.

Finally, the Board notes that the Veteran, in his July 2022 appeal, asserted that the excessive amount of sunscreen he was required to wear due to his service-connected skin cancer also caused damage to his clothing, but that he did not claim it in his clothing allowance application, as it was not prescribed.  However, as the Veteran did not timely file a clothing allowance claim for any such substance, and no such claim was adjudicated by the AOJ in the first instance, the Board will not consider it here.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 511(a) ("The Secretary shall decide all questions of law and fact necessary to a decision by the Secretary under a law that affects the provision of benefits by the Secretary to veterans or the dependents or survivors of veterans"), and 7104(a) (conferring on the Board jurisdiction over appeals of all VA decisions pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 511(a)).  

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Andrew Mack, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.