Citation Nr: A25030189
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452495
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include bipolar disorder, major depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2010 to October 2010, with additional service in the Reserve, so presumably also on active duty for training and inactive duty training.  

The Veteran's August 2023 claims for service connection for PTSD, bipolar disorder and major depression, and hypertension were denied by the local regional office (RO) in a January 2024 rating decision.  The Veteran subsequently submitted a VA Form 20-0996, requesting Higher-Level Review (HLR) that same month.  In a May 2024 Higher-Level review rating decision, the RO continued to deny the Veteran's claims.

In response, in July 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (i.e., an AMA Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) and requested "direct review" of the evidence in his appeal by a Veterans Law Judge.  According to the Direct Review docket, no additional evidence received after the rating decision he has appealed may be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the decision he appealed, which is the January 2024 rating decision.

Ordinarily, this would preclude obtaining and considering additional evidence.  However, there are pre-decisional, duty-to-assist errors that need correcting before deciding the claims on appeal.  The additional evidence received since January 2024 will be considered by the RO when subsequently readjudicating the claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the U. S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that, although a Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for a specific diagnosed disability, it cannot be a claim limited only to that diagnosis, but also must be considered a claim for any disability that reasonably may be encompassed by several factors including the Veteran's description of the claim, the symptoms he describes, and the information he submits or that VA obtains in support of the claim.  The Court reasoned that a Veteran does not file a claim to receive benefits only for a particular diagnosis, but for the affliction (symptoms) his condition, however described, causes him.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  Here, although the Veteran filed his claims for service connection specifically for bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and PTSD, the Board notes that he has sought treatment in the past for other acquired psychiatric disorders and received other mental health disorder diagnoses.  Thus, pursuant to Clemons, the Board has recharacterized his claim more generally as for an acquired psychiatric disorder, inclusive of the Veteran's several diagnoses.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

As already alluded to, the Veteran served in the Reserve, but it remains unclear whether any periods of that service qualify as active duty (AD), active duty for training (ACDUTRA), or inactive duty training (INACDUTRA).

"Active military, naval, or air service" includes AD and any period of ACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or an injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty, or any period of INACDUTRA during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury, though not also disease, incurred or aggravated in the line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident occurring during such training.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101(21), (24), 106; 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a), (d).

Reserve and National Guard service generally means ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA.  ACDUTRA is full time duty for training purposes performed by Reservists and National Guardsmen pursuant to 32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505.  See 38 U.S.C. § 101(22); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(c).  This typically refers to the two weeks of annual training that each Reservist or National Guardsman must perform each year.  It can also refer to the Reservist's or Guardsman's initial period of training.  INACDUTRA includes duty, other than full-time duty, performed for training purposes by Reservists and National Guardsmen pursuant to 32 U.S.C. §§ 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505. 38 U.S.C. § 101(23); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(d).  This refers to the 12, incremented four-hour weekend drills that each Reservist or National Guardsman must perform each year.  These drills are deemed to be part-time training.

To the extent this claimant is alleging that he has disability owing to an injury or a disease incurred or aggravated during his time in the Reserve, he must first establish his status as a "Veteran" in connection with that service and then that he was disabled from disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty during that service, such as while on Reserve ACDUTRA/INACDUTRA or during Federalized National Guard service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(a), (d); Harris v. West, 13 Vet. App. 509, 511 (2000); Paulson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 466, 470 (1995).  In the absence of any such evidence, the period of service would not qualify as "active military, naval, or air service" and the claimant would not achieve veteran status for purposes of that claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 101(2)-(24).

Although the claims file contains some military personnel records relating to the Veteran's enlistment, there is no document that reflects the precise dates when he served in an ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA capacity.  This information is crucial in addressing his contentions that his disabilities are related or attributable to his ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA service.  Failure to obtain these records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. §20.802(a).  Therefore, on remand, these relevant records should be obtained.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Contact the appropriate entities, including the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC), DPRIS, and any other appropriate source (since the Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) no longer exist), and request verification of all dates of AD, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA this claimant had in the Army, Army Reserves, Army National Guard, or other military branch or component.  Reports of retirement points are insufficient to meet the requirement of this remand order.  A listing of the specific dates of service and whether within those dates the service can be characterized as AD, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA is required.

All information obtained in this regard must be added to the record.  If any such information cannot be obtained, fully document the reasons, and provide this explanation in the claims file.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mukherjee, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.