Citation Nr: A25030282
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240408-432035
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Navy from August 1979 to August 1982.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2023 decision.  In February 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior September 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 decision, and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected right knee and/or right shoulder strain caused his urinary frequency.  

The Veteran is currently service connected for a right shoulder strain with mild subluxation and right knee chondromalacia patellae with osteoarthritis.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his urinary frequency.  Although the Veteran has been afforded VA examinations for his male reproductive order conditions, erectile dysfunction is the only claimed condition listed as pertinent to the examination.  Further, there is no medical nexus opinion of record for the Veteran's claim for urinary frequency.  

VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold.  Id. at 83

In the Veteran's July 2023 VA examination for male reproductive organ conditions, the examiner noted that the Veteran had a voiding dysfunction that caused increased urinary frequency described as daytime voiding interval between 1 and 2 hour and nighttime awakening to void 3 to 4 times.  January 2016 VA treatment notes report the Veteran voiding spontaneously, including urinating on himself.  Similarly, a June 2023 VA treatment record note reports that the Veteran had an episode of urinary and bowel incontinence and had continued issues with urgency.  

In this instance, because the Veteran has a diagnosis or persistent or recurrent symptoms of urinary frequency, is service connected with right shoulder and knee disabilities, and there is some indication of a potential relationship between his urinary frequency symptoms and his service connected conditions, remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and likely etiology of his urinary frequency claim.  The Veteran's claims file must be made available to the examiner.  On review of the record (to include this Remand), the examiner is asked to opine:

(a.) Whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of urinary frequency;

(b.) Whether the Veteran's urinary frequency is at least as likely as not directly related to service;

(c.) Whether the Veteran's urinary frequency was at least as likely as not caused by his service-connected disabilities;

(d.) Whether the Veteran's urinary frequency was at least as likely as not aggravated by his service-connected disabilities; and 

(e.) Whether the Veteran's urinary frequency at least as likely as not had its onset in and/or is otherwise etiologically related to his non-deployment related exposure to asbestos.

A complete rationale for any medical opinion must be provided.

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Feistritzer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.