Citation Nr: A25030952
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-454701
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), secondary to treatment for service-connected disability, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive weight of the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's GERD is secondary to treatment for a service-connected knee disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD, secondary to treatment for a service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1996 to September 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023, rating decision issued by Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Veteran timely submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  38 C.F.R. § 19.2.  The Veteran elected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge and declined a hearing.

Under direct review, evidence submitted after the date of notification of the rating decision is not reviewable by the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If the Veteran wants VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify that evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) 

Service connection may be established for disability caused by disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310.  In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence, generally medical, of a causal relationship between the claimed in service disease or injury and the current disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999). 

Service connection may also be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); Cosman v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 503 (1992).  The disease entity for which service connection is sought must be chronic rather than acute and transitory in nature.  For the showing of chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations must exist sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic.  Furthermore, service incurrence will be presumed for certain chronic diseases if manifest to a compensable degree within the year after active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

A disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability shall be service-connected.  When service connection is established for a secondary disability, the secondary disability shall be considered a part of the original disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Secondary service connection may also be established for a nonservice-connected disability which is aggravated by a service-connected disability.  In that instance, the Veteran is compensated for the degree of disability over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

The Veteran asserts that GERD is secondary to a service-connected knee disability.  

The service medical records show that the Veteran weighed 168 pounds at an April 1996 examination.  In May 1999, the Veteran reported knee pain after training.  The Veteran's weight had increased by 22 pounds to 190 pounds.  The Veteran weighed 205 pounds in December 1999; 222 pounds in July 2000; and 215 pounds in May 2002.  

At a March 2004 VA examination, the Veteran weighed 229 pounds.  The Veteran reported that knee pain prevented him from running.  The VA examiner stated that the effect of the knee disability on the Veteran's daily activity was minimal.

An August 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not related to a service-connected left knee disability because there was no accepted evidence-based medical studies which showed a relationship between the two disabilities.  The examiner stated that there was no intersection between the pathophysiology of the two disabilities.

In June 2023, VA received a medical opinion from the Veteran's private doctor.  In the May 2023 letter, the doctor opined that the Veteran's GERD was more likely than not caused or aggravated by obesity and chronic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) used to treat the service-connected knee disability.  The doctor submitted medical literature which showed a causal relationship between NSAID use and GERD.  The doctor stated that the Veteran was less active due to knee symptoms and that the obesity developed after the knee injury.  The doctor also submitted articles showing a relationship between musculoskeletal pain and obesity.  

In a June 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he became obese due decreased activity caused by pain associated with a service-connected knee disability; and that obesity, in turn, caused GERD.  The Veteran also stated that he took Ibuprofen and Motrin for service-connected knee pain and then began to have GERD symptoms.

A June 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was not related to the Veteran's service-connected knee disability.  The examiner stated that there was no medical literature to support a relationship between GERD and the Veteran's left patellofemoral pain syndrome.

In a June 2023 VA obstructive sleep apnea examination report, an examiner explained that although the Veteran asserted that obstructive sleep apnea was the result of weight gain caused by the service-connected knee disability, medical literature showed that the pathogenesis of weight gain was multifactorial and could not be attributed solely to a decrease in physical activity.  The examiner explained and cited to medical literature which showed that physical activity alone was not the primary determinant of weight gain.  Diet, to include caloric intake and fat consumption were considered equal if not more important in weight gain and obesity than activity; and isolated aerobic exercise was not an effective weight loss therapy.

In the July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had not been received.  The AOJ noted the private medical opinion and stated that the evidence received in June 2023 did not prove or disprove a matter at issue. 

The Board finds that the private medical opinion was both new and relevant.  The opinion was received after the November 2022 rating decision.  The evidence was relevant because the doctor opined and cited to evidence which showed that GERD was the result of the Veteran's service-connected knee disability.

The Board finds the May 2023 private opinion to be persuasive and the most probative of the issue at hand.  The Board finds the August 2022 and June 2023 VA examination reports incomplete and of less probative value.  The Board notes that secondary service connection may be found where a service-connected disability or treatment for a service-connected disability caused or aggravated a claimed nonservice-connected disability.  The VA examiners did not discuss the Veteran's use of NSAIDs for the treatment of the service-connected knee disability and the development of GERD.  When VA provides an examination or obtains an opinion, the examination or opinion must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

The Board assigns the greatest probative weight to the May 2023 opinion regarding the Veteran's use of NSAIDs and the development of GERD because that opinion was provided by a medical professional who cited to medical literature which supported the conclusion reached.

The Board clarifies that less probative weight is assigned to the May 2023 conclusion that the Veteran's knee disability caused weight gain which caused GERD.  After accessing the articles submitted by the doctor in support of that conclusion, the Board found that generally, the researchers of those articles noted that both diet and decreased physical activity contributed to obesity.  The doctor cited to an article which the stated that weight loss dieting programs caused weight loss and improved musculoskeletal pain symptoms.  The doctor noted an article by in which the authors studied gain weight in the two years following total knee arthroplasty.  In that article, the authors concluded that post-operative care should include access to nutrition or weight management professionals in addition to medical and physical therapy services.  

The Board notes that the June 2023 VA obstructive sleep apnea examination report findings supported the conclusion that the Veteran's weight gain could not be attributed solely to a decrease in physical activity.  At the June 2023 obstructive sleep apnea examination, the Veteran asserted that weight gain was caused by decreased activity due to a service-connected knee disability.  The June 2023 VA examiner explained and cited to articles which showed that the Veteran's weight gain could not be contributed solely to decreased activity caused by the knee disability.  

At the June 2023 obstructive sleep apnea examination, the Veteran asserted that weight gain was caused by decreased activity due to a service-connected knee disability.  However, the VA examiner explained and cited to articles which showed that the Veteran's weight gain could not be contributed solely to decreased activity caused by the knee disability.  

The Board finds the March 2023 opinion regarding weight gain caused by the Veteran's knee disability less probative because the doctor did not discuss relevant evidence of record.  Namely, the doctor stated that the Veteran's obesity developed after the knee injury in service.  However, the doctor did not discuss evidence which showed that the Veteran had gained nearly 22 pounds prior to the documented knee pain.  The doctor did not discuss the March 2004 VA examination report which showed that the Veteran weighed 229 pounds and the VA examiner's finding that the effects of the knee disability on the Veteran's activities were minimal.  

Nevertheless, the Board finds that service connection for GERD is warranted as the most persuasive evidence of record supports a finding that the Veteran's GERD is related to NSAID use for a service-connected knee disability.  Accordingly, as the persuasive weight of the evidence supports entitlement to service connection for GERD, the claim is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E.O., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.