Citation Nr: A25030089
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-446941
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis left knee is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis right knee is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2000 to July 2004.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of the left and right knees, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis left knee

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis right knee

The Veteran contends that his left and right knee degenerative arthritis are caused by his active military service.  The Veteran contends that his bilateral knee pain started while he was on active duty and has gotten progressively worse.  January 2024 VA Examination.  He states that his military duties required excessive physical exertion, heavy lifting, and constant movement.  October 2023 Lay Statement.

Service treatment records are silent for any symptoms, treatment, or diagnosis of any knee condition in service.  The Veteran had a normal lower extremity examination in the March 2000 entrance examination.  In the accompanying Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied any "trick" knee, arthritis, and bone or joint deformity.  In the accompanying Applicant Medical Prescreening Form, the Veteran denied any "trick" joints or impaired use of the legs.  In the January 2004 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied any knee trouble as well as any swollen or painful joints.  The Veteran had a normal lower extremity examination at the March 2004 separation examination.

There are no relevant private treatment records.

VA treatment records show that the Veteran has a diagnosis of degenerative joint disease in his left and right knees.  April 2018 treatment notes indicate the Veteran injured his left knee when he tripped and fell.  The Veteran complained of left knee pain since that incident and noted that he had difficulty walking due to knee pain.  The Veteran had some crepitus in his left knee which the Veteran said has always been there.  The April 2018 left knee x-ray showed no acute fracture or dislocation.  In July 2022, the Veteran was noted to have bilateral knee pain primarily in his right knee but also in his left.  The Veteran noted that the pain had worsened over the last few years.  The physician felt that the Veteran's knee pain was likely degenerative joint disease.  The Veteran complained of worsening knee pain in October 2022.  In December 2022, the Veteran complained of that his right knee pain is on and off and his knee is getting stiff.  In an August 2023 treatment note, the Veteran again stated that he had bilateral knee pain with his right worse than his left.  The pain has been worsening over the last few years.  An August 2023 VA x-ray showed bilateral mild medial compartment joint space narrowing, with no acute fracture or osteophytes present.  At an August 2023 orthopedic consultation, the Veteran was diagnosed with early degenerative joint disease bilaterally with superimposed obesity.  In October 2023 treatment record notes that the knee injections provided some relief, but he still has pain walking long distances.  The Veteran had bilateral knee injections again in November 2023.  He was also prescribed bilateral knee braces in November 2023.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2023.  At that examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic.  The Veteran noted that his knee pain began in 2001 and has gotten progressively worse.  The VA examiner opined the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knees was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's military service.  The examiner discussed the Veteran's obesity and acknowledged the August 2023 orthopedic consultation discussing the Veteran's degenerative joint disease with superimposed obesity.  Additionally, the examiner noted the Veteran had no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for degenerative arthritis in service.  Therefore, the examiner found that the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knees was not caused by the Veteran's active military service.

VA must provide an examination that is adequate for VA compensation purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  The Board finds that the December 2023 medical opinion is inadequate for VA compensation purposes.  The examiner did not address whether the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knees manifested in service or within one year after discharge.  The examiner simply noted that the Veteran did not have any complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knees in service.  The absence of contemporaneous records does not preclude granting service connection for a claimed disability. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  

The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from the December 2023 VA examiner, if possible.  If the clinician determines that an examination is warranted, then one should be scheduled.  A copy of this Remand and the claims file should be provided to the examiner, and the report must reflect that the claims file was reviewed.  The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knees began during service, within one year of his discharge in July 2004, or is otherwise related to his service?

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's report of military duties which included excessive physical exertion, heavy lifting, and constant knee pain [October 2023 Lay Statement] as well as the Veteran's contention that his knee pain began in 2001 and has gotten progressively worse [December 2023 VA examination].

The examiner is reminded that a lack of documented treatment during service is not itself a sufficient basis for a negative nexus opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s). If the requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should explain why.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Bush, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.