Citation Nr: A25030284
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240617-448648
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that allergic rhinitis began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1974 to September 1978.

The June 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions on appeal constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The claims of entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension and for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis) were originally denied in a May 2021 rating decision.  Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a May 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the May 2021 rating decision.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) then issued a June 2022 HLR decision, which denied the rhinitis claim, but found a duty to assist error with respect to the valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension claim. The AOJ moved the heart claim to the supplemental claim lane. 

After conducting the additional development deemed necessary, the AOJ issued an October 2022 supplemental claim decision which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the valvular heart disease claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  The RO then issued another supplemental claim decision on this issue in June 2023, as additional development was conducted in May 2023. The AOJ confirmed and continued the prior denial of service connection for valvular heart disease. 

The Veteran also submitted a May 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claims of entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension (from the October 2022 rating decision) and for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis) (from the June 2022 rating decision).  The AOJ issued an October 2023 supplemental claim decision, which confirmed and continued the prior denials. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board cannot consider any evidence added to the file after the decision(s) on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider with respect to either claim, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Importantly, the Veteran appealed both the June 2023 and the October 2023 supplemental claim decisions with respect to the claim of entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension.  The evidentiary window closed as of the June 2023 decision for that appeal and as of the October 2023 decision for the appeal of the October 2023 decision.  However, the record contains no pertinent evidence related to that claim that was received after the June 2023 supplemental claim decision but before the October 2023 supplemental claim decision.  At the time of the June 2023 decision, VA records for treatment through June 7, 2023, were in the file. The VA outpatient records added to the file in August 2023 concerned additional treatment received through August 17, 2023, but contained no additional treatment or information for the heart condition. Because the claims are identical and the relevant evidence to be considered in both the appeal of the June 2023 rating decision and the appeal of the October 2023 rating decision are the same, the analysis below will not differentiate the claims.  

VA regulations provide that, "[u]pon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim... before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim." 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1). That regulation does not indicate that the claimant is entitled to pre-decisional notice of this optional hearing. In fact, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) provides that, following a decision, "[c]laimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of any decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief... [including] the right to a hearing on any issue involved in the claim as provided in paragraph (d) of this section...." Read together with § 3.103(d), the only notice § 3.103(b) requires is that a claimant be provided notice of the right for a hearing with notification of the decision (by definition, a post-decisional notice). In November 2022, VA amended VA Form 21-526EZ and in May 2024 VA amended VA Form 20-0995 to inform claimants of the right to a hearing at any time during the claims process.  The claims in this appeal were filed on prior to the amended versions. However, the Board finds that any error in the failure to inform the Veteran of the right to a pre-decisional hearing before the Regional Office (RO) was harmless error. 

In Bowen, the Court found that when a claimant is denied a hearing before the RO, there is no due process violation if he is subsequently offered the opportunity for a hearing before the Board, even if a hearing was not requested or conducted, as long as there is no violation of due process concerning the Board hearing opportunity. Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253-4 (2012). The facts in the case can be differentiated on several levels, to include that the Veteran did not actually request an RO hearing and the issue in Bowen was not one of notice. Regardless, the Board cannot find a basis to conclude that the underlying holding and logic of the Bowen case would not lead to the same finding of no prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case. The June 2023 and October 2023 notification letters informing the Veteran of the rating decisions at issue included a VA Form 20-0998, Your Right to Seek Review of Our Decision, outlining the Veteran's appeal options, to include a hearing before the Board. Additionally, in the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran was provided with an option to request a hearing with a Veterans Law Judge. The Veteran instead selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge and the form explicitly states that by choosing this option, the Veteran does not want a Board hearing. Because the Veteran was provided with notice of the right to appeal to the Board, as well as the right to a Board hearing, there was no due process violation in the processing of the claim or any suggestion that the Veteran was prejudiced by the failure of VA to provide a hearing at the RO level. See Bowen.

1. Entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension

The Veteran contends that he has valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension that is etiologically related to his active service to include alleged exposures to herbicide agents (e.g., Agent Orange) and radiation on Johnston Atoll.  See January 2021 VA 21-526EZ (specifying exposure to "Agent Orange, Radiation" and describing how the disabilities relate to service as "exposure during service at Johnston Atoll"); May 2023 VA Form 20-0995 ("Herbicides remained in the environment in Johnston Atoll and [the Veteran] was exposed to those chemicals while serving there."); June 2024 VA Form 10182 ("Service connection for valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension due to herbicide exposure.").

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension, and evidence shows that the Veteran was stationed on Johnston Atoll for ten (10) days beginning April 22, 1978, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

VA treatment records show the Veteran was not diagnosed with orthostatic hypotension until September 2018 and was not diagnosed with valvular heart disease until February 2021, decades after separation from service.  

Further, the February 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed heart condition is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The rationale was that the Veteran had no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment of a heart condition through his service.  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  While the opinion does not address the alleged exposures, it does have probative value with respect to whether the Veteran's heart condition, diagnosed as valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension, began during or is related to an in-service disease, injury, or event other than the alleged exposures to herbicide agents and radiation.  The examiner found no indication in the service treatment records that the Veteran had symptoms or treatment or any diagnosis of his alleged heart condition during service.

While the Veteran believes the claimed valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypertension is related to alleged exposures to herbicide agents and radiation during his service on the Johnston Atoll, the Board reiterates that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran was actually exposed to herbicide agents or radiation on the Johnston Atoll.  

The basis of the Veteran's allegation with respect to herbicide agents is the conceded fact that herbicide agents such as Agent Orange were stored on the Johnston Atoll prior to September 30, 1977.  The PACT Act establishes presumptive exposure for Veterans who served on Johnston Island (Atoll) from January 1, 1972, to September 30, 1977.  See The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168 § 403 (Aug. 10, 2022).  The Veteran served on Johnston Island (Atoll) on TDY for 10 days beginning April 22, 1978.  This is after the presumptive period and, so, the Veteran cannot benefit from the PACT Act presumption.

The Veteran has submitted various articles related to the use of herbicides in Vietnam and contamination of the environment in Vietnam.  See May 2023 Submission by Veteran.  However, there is no reason to assume that the results of widespread use of herbicide agents in Vietnam (e.g., contamination of soil, water, etc.) would be duplicated on Johnston Island due to storage (rather than use) of herbicide agents there.  The May 2023 submission also contains a lengthy (over 500 page) scientific/medical article regarding the toxicological profile for chemicals found in herbicide agents.  Information contained within treatises is generally too abstract to prove the nexus element of a service-connection claim, although it is possible that a treatise might "discuss generic relationships with a degree of certainty" that would allow a finding of "plausible causality based upon objective facts."  See Sacks v. West, 11 Vet. App. 314, 316-17 (1998).  Here, even assuming some background exposure, the scientific evidence in the May 2023 submission would be insufficient to establish any relationship between the Veteran's particular heart condition and the alleged exposure.  This is particularly so where the document contains statements like this: "there is suggestive but inconclusive evidence of adverse cardiovascular effects in humans exposed to relatively high concentrations of CDDs" and "no evidence of adverse cardiovascular effects was detected among U.S. workers exposed to CDDs."  The Veteran's allegation is not that he was exposed to large amounts of the chemicals, as he has never alleged such direct exposure, but, instead, that there was some contamination of soil or drinking water.  Again, even assuming such exposure, this article is too general and its findings too technical for the lay Board to apply it to this case.  The Board assigns it no probative value.

More importantly, the Veteran is not presumed to have been exposed and there is no direct evidence of exposure.  

The Veteran submitted a statement from a fellow servicemember which alleges, in general terms, that it is widely known that the "entire island was and is a nightmare for those who were deployed or stationed to the island for any time."  March 2021 Buddy Statement.  The statement does not allege specific exposures by the Veteran, does not relate any first hand knowledge of specific exposures, and otherwise fails to provide any direct evidence relevant to the Veteran's claim other than that the Veteran was stationed on Johnston Island with this fellow servicemember.  The Veteran's bald assertion that "herbicides remained in the environment in Johnston Atoll", see May 2023 VA Form 20-0995, is not sufficient to establish that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents where he has cited no expert statements or even directly relevant scientific or other articles to establish that fact.  As noted the PACT Act establishes a presumption which ended September 30, 1977, nearly nine (9) months before the Veteran was stationed on Johnston Island.  The presumptive period was adopted based on scientific and other evidence regarding the possibility of exposure given the timing and manner of storage.  The record contains no evidence to suggest that the Veteran was actually exposed to herbicide agents other than his own and his fellow servicemember's speculation that, because herbicide agents were stored on Johnston Island, herbicide agents "remained in the environment."  This is insufficient to place the evidence in equipoise regarding any exposure that may be related to the Veteran's valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension.

As to radiation exposure, nuclear weapons were detonated near Johnston Island in 1958 during Operation Hardtack and in 1962 during Operation Dominic.  There is a presumption of radiation exposure for servicemembers who were present at the test site or performed official military duties in direct support of the nuclear test during the "operational period" which, for Operation Hardtack I and Operation Hardtack II ended October 31, 1958, and for Operation Dominic I and Operation Dominic II, ended December 31, 1962.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309(d)(3).  Thus, the Veteran's service on Johnston Island was over 15 years after any period of presumptive exposure to radiation.  The Veteran has not provided any argument or evidence to support his contention that he was exposed to radiation other than the March 2021 Buddy Statement which, as noted above, speaks in generalities and simply assumes lingering contamination from these tests.  Neither the Veteran nor his witness has submitted statements which indicate direct knowledge of exposure to radiation.  Given the law does not presume continued exposure to radiation indefinitely, there is no basis for the Board to make any such presumption.  Because there is no evidence and no allegations that would require VA to obtain additional documents or expert testimony, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against concluding that the Veteran was exposed to radiation during the ten days he was on Johnston Island.

In addition, there is nothing in the record to suggest that the alleged residual exposure would cause the sort of cardiovascular conditions the Veteran has.  The regulations specify various conditions that may be presumptively connected to a Veteran known to be exposed to radiation, but the Veteran's diagnosed valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension are not included in that list.  Without some evidence or indication that the Veteran's valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension could be association with radiation exposure, there is no basis for further development, to include obtaining any expert opinions regarding whether the Veteran's valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension are etiologically related to the alleged exposure.

In short, there is neither sufficient evidence of exposure nor, if exposure were assumed despite the lack of evidence, any indication that the Veteran's valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension diagnosed in and after 2018 might be associated with radiation exposure.

The evidence is not in approximate balance, but is persuasively against the claim, therefore there is not reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for valvular heart disease and orthostatic hypotension is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as sinusitis)

The Veteran contends that he has a sinus condition, since diagnosed as allergic rhinitis, that is related to his active service.  He has generally alleged that his allergic rhinitis is due to exposure to herbicide agents and/or radiation while stationed in Johnston Island (Atoll).  See January 2021 VA 21-526EZ (specifying exposure to "Agent Orange, Radiation" and describing how the disabilities relate to service as "exposure during service at Johnston Atoll"); May 2023 VA Form 20-0995 ("Herbicides remained in the environment in Johnston Atoll and [the Veteran] was exposed to those chemicals while serving there."); June 2024 VA Form 10182 ("Service connection for valvular heart disease with orthostatic hypotension due to herbicide exposure.").

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of allergic rhinitis, and evidence shows that the Veteran had complaints of and treatment for sinus issues during service, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of allergic rhinitis began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

VA treatment records show the Veteran was not diagnosed with rhinitis until 2013, decades after separation from service. While the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of "nose running" intermittently since service, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of his current allergic rhinitis. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the diagnostic criteria for and presentation of allergic rhinitis and the interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Further, the February 2021 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including in-service complaints of and treatment for sinus headaches. The rationale was that the in-service sinus condition appears to have been "an acute event in 1976 without any chronicity or sequelae as the record is silent for additional complaints or treatment for this sinus condition until 2013."  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). 

The Veteran believes the claimed allergic rhinitis is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The Veteran in this case is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the potential causes of allergic rhinitis, the diagnostic criteria for and presentation of allergic rhinitis, the ability to read and interpret pertinent medical literature, and the interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the February 2021 VA examiner's opinion.

The Veteran has raised the issue of whether his allergic rhinitis is etiologically related to alleged exposure to herbicide agents (e.g. Agent Orange) and/or radiation during his ten days of service on Johnston Island.  The Board has addressed his exposure allegations above in the discussion of the heart disabilities claim and incorporates that analysis here.  In short, the presumptive period for exposure to herbicide agents for servicemembers stationed on Johnston Island ended in September 1977 and the presumptive period for radiation exposure for certain servicemembers stationed on Johnston Island ended in December 1962, while the Veteran was first stationed on Johnston Island on April 22, 1978.  Therefore, no presumptions apply.  Moreover, there is no competent, probative evidence that the Veteran was actually exposed to herbicide agents or to radiation while stationed on Johnston Island or otherwise.  

The evidence is not in approximate balance, but is persuasively against the claim, therefore there is not reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is denied.   

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hubers, Kerry

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.