Citation Nr: A25030250
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-453963
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for tension headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 2001 to December 2001, and from June 2004 to June 2005. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by the VA Regional Office (RO) continuing a 30 percent disability rating for tension headaches, and from a January 2024 higher level review rating decision denying entitlement to TDIU.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, as it pertains to the claim for TDIU, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With regards to the claim for increased rating for tension headaches, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding both claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Increased rating for tension headaches. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for his service-connected tension headaches. See April 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement.

The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of increased evaluation for tension headaches and finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist and conduct further development before the claim can be decided. 

The Board finds the most recent August 2023 VA examination for tension headaches inadequate. First, the Board notes that a previous VA examination that took place in May 2023 includes reports that Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of non-migraine headache pain with a frequency of greater than once per month. In addition, the examiner found that the Veteran was experiencing completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of non-migraine pain more than once per month, which is the highest frequency available to choose from on the examination form. Finally, the examiner also endorsed non-headache symptoms of sensitivity to light and sound, as well as changes in vision. 

In the August 2023 VA examination, which occurred less than ninety days later, the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not suffer from either characteristic prostrating attacks of pain or the completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of pain. The examiner also did not note any of the previously reported non-headache symptoms. The examiner did not address or reconcile the significant discrepancies between his clinical findings and those in the preceding May 2023 examination. While some of those differences could potentially be attributed to an improvement of Veteran's condition, the Board notes that the examiner stated that Veteran's symptoms did not improve but actually worsened. Thus, further clarification is needed as to the current severity of Veteran's symptoms.

Accordingly, the Board finds that due to this pre-decisional error in the duty to assist a remand is required to obtain a new VA examination addressing the current severity of Veteran's tension headaches.    

2. Entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU).

The Board notes that the Veteran asserts that his individual unemployability is due to his service-connected PTSD and tension headaches. See July 2024 Appellate Brief. Thus, the issue of entitlement to TDIU must also be remanded as it is inextricably intertwined with the issue of increased rating for the tension headaches.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when the adjudication of one issue could have "significant impact" on the other issue). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination with a qualified clinician, to determine the severity of Veteran's service-connected tension headaches. After a full review of the claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, the examiner should provide a full description of the disability. All indicated studies, tests, and evaluations should be performed necessary for evaluation of the Veteran's headache disability.

The examiner should specifically address and reconcile any inconsistent findings from May 2023 and August 2023 VA examinations for headaches. 

A detailed explanation (rationale) is required for all opinions provided. By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Blaszkiewicz, Adam

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.