Citation Nr: A25030727
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240705-456029
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The Veteran is competent to handle the disbursement of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) funds and entitlement to restoration of competency is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran currently has the mental capacity to contract or manage personal affairs, including the disbursement of funds, without limitation.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for restoration of the Veteran's competency are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5502; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.353.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 1968 to December 1971.  This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2024 rating decision by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

The Veteran initially elected an appeal to the Board using the direct review docket in a July 2024 VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)).  Thereafter, in an October 2024 NOD, the Veteran elected an appeal to the Board, using the Board hearing docket.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  This election switched the dockets from the direct docket to the hearing docket.  On the hearing docket, the Board considers the same record as that considered by the AOJ, as well as evidence submitted at a Board hearing and during the 90-day period following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

The Veteran testified at a March 2025 hearing held before the undersigned via videoconference.  The Veteran's daughter and son-in-law also appeared and testified.  A transcript of the hearing is associated with the claims file. 

The Veteran asserts that he is capable of managing his VA funds.  Under VA regulations, a mentally incompetent person is one who because of injury or disease lacks the mental capacity to contract or to manage his or her own affairs, including disbursement of funds without limitation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.353(a).

Unless the medical evidence is clear, convincing and leaves no doubt as to the person's incompetency, the rating agency will make no determination of incompetency without a definite expression regarding the question by the responsible medical authorities.  Determinations relative to incompetency should be based upon all evidence of record and there should be a consistent relationship between the percentage of disability, facts relating to commitment or hospitalization and the holding of incompetency.  38 C.F.R. § 3.353(c).

Where reasonable doubt arises regarding a beneficiary's mental capacity to contract or to manage his or her own affairs, including the disbursement of funds without limitation, such doubt will be resolved in favor of competency.  38 C.F.R. § 3.353(d); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Whenever it is proposed to make an incompetency determination, the beneficiary will be notified of the proposed action and of the right to a hearing as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103.  Such notice is not necessary if the beneficiary has been declared incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction or if a guardian has been appointed for the beneficiary based upon a court finding of incompetency.  If a hearing is requested, it must be held prior to a rating decision of incompetency.  Failure or refusal of the beneficiary after proper notice to request or cooperate in such a hearing will not preclude a rating decision based on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.353(e).

The AOJ's determination of incompetency was predicated upon a July 2023 VA mental disorders examination.  The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran was not capable of managing his own affairs.  The VA examiner cited a 2022 stroke, which affected the Veteran's memory and executive functioning, and that his daughter had power of attorney.  

At the March 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that while his daughter helps him, it is at his direction.  He further testified that he is aware of what funds he receives, is able to track his bills, and writes his own grocery lists. His communication skills were impacted by his stroke, but he was clearly aware of the proceedings and their purpose.  He responded directly to questioning by the undersigned and at times even waived off assistance from his daughter.  

In a June 2024 statement, which was resubmitted within the AMA evidentiary window in March 2025, the Veteran stated that he is capable of handling his own affairs.  He noted that his daughter offers to help, and her assistance is welcomed and appreciated, but that he is well-capable of handling his own finances and a fiduciary is not necessary.  

The record also contains a letter from the Veteran's treating clinician, which was associated with the claims file in March 2025.  She indicated that despite the Veteran's disabilities, he is of sound mind and capable of managing his own financial affairs.  The clinician further reported that she found no evidence of cognitive impairment that would preclude the Veteran from managing his finances.  

The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to handle the disbursement of VA funds.  While a July 2023 VA examiner found the Veteran not competent, the remainder of the relevant evidence shows that the Veteran is currently able to adequately manage personal finances, including the receipt of VA benefits.  The totality of the evidence shows that the Veteran is currently capable of managing his financial affairs.  The Board further notes that at the March 2025 hearing, the Veteran was aware, attentive, and responsive, and spoke up for himself.  

In light of the foregoing, it has not been shown by clear and convincing medical evidence that the Veteran lacks the mental capacity to contract or manage his own affairs, including the disbursement of funds, without limitation.  Considering the presumption in favor of competency, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent handle the disbursement of VA funds.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.A. Ong, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.