Citation Nr: A25030584
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-433756
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of military sexual trauma (MST) from August 22, 2024, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PTSD more closely approximates occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an assignment of a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for service-connected PTSD are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (West 2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 1989 to September 1996.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Representation

Additionally, with regard to the Veteran's representative in this matter, the record shows that, in September 1996, the Veteran executed a VA Form 21-22, Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Claimant's Representative, in favor of Disabled American Veterans (DAV).  In November 2024, the Veteran executed a VA Form 21-22 in favor of Arizona Department of Veterans Affairs; no reason for the change in representation was provided.  Thereafter, in February 2025, the Veteran executed a VA Form 21-22a, Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative, in favor of DAV, no reason for the change in representation was provided.

Here, the notice of disagreement was received by the Board on April 23, 2024, therefore, the Veteran's requests for change in representation in November 2024 and February 2025 were well beyond the 90-day period after notice of disagreement in which such requests may be made absent good cause.

An appellant and his or her representative, if any, will be granted a period of 90 days following receipt of a Notice of Disagreement, or up to and including the date the appellate decision is promulgated by the Board, whichever comes first, during which they may submit a request for a change in representation.  38 CFR § 20.1304(a).  Following the expiration of the period described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Board will not accept a request for a change in representation except when the appellant demonstrates on motion that there was good cause for the delay.  38 CFR § 20.1304(b).  As such, good cause is required for a change in representation.

As noted above, the Veteran did not provide a reason for his requested changes in representation.  Additionally, DAV has submitted argument with respect to these matters, while Arizona Department of Veterans Affairs has not submitted any argument or evidence with respect to these matters.  See May 2024 Appellate Brief.

Therefore, the Board finds that DAV represents the Veteran in this appeal.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of military sexual trauma (MST) from August 22, 2024

Initial Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by application of the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  However, in Fenderson, the Court noted an important distinction between an appeal involving a Veteran's disagreement with the initial rating assigned at the time a disability is service connected.  Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection to consider the appropriateness of "staged rating" (i.e., assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found) is required.  See Fenderson, 12 Vet.  App. at 126; see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Procedural Background

In a February 2024 VA rating decision, service connection for PTSD was granted under DC 9411 at 30 percent, effective August 24, 2022.  The Veteran timely appealed this rating.  Given such, the Veteran is appealing the original assignment of disability evaluation following the award of service connection.  In such a case, it is not the present level of disability, which is of primary importance, but rather the entire period since the effective date of the grant of service connection is to be considered to ensure that consideration is given to the possibility of staged ratings; that is, separate ratings for separate periods of time based on the facts found.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Therefore, the period on appeal begins on August 24, 2022.

All psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.  The Veteran's PTSD is rated at 30 percent under DC 9411 throughout the entire period on appeal.

Diagnostic Criteria: General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders

Under DC 9411, a 30-percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

The next higher 50-percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70-percent rating is assigned when the psychiatric condition produces occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.).

A maximum 100-percent rating is assigned when there is total occupational or social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is a veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a veteran's occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating.  Id. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

Factual Background

In an April 2023 VA examination report, the VA examiner noted a diagnosis of PTSD.  See April 2023 VA Initial PTSD Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The Veteran's PTSD symptoms are depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, and chronic sleep impairment.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was easily engaged, cooperative, and forthcoming.  He was within normal limits concerning appearance, behavior, attitude, level of consciousness, orientation, insight and judgment, speech, and language, thought process and content, attention span, memory, and intellectual functioning.  His mood and affect were slightly dysthymic.  He denied hallucinations, delusions, or suicidal ideation.

Regarding social history, the Veteran reported he still has good family relationships but had been living away from them for a long time, that he has never been married and has no children, he has no friends, he is not dating, he has no friends, he has no religion and no hobbies.  With respect to occupational history, the Veteran reported that he currently is employed with the VA since the previous year as medical support assistant (MSA) and is now a supervisor.  He gets along on the job.  He also reported that he worked as a sales manager in the past and the longest job he had was about ten years.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD is summarized by occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and the ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

The April 2023 VA examiner additionally noted that the Veteran experiences daily memories and nightmares, is highly avoidant, and has been unable to have relationships through the years.  See April 2023 VA Initial PTSD DBQ.  Additionally, the examiner reported that the Veteran has trouble falling sleeping due to ruminations, awakens at night due to anxiety and bad dreams, and is tired much of the time.  And lastly, the Veteran reported panic attacks that occur every few days and he gets anxious about having to see the therapist and "relive the moment."  The Veteran reported, "I have found that keeping my mind occupied at work is my therapy... it takes my mind of what has happened."

In an April 2023 lay statement, the Veteran stated he had changes in his performance evaluations due to inability to get along with workmates, experiences serious depression, experienced substance abuse and had to attend VA substance abuse treatment program, never could enter a relationship with a woman or maintain a relationship with a woman, he is "standoffish" with anyone in his personal space, he distanced himself with family for years afterwards, he always felt ashamed and embarrassed and felt his incident was covered up by the military.  See April 2023 VA Form 21-0781a, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD secondary to sexual assault.

Analysis

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the Veteran's psychiatric disability has been manifested by symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work like setting), trouble concentrating, and trouble staying focused.  As such, the Veteran exhibits symptoms that meet the criteria for both the 30 percent and 50 percent ratings.  Considering the duration, frequency, and severity of the Veteran's disability, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted throughout the period on appeal.

Specifically, the Veteran's stated he has disturbances of motivation and mood (evidenced by his depression and anxiety) and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships (inability to get along with coworkers, strained relationships with family members, and an inability to maintain relationships with women).  These are symptoms listed under the 50 percent rating criteria.  In sum, the Board notes that while the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms reflect symptoms which fall under the 30 and 50 percent rating criteria, the intensity of the individual symptoms varied throughout the period on appeal, and the chronic nature of the duration and frequency of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms reflect the severity of the Veteran's PTSD.  Therefore, when evaluating the Veteran's PTSD symptoms, the Board finds that the Veteran's overall disability picture more closely depicts PTSD symptoms that are productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which equates to a rating of 50 percent.

As to a rating higher than 50 percent, the Board notes that the evidence does not support a 70 or a 100 percent rating.

A 70 percent rating is not warranted any time during the period on appeal as the Veteran did not exhibit symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  In fact, the May 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported no hallucinations, delusions, or suicidal ideation.  Furthermore, the Veteran's speech has always been noted as logical and clear.  The May 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was within normal limits concerning appearance, behavior, attitude, level of consciousness, orientation, insight and judgment, speech, and language, thought process and content, attention span, memory, and intellectual functioning.

While the Veteran reported he has difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, the evidence does not reflect he is not able to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Quite the opposite, the evidence, by the Veteran's own statements, reflect that while he does not have relationships with women and no friends, the Veteran has been able to maintain relationships with family members.  Also, while the Veteran does attribute trouble with coworkers with his PTSD, he reports getting along on the job and this just represents one area in which his PTSD effects the Veteran's ability to work.  Indeed, one area of deficiency does not reflect deficiencies in most areas when related to the Veteran's ability to work.  As such, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran's overall PTSD is productive of social and occupational impairment with deficiencies in most areas, that would be consistent or near consistent with a 70-percent rating.

A maximum 100 percent rating is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal as the Veteran did not exhibit symptoms such as grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent delusions or hallucinations, persistent danger of hurting himself or others, intermittent inability to perform daily living, disorientation to time living or place, memory loss of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Throughout the entire record, the Veteran has been alert and fully oriented.  The record does not show that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of grossly inappropriate behavior, intermittent inability to perform daily living, disorientation to time living or place, memory loss of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  As discussed above, the Veteran's orientation has always been noted to be within normal limits.  While the Veteran reports that he experiences short- and long-term memory loss, he does not contend, nor does the evidence reflect that he has memory loss of close relatives, his own occupation, or name.  Importantly, during the May 2023 VA examination report of record, the Veteran answered all questions about his name, his previous occupational history, his symptoms, and generally provided appropriately responsive answers to questions posed.

Moreover, the evidence does not support both total occupational and social impairment.  As discussed above, the Veteran maintains relationships with family members.  Thus, not reflective of total social impairment.  While, the Veteran has reported issues with work performance and an inability to get along with coworkers, this factor alone is insufficient to reflect the Veteran has total occupational impairment due solely to PTSD.

Thus, the criteria for a 70 percent or a 100 percent rating are not satisfied.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for PTSD, is warranted.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. C., Abua-Barnes, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.