Citation Nr: A25030866
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240803-466953
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right wrist is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), also claimed as nightmare disorder, anxiety disorder and primary insomnia is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for post-concussive syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fallen arches, bilateral, as secondary to a back disability, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the applicable period, degenerative arthritis of the right wrist has not manifested by ankylosis or its equivalent.

2. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

3. The Veteran's service-connected tinnitus is assigned a 10 percent rating, the maximum rating authorized under Diagnostic Code 6260.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right wrist are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5215.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD, also claimed as nightmare disorder, anxiety disorder and primary insomnia are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

3. There is no legal basis for the assignment of an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from May 2007 to September 2013.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in August 2023 (tinnitus) and November 2023 (all other issues).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 (tinnitus) and November 2023 (all other issues) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the August 2024 NOD also included the following issues: whether new and material evidence has been received to reopen the claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability; entitlement to service connection for headaches; and entitlement to service connection for hypertension.  However, these issues were last denied in a February 2018 rating decision (with a March 2018 notification letter) issued under the legacy review system. The AMA review system only applies to claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after the effective date of the AMA, which is February 19, 2019.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2.  In the legacy system, appellate review is initiated by filing a notice of disagreement and is completed by filing a substantive appeal after a Statement of the Case is furnished.  38 U.S.C. § 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. § 19.20.  However, a notice of disagreement must be filed, or new and material evidence must be presented, within one year of the date that the agency mails the notice of determination to him.  Otherwise, that determination will be final.  38 C.F.R. § 19.52(a).  

Here, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement on a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement in August 2024.  While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's use of a VA Form 10182 (used for AMA appeals) instead of VA Form 21-0958 (used for legacy appeals) would constitute a procedural defect, under the guidance in Hall, the Board may accept the VA Form 10182 as an appeal of the legacy rating decision if timely filed.  See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 333-34 (2021).  However, here the Veteran's August 2024 notice of disagreement is untimely as it was filed after the March 2019 deadline.  As such, the February 2018 decision is final.  As such, those issues will not be addressed.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) if he wishes to have these issues readjudicated. 

The appellant filed a claim for service connection of cyst/benign growth - musculoskeletal - mid/lower back (thoracolumbar) on June 14, 2023.  In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ deferred adjudication of this issue, but did not thereafter adjudicate it.  Therefore, the Board cannot adjudicate that issue.  The appellant may resubmit the claim to the AOJ or notify the AOJ that the issue is still pending.

Entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right wrist.

VA received the Veteran's claim for an increased evaluation on June 14, 2023. Thus, this date marks the beginning of the appeal period, to include the one-year lookback period.  An effective date for an increased rating claim may date back as much as one year before the date of the formal application for increase if it is "factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred" within that timeframe.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997).

38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5214 and 5215, provide disability evaluations for wrist ankylosis and limitation of motion, respectively.  

To qualify for the minimum compensable evaluation of 30 percent (major)/20 percent (minor) disabling available under Diagnostic Code 5214 (wrist ankylosis) for major joints, the service-connected disability must be manifested by favorable ankylosis of 20 to 30 degrees of dorsiflexion.  The next higher evaluation of 40 percent (major)/30 percent (minor) disabling is available where the veteran's wrist ankylosis is in any other position except favorable.  Finally, the maximum evaluation of 50 percent (major)/40 percent (minor) disabling is available under Diagnostic Code 5214 where the veteran's ankylosis is unfavorable, is in any degree of palmar flexion, or is associated with ulnar or radial deviation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5214. 

An evaluation of 10 percent disabling is available under Diagnostic Code 5215 for limitation of motion of either wrist where the veteran's wrist is limited in palmar flexion in line with the forearm or whether the veteran's dorsiflexion is less than 15 degrees.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5215.

VA examination in October 2023 resulted in an assessment of degenerative arthritis of the right wrist.  At the time, the Veteran reported flare-ups one to two times per month, manifested by increased pain and an inability to drive, type, write or complete tasks for short periods of time.  He characterized them as moderate. The Veteran reported alleviating factors as Tylenol, Advil, Meloxicam, rest, and ice. Range of motion was worst following repetitive use times three, repetitive use over time and during flare-ups, with dorsiflexion to 40 degrees, palmar flexion to 35 degrees, ulnar deviation to 5 degrees and radial deviation to 15 degrees.  There was no ankylosis.

To substantiate an evaluation in excess of 10 percent, the evidence must demonstrate ankylosis or its equivalent as 10 percent is the maximum evaluation provided under Diagnostic Code 5215.  Here, VA examination in October 2023 ruled out ankylosis.  Moreover, the examination report shows that the Veteran's right wrist retains a significant amount of range of motion such that functional ankylosis is not shown.  In the absence of ankylosis, the claim is denied.

In reaching this determination, the Board acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use," Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the Veteran has reported treatment with Tylenol, Advil, and Meloxicam.  In this case, the VA examiner, in rendering ROM findings, noted and considered the Veteran's lay statements describing functional limitations in all worst-case scenarios (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.). There is no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report nor did the examiner indicate the Veteran was on any pain medications at the time of the examination. The Board finds the report adequate to base a decision.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD, also claimed as nightmare disorder, anxiety disorder and primary insomnia.

VA received the Veteran's claim for an increased evaluation on June 14, 2023. Thus, this date marks the beginning of the appeal period, to include the one-year lookback period.  An effective date for an increased rating claim may date back as much as one year before the date of the formal application for increase if it is "factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred" within that timeframe.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. 

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

To substantiate the next higher 100 percent schedular evaluation, total occupational and social impairment must be shown.  

VA examination in September 2023 resulted in assessments of PTSD, major depressive disorder (MDD) and insomnia disorder, the symptoms of which overlapped and were indistinguishable.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran was working and remained married, although his marriage was troublesome, and he tended to isolate.  On mental status examination, the Veteran was oriented times three, and presented with a euthymic mood and congruent, full-range affect.  Speech was normal.  Eye contact was appropriate.  Nonverbal behaviors appeared normal.  He was dressed and groomed appropriately.  Hygiene was intact.  He was friendly, open and engaged.  His thought processes were logical, linear and goal-directed.  He denied hallucinations, perceptual disturbances and did not present with any delusions or disordered thought.  He had adequate comprehension.  Judgment and insight were intact.  Memory and attention were grossly intact.  He denied suicidal/homicidal ideation.  The examiner found occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood due to symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, disturbances of motivation and mood and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  

The September 2023 VA examination shows that the Veteran's PTSD has not manifested by symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating.  None of the symptoms listed in the examination report are listed in the 100 percent criteria.  Regardless, total occupational and occupational impairment has not been shown because, despite his disability, the Veteran has remained employed and married.  Total occupational and social impairment is not shown, and the claim is denied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.

The Veteran seeks an increased evaluation for tinnitus in excess of 10 percent.  The AOJ denied entitlement to a higher evaluation because under Diagnostic Code 6260 there is no provision for assignment of a separate 10 percent evaluation for tinnitus of each ear.  In Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit deferred to VA's interpretation of its own regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 4.25(b) and Diagnostic Code 6260, which limits a veteran to a single disability rating for tinnitus, regardless of whether the tinnitus is perceived as unilateral or bilateral.

The Veteran's service-connected tinnitus has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available.  38 C.F.R. §4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.  As there is no legal basis upon which to award separate schedular evaluations for tinnitus in each ear, the Veteran's appeal must be denied.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for post-concussive syndrome.

A VA examination is necessary to decide this claim and VA committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to obtain one.  The Veteran has claimed that he sustained a head injury in service due to repetitive jarring injuries while on convoy duty in Kuwait and Iraq, as is consistent with the circumstances of his service.  See DD Form 214.  This suggests that he incurred an injury in service.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) (indicating that for purposes of providing a medical examination, indication of a nexus between an in-service event and a currently diagnosed disability is a low threshold).  Accordingly, the claim is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fallen arches, bilateral, secondary to a back disability.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability.

The AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to adjudicate the underlying claim of entitlement to service connection for cyst/benign growth - musculoskeletal - mid/lower back (thoracolumbar) (low back disability) prior to adjudicating these secondary claims.  AOJ resolution of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back disability will impact the present claims.   As such, these issues are inextricably intertwined.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).  Accordingly, adjudication of these issues must be deferred pending the outcome of the Veteran's service connection claim for a low back disability.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the presence, severity, and etiology of the claimed post-concussive syndrome.  All indicated tests and studies should be conducted.

The claims file should be available for review by the examiner.  The examiner should obtain a complete, pertinent history from the Veteran and review the claims file in conjunction with the examination, giving particular attention to his lay assertions, as well as the pertinent medical evidence.

Based on a review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether post-concussive syndrome, if diagnosed, began in service or is otherwise attributable to service.

All opinions must be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If the examiner is unable to reach an opinion without resort to speculation, they should explain the reasons for this inability and comment on whether any further tests, evidence or information would be useful in rendering an opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

2. Adjudicate the claims of entitlement to service connection for fallen arches, bilateral, secondary to a back disability; entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability; and entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy as secondary to a back disability AFTER adjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for cyst/benign growth - musculoskeletal - mid/lower back (thoracolumbar) (low back disability.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Joseph R. Keselyak, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.