Citation Nr: A25030961
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 221109-292794
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired mental health disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and alcohol abuse disorder, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the rating period on appeal, the Veteran's asthma was manifested by daily inhalation bronchodilator therapy and daily oral bronchodilators.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.96, 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6604.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from March 1990 to February 1994.  

The Veteran had an additional period of active duty service from November 1994 to June 1995; however, his service during this period is under dishonorable conditions and he is therefore barred from receiving VA benefits for disabilities determined to be related to his service during this period.  (10/17/2022, Administrative Decision, p. 1). 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2022.  The October 2022 decision granted service connection for asthma and established a 30 percent rating effective in October 2020.  The October 2022 decision also denied claims of service connection for PTSD and alcohol abuse disorder.  This decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In a November 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and challenged the disability rating established for asthma in the October 2022 rating decision and the denial of entitlement to service connection for alcohol abuse disorder.  The Board notes that the November 2022 Notice of Disagreement also included skin disease of the foot, irritable bowel syndrome, and dermatitis; however, these issues where not considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) prior to the filing of the November 2022 Notice of Disagreement.  Accordingly, the issues of skin disease of the foot, irritable bowel syndrome, and dermatitis are not properly before the Board.

Regarding the issues of entitlement to an increase rating for asthma and entitlement to service connection for an acquired mental health disability, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.    If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired mental health disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In January 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA 21-526EZ raising new initial claims of entitlement to service connection for chronic bronchitis, depression, and anxiety.  In a July 2023 AOJ decision, the AOJ granted service connection for chronic bronchitis.  In the July 2023 decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran was not entitled to separate ratings for asthma and bronchitis, and therefore established a single 30 percent rating for asthma with chronic bronchitis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.96 (establishing that when rating coexisting respiratory conditions "a single rating will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation."). 

In August 2023 the AOJ issued another rating decision which continued the 30 percent rating for asthma with chronic bronchitis and denied entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression.  In November 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim challenging, in part, the rating established for chronic bronchitis and the denial of service connection for anxiety and depression.  The AOJ subsequently proffered a rating decision in March 2024 that decreased his rating for asthma with chronic bronchitis from 30 percent to 10 percent.  In a later decision, also proffered in March 2024, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression.

Regarding the Veteran's current claim of entitlement to an increased rating for asthma, given that the issue of the severity of the Veteran's asthma with chronic bronchitis during the period beginning February 1, 2023, (the date entitlement to service connection for chronic bronchitis was granted) is currently pending before the AOJ, the Board will not address whether an increased rating for asthma is warranted during the period beginning February 1, 2023.  Moreover, the issue of the validity of the March 2024 reduction is not before the Board in the instant appeal and, as such, will not be addressed in this decision.  If the Veteran disagrees with the AOJ's decision to reduce his rating for asthma with chronic bronchitis he should submit one of the required review option application forms as explained in the Decision Notification Letter. 

Regarding the Veteran's current claim of service connection for PTSD and alcohol abuse disorder, the Board notes that in the March 2024 rating decision that denied entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  

While in the appeal currently before the Board, the Veteran did not explicitly claim entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder or generalized anxiety disorder, the Board finds that his claim for PTSD reasonably encompasses claims for major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 12 (2009) (the scope of a claim includes disabilities that may reasonably be encompassed by several factors including: the claimant's description of the claim; the symptoms the claimant describes; and the information the claimant submits or that the Secretary obtains in support of the claim).  Therefore, the Board will consider whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder in the instant appeal.  

While the Board cannot consider evidence generated by VA or submitted by the Veteran after the October 2022 AOJ rating decision, the Board can consider legal findings made by the AOJ after the October 2022 rating decision on appeal.  "Evidence is defined as '[s]omething (including testimony, documents, and tangible objects that tends to prove or disprove the existence of an alleged fact.'"  Aviles-Rivera v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 268, 277 (2022) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019)).  An AOJ or Board decision is not evidence.  See Hime v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 1, 7 (2016) ("[A]lthough a Board decision represents the Board's determination as to the correct facts of a case and the application of law to those facts, a Board decision is not, itself, evidence.").  As such, the Board is not precluded from considering legal determinations made subsequent to the rating decision in question, even if the legal determination was made outside of an appropriate evidentiary window.  Indeed, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ absent clear and unmistakable evidence rebutting the favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  

In the instant case, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder in a March 2024 rating decision.  As the evidence of record does not establish that these findings were clearly and unmistakably made in error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 30 percent for his service connected asthma. 

The Veteran's asthma is currently rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602.  Under Diagnostic Code 6602, a 10 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 71 to 80 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 71 to 80 percent, or; intermittent inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 56 to 70 percent predicted, or; FEV- 1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or; daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, or; inhalational antiinflammatory medication.  A 60 percent rating is warranted where there is FEV-1 of 40 to 55 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or; at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.  A 100 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of less than 40 percent predicted value, or; FEV-1/FVC of less than 40 percent, or; more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or; requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602.

When evaluating based on pulmonary function tests, post-bronchodilator results are to be used unless the post-bronchodilator results were poorer than the pre-bronchodilator results, in which case, the pre-bronchodilator results should be used for rating purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(5).

When there is a disparity between the results of different pulmonary function tests (FEV-1, FVC, etc.), so that the level of evaluation would differ depending on which test result is used, VA must use the test result that the examiner states most accurately reflects the level of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(6).

The Board finds that the evidence persuasively weights against a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's service connected asthma.

In this regard, the Veteran underwent a VA respiratory conditions examination in November 2021.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's treatment for asthma includes daily inhalational bronchodilatory therapy.  The Veteran was not prescribed oral or parenteral corticosteroid medication, anti-inflammatory medication, or oxygen therapy.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran requires physician care for exacerbations of asthma twice a year and characterized the severity of the exacerbations as "mild."  No asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure were noted in the prior 12 months.  (11/12/2021, C&P Exam, p. 2-5).   

Pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function testing (PFT) revealed FVC of 81 percent predicted, FEV-1 of 88 precent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC of 108 percent.  Post-bronchodilator testing revealed FVC of 87 precent predicted, FEV-1 of 96 precent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC of 110 percent.  The examiner indicated that the FEV-1 test most accurately reflects the Veteran's level of disability.  (11/12/2021, C&P Exam, p. 11).    

Given the above, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 30 percent.  In this regard, the Veteran's treatment for asthma includes daily inhalational bronchodilator therapy, which is most consistent with a 30 percent rating.  

A rating in excess of a 30 percent rating is not warranted as the Veteran does not require monthly visits to a physician for care of exacerbations, systemic corticosteroids, or immuno-suppressive medications.  Further, the Veteran's symptoms do not include asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure.  Finally, the Veteran's PFT reveals FEV-1 greater than 55 percent and a FEV-1/FVC greater than 55 percent.  Based on these facts, the Board finds that a higher rating is not warranted.  

In conclusion, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 30 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.? 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired mental health disability, to include PTSD and alcohol abuse disorder, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired mental health disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the October 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a November 2021 PTSD examination; however, this medical opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's claimed acquired mental health disability is related to his period of active duty service.  In this regard, the November 2021 did not acknowledge or address the Veteran's diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.

As noted in the introduction of this decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  While the Board may not consider evidence submitted after the October 2022 rating decision, the Board can consider legal determinations made by the AOJ after the rating decision on appeal.  See Hime, 28 Vet. App. at 7.  Indeed, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  In this case the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent a showing of clear and unmistakable error. 

The Board finds that the evidence is not sufficient to warrant a finding that the AOJ clearly and unmistakably erred in making a favorable finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  In this regard, while the evidence available prior to the October 2022 rating decision on appeal does not confirm these diagnoses, the aforementioned November 2021 PTSD examination does indicate that the Veteran's symptoms include anxiety and chronic sleep impairment.  These symptoms are consistent with diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, and as such, the Board finds that the AOJ did not clearly and unmistakably err in making the favorable findings in question.  The Board is therefore bound by these findings. 

Given that the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has current diagnoses of major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, but the November 2022 examiner did not opine on whether these disabilities are related to the Veteran's service, the Board finds that the medical opinion is inadequate.  As such, the Board finds that a duty to assist error was committed prior to the October 2022 rating decision on appeal.  The claim must therefore be remanded for further medical development. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for an acquired mental health disability, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and alcohol abuse disorder.  The examiner must review the claims file and provide a response to the following:

(Continued on the next page)

?

Identify all disabilities current on examination or from the date of claim (October 2021).  For any diagnosed conditions, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal) related to service, including service in the Gulf War during his period of active duty service from March 1990 to February 1994?

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Glenn, Robert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.