Citation Nr: A25030557
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 241223-495934
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to May 9, 2022, for the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include atherosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease (CAD)) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, is denied.  

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a heart disorder for the period on appeal is denied. 

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for tension headaches for the period on appeal is denied.  

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, for the period on appeal is denied. 

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) for the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a TDIU for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's claim of service connection for a heart disorder stems from a May 9, 2022, claim for such issue; the Veteran did not file a formal or informal claim for service connection for a heart disorder prior to the receipt of the May 9, 2022, claim. 

2. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's heart disorder manifested with METs levels greater than 10; the Veteran's heart disorder did not manifest with a workload of less than 7 METs; evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation on electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, or X-ray; or a left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 50 percent.

3. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's tension headaches manifested with characteristic prostrating attacks with less frequent attacks than once in two months over the last several months; the Veteran's tension headaches did not manifest with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging at least once in two months over the last several months, and they did not manifest with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

4. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was manifested by no worse than occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder did not result in total occupational and social impairment. 

5. During the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities precluded him from securing and maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to May 9, 2022, for the award of service connection for a heart disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.151, 3,155, 3.157, 3.400. 

2. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for a heart disorder for the period on appeal have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.104, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7005.  

3. The criteria for a compensable evaluation for tension headaches for the period on appeal have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8100.  

4. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102,?4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9440. 

5. For the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, the criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1967 to December 1968. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued on January 18, 2024, August 15, 2024, and October 21, 2024, by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). The Veteran was notified of these decisions in letters issued on January 19, 2024, August 26, 2024, and October 23, 2024, respectively.

By way of background, a September 2022 rating decision granted service connection for the Veteran's heart disorder, to include atherosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease (CAD)) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent. In September 2023, the Veteran timely filed a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) seeking review of such rating decision on the issues of increased ratings and an earlier effective date for the Veteran's heart disorder. In a January 18, 2024, rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) performed such higher-level review based on the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 rating decision and denied the Veteran's claims related to his heart disorder. 

A February 2024 rating decision granted service connection for the Veteran's tension headaches. In March 2024, the Veteran timely filed a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) seeking review of such rating decision on the issue of increased ratings for the Veteran's tension headaches. In a rating decision from later that month, the AOJ identified a duty to assist error. In an August 15, 2024, rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) performed higher-level review based on the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision and denied the Veteran's claim related to his tension headaches.

A September 2024 rating decision granted an increased rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. On October 8, 2024, the Veteran timely filed a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) seeking review of such rating decision. In an October 21, 2024, rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) performed higher-level review based on the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 rating decision and denied the Veteran's claim related to his acquired psychiatric disorder. 

On December 23, 2024, the Veteran timely submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) for the issues related to the Veteran's heart disorder, tension headaches, and acquired psychiatric disorder. In the VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the evidence submission docket.   

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022, February 2024, and September 2024, AOJ decisions, respectively, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following the December 23, 2024, Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.303(b)(2). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the respective decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, and prior the date the Board received the VA Form 10182 or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. However, as the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

I.	Effective Dates and Increased Ratings

Generally, except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The law pertaining to the effective date of a VA claim for increase in disability mandates that, unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date for the increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of the claim for increase. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. However, such specifically provides that the effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if any application is received within one year from such date. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o). If the increase became ascertainable more than one year prior to the date of receipt of the claim, then the proper effective date would be the date of claim. In a case where the increase became ascertainable after the filing of the claim, then the effective date would be the date of increase. See generally Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997). 

The Court has indicated that it is axiomatic that the fact that must be found, in order for entitlement to an increase in disability compensation to arise, is that the service-connected disability must have increased in severity to a degree warranting an increase in compensation. See Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App.511, 519 (1992) (noting that, under section 5110(b)(2), which provides that the effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, "the only cognizable 'increase' for this purpose is one to the next disability level" provided by law for the particular disability). 

Prior to March 24, 2015, any communication indicating an intent to apply for a benefit under the laws administered by the VA may be considered an informal claim provided it identifies, but not necessarily with specificity, the benefit sought. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155 (2014). Additionally, according to 38 C.F.R. § 3.157(b), once a claim for compensation has been allowed, receipt of a VA outpatient or hospital examination or admission to a VA hospital can be accepted as an informal claim for increased benefits. Servello v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 196, 199 (1992). The date on the VA outpatient or hospital examination will be accepted as the date of claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.157(b). When the evidence is from a private physician, the date of receipt of such evidence will be accepted as the date of receipt of an informal claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.157(b)(2). To qualify as a "report of examination" as contemplated by § 3.157(b)(1), the medical record at issue "must describe the results of a specific, particular examination" and must "indicate that [a] veteran's service-connected disability [has] worsened since the time it was last evaluated" Massie v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App.123, 133-34 (2011), aff'd, 724 F.3d 1325 (Fed. Cir. 2013) (the plain language of the term "report of examination" as contemplated by § 3.157(b)(1) necessarily implies that the medical record in question must describe the results of a specific, particular examination). Unlike an original informal claim under § 3.155(a), an intent to apply for benefits is not necessary for a report of examination or hospitalization by VA to constitute an informal claim for increase under § 3.157(b). MacPhee v. Nicholson, 459 F.3d 1323, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Criswell v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App.501, 504 (2006) (explaining that § 3.157 is recognized as an exception to the general rule that "[t]he mere existence of medical records cannot be construed as an informal claim; rather, there must be some intent by the claimant to apply for a benefit").

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found -a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id. 

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. 

1.	Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for a heart disorder

2.	Entitlement to increased ratings for a heart disorder

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an effective date earlier than May 9, 2022, for the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease (CAD)) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent. He also contends that he is entitled to increased ratings for his service-connected heart disorder.

The Veteran first filed a claim of entitlement to service connection for heart disease in a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim on May 9, 2022. The RO granted the Veteran's claim in a September 22, 2022, rating decision, and the Veteran was notified of that decision in a September 23, 2022, letter.  

As mentioned earlier, on September 18, 2023, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) with claims of entitlement to increased ratings and entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for the heart disorder. The RO denied the Veteran's claims in a January 18, 2024, rating decision, and the Veteran was notified of that decision in a January 19, 2024, letter. The Veteran timely appealed with a December 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182) under the AMA.

In the September 2022 rating decision, the RO stated that the May 9, 2022, effective date for the award of service connection for a heart disorder was based on the date they received the Veteran's claim. When a claim of service connection is received more than one year after discharge from active duty, the effective date is the date VA received the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  

In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for the Veteran's heart disorder. The RO stated that a review of the record showed the formal claim application in a VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim was received on May 9, 2022; and there were no intent to files that applied to the May 9, 2022, claim that were received within the prescribed time periods prior to this application. The RO also stated that they considered application of an earlier effective date under a 38 CFR 3.114, liberalizing law, but no entitlement was shown as the Veteran's arteriosclerotic heart disease was not diagnosed prior to August 31, 2010.

Where compensation is awarded pursuant to a liberalizing law, the effective date shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the effective date of the act or regulation. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.114(a). If a claim is reviewed at the request of the claimant more than one year after the effective date of the law or VA issue, benefits may be authorized for a period of one year prior to the date of receipt of such request provided the claimant met all eligibility criteria on the effective date of the liberalizing law and such eligibility existed continuously from that date to the date of claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.114(a).

In cases involving presumptive service connection due to herbicide exposure, there is an exception to the provisions set forth above. That is, VA has promulgated special rules for the effective dates for the award of presumptive service connection based on exposure to herbicides, pursuant to orders of the United States District Court in the class action of Nehmer v. United States Department of Veterans Affairs. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.816; Nehmer v. United States Veterans Administration, 712 F. Supp. 1404 (N.D. Cal. 1989) (Nehmer I); Nehmer v. United States Veterans Administration, 32 F. Supp. 2d 1175 (N.D. Cal. 1999) (Nehmer II); Nehmer v. Veterans Administration of the Government of the United States, 284 F.3d 1158 (9th Cir. 2002) (Nehmer III).

Specifically, a Nehmer class member is defined as a Vietnam veteran who has a "covered herbicide disease." See 38 C.F.R. § 3.816. According to 38 C.F.R. § 3.816(b)(2) a "covered herbicide disease" includes a disease for which the Secretary of Veterans Affairs has established a presumption of service connection pursuant to the Agent Orange Act of 1991, Public Law 102-4, other than chloracne as provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). As relevant to the instant case, the Veteran's heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease, is a covered herbicide disease.

In pertinent part, if the Nehmer class member's claim for disability compensation for the covered herbicide disease was either pending before VA on May 3, 1989, or was received by VA between that date and the effective date of the statute or regulation establishing a presumption of service connection for the covered disease, the effective date of the award will be the later of the date such claim was received by VA or the date the disability arose. 38 C.F.R. § 3.816(c)(2). Ischemic heart disease was added to the list of diseases subject to presumptive service connection for a veteran exposed to certain herbicide agents, effective August 31, 2010. See 75 Fed. Reg. 53,202 (August 31, 2010).

Additionally, the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019 (BWN Act) was passed on June 25, 2019, and made effective January 1, 2020. Such created a new statute codified at 38 U.S.C. § 1116A, which provides that a veteran who, during active military, naval, or air service, served offshore of the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent unless there is affirmative evidence to the contrary. 38 U.S.C. § 1116A(b). The BWN Act also provides for special effective date rules for claims where service connection is sought for diseases presumed service-connected in veterans exposed to Agent Orange that were denied on lack of service in Vietnam and are now able to be granted based on such service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1116A(c)(2). Specifically, an earlier effective date is potentially warranted under the BWN Act if a veteran submitted a claim for disability compensation between September 25, 1985, and January 1, 2020, for a covered disease and also submitted a claim for disability compensation on or after January 1, 2020, for the same condition covered by the prior claim, which is approved pursuant to this section. 38 U.S.C. § 1116A(c)(2)(B); VAOPGCPREC 3-2019 (Dec. 13, 2019). If such conditions are met, the Secretary shall determine the effective date of an award by treating the date on which the veteran filed the prior claim as the date on which the veteran filed the claim so awarded under 38 U.S.C. § 1116A. 38 U.S.C. § 1116A(2)(A).

In this case, as noted in the September 2022 and January 2024 rating decisions, based on review of the Veteran's Navy deck logs, the Veteran is confirmed to have eligible offshore service while he was aboard the U.S.S. Berkley during active service. Therefore, exposure to herbicides was conceded based on the Veteran's nautical service in the offshore eligible waters, as defined in the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019. 

However, the earliest medical evidence of the Veteran's arteriosclerotic heart disease in the record is a private Barium Swallow study from October 5, 2021, with Dr. Briccio S. Cadiz. Consequently, entitlement to service connection for such disability did not arise until such date.

Furthermore, the Board finds there is no document of record that can be construed as a formal or informal claim for service connection for a heart disorder, to include atherosclerotic heart disease, that was received on or after October 5, 2021, and prior to the receipt of the Veteran's May 9, 2022, VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim for service connection for heart disease. 

Notably, the Veteran's May 9, 2022, claim was received subsequent to the August 31, 2010, effective date of the regulation establishing a presumption of service connection for ischemic heart disease. Thus, an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease, is not warranted based on the Veteran's status as a Nehmer class member. 38 C.F.R. § 3.816(c)(2). 

Additionally, the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran submitted a claim of service connection for a heart disorder prior to January 1, 2020, the effective date for the BWN Act. Thus, an earlier effective date is also not warranted based on the Blue Water Navy Act. 38 U.S.C. § 1116A(c)(2).

Furthermore, to the extent that an earlier effective date could be considered on grounds unrelated to the BWN Act or the Veteran's status as a "Nehmer class member", there is no basis in law or fact to grant such an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent.

VA cannot assign an effective date for an award of service connection based on the earliest medical evidence of symptoms or the earliest evidence showing a causal connection to service. Rather, VA must assign the date that it received the claim application upon which service connection was eventually awarded. Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999). Here, the award of service connection for the Veteran's heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, grew out of the May 9, 2022, claim in a VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim.   

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he should be awarded an effective date earlier than May 9, 2022, for his award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent. However, based on the laws and regulations as laid out above, there is no legal basis to grant an effective date earlier than May 9, 2022, for that award. VA cannot pay benefits unless a claim is filed. Whether or not the Veteran exhibited symptoms of arteriosclerotic heart disease prior to May 9, 2022, VA cannot assign an effective date for an award of service connection for such a heart disorder based on the earliest medical evidence of symptoms or the earliest evidence showing a causal connection to service. Rather, VA must assign the date that it received the claim application upon which service connection was eventually awarded. Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999).    

In this case, the claim that successfully led to the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, was not filed until May 9, 2022. Because the Veteran's May 9, 2022, claim successfully led to the award of service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, the Board finds that May 9, 2022, is the proper effective date for such award; and an effective date prior to May 9, 2022, is not warranted in this case. 

Regarding the issue of increased disability ratings, in the September 2022 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for a heart disorder, to include arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, with a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7005, effective May 9, 2022. The Veteran was notified of that decision in a September 23, 2022, letter. The 10 percent rating has applied to the entire period on appeal.

As mentioned earlier, on September 18, 2023, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) with claims of entitlement to increased ratings and entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for a heart disorder. The RO denied the Veteran's claims in a January 18, 2024, rating decision, and the Veteran was notified of that decision in a January 19, 2024, letter. The Veteran timely appealed with a December 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182).

The Board notes that, as mentioned earlier, in the January 2024, rating decision at issue related to the Veteran's heart disorder, the AOJ performed higher-level review based on the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 rating decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following the December 23, 2024, Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182). 

The Veteran's heart disease has been rated under DC 7005, which concerns arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease (CAD)). CAD is rated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart (General Rating Formula). The General Rating Formula provides that a 10 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 7.1-10.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms, or continuous medication is required to treat the disease. A 30 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 5.1-7.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms, or where there is evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation confirmed by echocardiogram or equivalent (e.g. multigated acquisition scan or magnetic resonance imaging). A 60 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.1-5.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms. A 100 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.0 or less METs results in heart failure symptoms. Note (3) provides that heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpations, or syncope. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, DC 7005.

One MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute. When the level of METs at which dyspnea/breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope may be used.

Turning to the evidence of record, in statements from June 2022 and December 2024, the Veteran reported that, as a result of his heart disease, he experienced fatigue, dizziness, shortness of breath, mild chest pain, and anxiety. The Veteran stated that he had to curtail outdoor activities such as golf and gardening. He had previously played golf two or three times a week during the summer months, but he now played nine holes of golf once a week. He used to garden almost daily, but he now only gardened as necessary during the cooler hours of the day. Due to tiredness, he took one or two naps a day, and he rested often throughout the day. For work, he previously mowed six lawns per week, but now he mowed two lawns per week. The Veteran stated that he experienced dizziness on a daily basis. When he physically exerted himself or bent over, he would become dizzy and feel the need to get off his feet to avoid falling for a minute. He also became dizzy when he stood up after sitting for a while. Doing as little as walking up a flight of stairs or walking briskly for 100ft left him short of breath. He experienced mild chest pain if he strained or overexerted himself. The Veteran also stated that his heart condition made it too difficult for him to maintain his lawn care service; and he was too limited in what he could do physically due to the shortness of breath, fatigue, and chest pains.  

In a May 10, 2022, private treatment record, the Veteran reported having exertional chest burning with radiation up to his neck occurring with pretty minimal levels of effort. The examiner gave an assessment of angina pectoris and a crescendo angina that occurred at minimal levels of effort.

In a June 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was reported to be physically active, and he was about to begin cardiac rehabilitation. The Veteran reported having postural lightheadedness, as well as issues with fatigue and sleep hygiene. The examiner gave an assessment of coronary artery disease involving native coronary artery of the native heart without angina pectoris. 

At an August 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease), unstable angina, and percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent. The examiner noted that the Veteran's heart disease qualified within the generally accepted medical definition of ischemic heart disease. The Veteran reported that, since he had his coronary artery stent placed on May 12, 2022, he no longer had chest pain or unstable angina symptoms. The Veteran was told to take nitroglycerin if he had chest pain recurrences, but he had not had such chest pain. No cardiac limitations were reported or documented. The Veteran was also taking Plavix and Aspirin as per the standard of care after placement of a coronary artery stent. He also took Aspirin.  

The VA examiner performed an interview-based METs test. An exercise stress test was not performed because the VA examiner said that such was medically contraindicated. Specifically, the Veteran was diagnosed with an unstable angina, and this was an absolute contraindication to ambulatory stress testing that would not change the management of the condition anyway. In the interview-based METs test, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's METs levels were greater than 10, and the Veteran did not report any related symptoms. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's heart condition did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks. 

The Board has additionally reviewed the balance of the Veteran's other medical treatment records from the relevant period on appeal. The findings in the medical treatment records are substantially similar to those noted in the medical examinations and other medical records described above.   

Considering all the evidence described above, the Board finds that, for the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran's symptomatology related to his service-connected heart disorder, to include atherosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, is adequately compensated by the currently assigned 10 percent disability evaluation.   

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's heart disorder manifested with METs levels greater than 10. The Veteran's heart disorder did not manifest with workload of less than 7 METs; evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation on electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, or X-ray; or a left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of less than 50 percent, as would be required for an evaluation in excess of 10 percent under DC 7005. Thus, the Veteran is appropriately assigned a 10 percent evaluation under DC 7005 for his heart disorder, to include atherosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, during the period on appeal. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that his heart disorder was of a sufficient severity so as to warrant higher disability ratings than those described above. However, the competent medical evidence offering specific determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal. Thus, the Veteran's own assessment as to the severity of the symptoms and their relationship to the rating criteria are less probative than the opinions of medical practitioners who have specialized knowledge and skill in excess of him. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Woehlaert, supra.

The Board finds the August 2022 VA examiner's report to be the more probative evidence of record concerning whether the Veteran's heart disorder was severe enough to warrant higher disability ratings. The VA examiner's rationale was logical and well-reasoned and based on consideration of the Veteran's claims file, medical records, and post-service history. Thus, the Board is satisfied that the August 2022 VA examiner's report is competent, credible, persuasive, and probative for deciding this appeal. 

In reaching the above determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the Veteran's claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  

3.	Entitlement to increased ratings for migraine headaches

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to increased ratings for tension headaches.

In a February 24, 2024, rating decision, the RO awarded service connection for tension headaches with a noncompensable (0 percent) evaluation under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100, effective May 10, 2022. The Veteran was notified of this decision in a February 28, 2024, letter. The Board notes that the noncompensable evaluation applies to the entire period on appeal. 

On March 19, 2024, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) on the issue of increased ratings for tension headaches. In a March 2024 rating decision, the RO identified a duty to assist error during higher-level review for the Veteran's claim of increased ratings for tension headaches. Specifically, the RO failed to get a VA examination and/or medical opinion. The Veteran underwent a VA examination for his tension headaches in April 2024. 

The RO denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to increased ratings for tension headaches in an August 15, 2024, rating decision, and the Veteran was notified of that decision in an August 26, 2024, letter. The Veteran timely appealed with a December 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182).

The Veteran's tension headaches have been rated by analogy under DC 8100, which concerns migraine headaches. Under DC 8100, a 50 percent rating is assigned for migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A 10 percent rating is assigned for characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months, and a noncompensable (0 percent) rating is assigned for less frequent attacks. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

Notably, the rating criteria do not define "prostrating". According to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1554 (31st ed. 2007), "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Similarly, the term "productive of severe economic inadaptability" is not defined by VA regulations. However, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has stated that this term is not synonymous with being completely unable to work, and that the phrase "productive of" could be read to mean either "producing" or "capable of producing" economic inadaptability. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 446-47 (2004).

Turning to the evidence of record, in a September 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he had headaches almost daily, and some headaches were worse than others. The headaches usually lasted for hours, and the headaches would go away after he lay down for a while. He stated that he had to lay down most of the times a headache came on. To control his headaches, the Veteran would sit down and rest without noise or light, and he would try not to focus on any problems. There were times when a headache would cause him to feel lightheaded, as well. The Veteran would get headaches when he had tinnitus or anxiety or when he did not get enough rest at night. He took over-the-counter medication, which made the headaches more bearable. 

In statements from August 2023 and September 2023, the Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran had headaches about once a day or two or three times a week, and they would normally last two to four hours. The headaches would cause him to feel dizzy, lightheaded, and/or nauseous. Light and sound increased the severity of the headache. Tinnitus and anxiety would also worsen the headache. There were times when the Veteran would take off from work or cancel plans or appointments because of the headache. When he had a headache, the Veteran would lay down, and he would occasionally take Tylenol. Medication helped about half the time. 

At a February 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches. The VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced constant headache pain on both sides of the head that worsened with activity. The Veteran also experienced sensitivity to light and sound. The head pain typically lasted less than a day. The Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain with less frequent attacks than one in two months over the last several months. The Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The Veteran's headache condition impacted his work in that it made it very difficult to focus on tasks at hand and perform prolonged activity; and over time, this decreased the Veteran's productivity.

At a November 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tension headaches. The VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced constant head pain. The Veteran reported daily headaches on both sides of the head. The Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain. He did not have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine or non-migraine pain. The condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work. Specifically, the Veteran reported that, when the pain was severe, he would have to lie down in a quiet place; and he reported that he experienced a severe headache at least every three to four weeks.

At an April 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tension headaches. The Veteran reported having daily headaches with headache pain on both sides of the head that typically lasted less than one day. The Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain with less frequent attacks than one in two months over the last several months. The Veteran also had completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain; however, such attacks were less frequent than one in two months, and there was no indication that such headaches were productive of severe economic inadaptability. The Veteran's headache condition impacted his work in that the Veteran was unable to perform all activities during severe tension headache flare-ups, which may last several hours. 

The Board has additionally reviewed the balance of the Veteran's other medical treatment records from the period on appeal. The findings in the medical treatment records are substantially similar to those noted in the medical examinations described above.   

Considering all the evidence described above, the Board finds that, for the period on appeal, the Veteran's tension headache symptomatology is adequately compensated by the currently assigned noncompensable disability evaluation.  

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's tension headaches manifested with characteristic prostrating attacks that were less frequent than once in two months over the last several months. The Veteran's tension headaches did not manifest with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging at least once in two months over the last several months, as would be required for a compensable rating under DC 8100. Even when the Veteran was found to have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks, such were not shown to be very frequent or productive of severe economic inadaptability, as would be required for a 50 percent disability rating under DC 8100. Thus, the Veteran is appropriately assigned a noncompensable evaluation under DC 8100 for his tension headaches during the period on appeal.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that his tension headaches were of a sufficient severity so as to warrant higher disability ratings than those described above. However, the competent medical evidence offering specific determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal. Thus, the Veteran's own assessment as to the severity of the symptoms and their relationship to the rating criteria are less probative than the opinions of medical practitioners who have specialized knowledge and skill in excess of him. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Woehlaert, supra.

The Board finds the February 2023, November 2023, and April 2024 VA examiners' reports to be the more probative evidence of record concerning whether the Veteran's tension headaches are severe enough to warrant higher disability ratings. The VA examiners' rationales were logical and well-reasoned and based on consideration of the Veteran's claims file, medical records, and post-service history. Thus, the Board is satisfied that the February 2023, November 2023, and April 2024 VA examiners' reports are competent, credible, persuasive, and probative for deciding this appeal. 

In reaching the above determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the Veteran's claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  

4.	Entitlement to increased ratings for an acquired psychiatric disorder

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to increased ratings for his service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. 

In a March 2022 rating decision, the RO awarded the Veteran service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, with a 30 percent evaluation under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440, effective January 21, 2022. Less than a week after this rating decision, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) on the issue of an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for the acquired psychiatric disorder. In an April 2022 rating decision, the RO granted an earlier effective date of August 19, 2021, for the award of service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder.

On February 16, 2023, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) on the issue of increased ratings for the acquired psychiatric disorder. In a May 16, 2023, rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's claim, and the Veteran was notified of this decision in a May 18, 2023, letter. 

On September 29, 2023, the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) on the issue of increased ratings for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder. In a September 24, 2024, rating decision, the RO granted an increased rating of 70 percent, effective September 29, 2023. The Veteran was notified of this decision in a September 26, 2024, letter. 

On October 8, 2024, the Veteran submitted a Higher-Level Review Request (VA Form 20-0996) on the issue of increased ratings for the acquired psychiatric disorder. In an October 21, 2024, rating decision, the RO denied the Veteran's claim, and the Veteran was notified of this decision in an October 23, 2024, letter. The Veteran timely appealed. 

The Board notes that the current appeal period before the Board begins on September 29, 2023, the date of the Veteran's current claim, plus a one-year look-back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). The 70 percent disability rating for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder applies to the entire period on appeal. 

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder has been rated pursuant to DC 9440, which provides that an acquired psychiatric disability such as adjustment disorder is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under the General Rating Formula, a 30 percent rating contemplates occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating contemplates occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairments of short-and long-term memory; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbance of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

As the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit explained, evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed.Cir.2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms[,] but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation... requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.

Furthermore, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  

In Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017), the Court held that the language of the general rating formula "indicates that the presence of suicidal ideation alone...may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas." However, as recognized by the Court, VA must engage in a holistic analysis in assessing the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of a veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability, and their resulting social and occupational impairment.

Looking at the evidence of record, in a September 2023 private disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) submitted by the Veteran, a private psychologist, Dr. KG, diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions. Dr. KG found that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. It was noted that the Veteran had intermittent outpatient mental health care over the past several years, and he took medications for his mental health condition. 

The Veteran lived with his spouse of 55 years; and he had a daughter, a son, and six grandchildren with whom he was close. The Veteran reported that had a lawn care service from March 2016 to June 2022, and he retired due to heart issues. Prior to that, he worked for his brother-in-law as an assistant manager from January 2002 to December 2014. He noted that he was afforded accommodations in that he took breaks and missed work as needed. He struggled with focus, fatigue, motivation, and handling stressful situations. At the time of this examination, he mowed a neighbor's yard for $45 cash per week. 

Dr. KG found that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often; near continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short and long term memory; memory loss for names of close relatives, his own occupation, or his own name; flattened affect; difficulty understanding complex commands; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals that interfered with routine activities; impaired impulse control; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs. 

In an accompanying private assessment, Dr. KG stated that the Veteran experienced low motivation, low mood, poor focus, and fatigue. The Veteran reported that he had attempted several trials of antidepressants, but he had experienced little symptom relief. When Dr. KG interviewed the Veteran, he noted that he struggled in his lawn care business with stress and chronic low motivation. He stated, "Once you commit to someone's yard, you have to do it on a schedule." Keeping up with the schedule stressed him out. Combined with his lack of energy, he felt the pressure on him. He added that getting up in the morning was difficult in that he dreaded it. He also noticed that he had become increasingly irritable with his family.

Dr. KG observed that the Veteran was cooperative in interview, but his attention was variable. His mood was depressed, and his affect was flat. His thought processes were coherent. No unusual thought content was noted. His speech was mildly slurred. He denied perceptual disturbances, and there was no evidence of a thought disorder. He denied suicidal thoughts. He reported insomnia and poor sleep due to his tinnitus. Due to low motivation, he often did not change his clothes, and his wife complained that he wore dirty or stained clothing. He experienced rumination about health problems. His anxiety was heightened in crowds because he struggled to hear conversations, and he often pretended to hear what people said when he did not hear them. He noted that his anxiety was evident in that he would constantly fidget, wring his hands, and pick his skin. He also had poor dental health due to teeth grinding. He used to do woodwork as a coping skill; but due to poor focus and low motivation, he no longer did woodwork. He stated that he would also lose interest, and he could not stay focused. He recalled a recent accident where he cut his fingers on a table saw due to poor focus. Additionally, due to memory issues, his wife assisted with medication management. Dr. KG also stated that the Veteran's persistent negative emotional state, combined with anxiety around communication, would make him unable to interact effectively with coworkers or receive general feedback related to routine job tasks. Despite an affable demeanor, per his spouse, he was frequently irritable. 

In a September 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with depression and anxiety, and the VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric condition resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported that he was still married to his wife of 56 years. He talked to some of his family members and a few friends. He liked woodworking, birdwatching, gardening, and being in the yard. At the time of this examination, he was not working. He would cut his own grass, but he did not cut other people's grass. The Veteran reported that he saw a VA doctor every six weeks, and he had tried many medications.  

The VA examiner found that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short- and long-term memory; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. The VA examiner observed that the Veteran's eye contact and speech were within normal limits. His mood was down, and his affect was flat. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, psychosis, and panic attacks. His thoughts were logical and linear. He had difficulty with concentration. He was capable of managing his financial affairs. 

The VA examiner also stated that the Veteran had been struggling with sleep issues, depression, and anxiety for many years. The Veteran stated that he worried about his own health, his son's personal life, and what is going on in the world, as well as things he had no control over. He stated that this affected his sleep. The Veteran did not like to be in crowds, as he had trouble hearing people; and he would forget people's names, which he found embarrassing. He stated that he would become irritable, but he was mostly mild mannered. He stated that he would not lash out at someone, but he might throw something across the room in frustration. 

The VA examiner also opined that the September 2023 private DBQ was unreliable. Specifically, the private examiner had indicated that the Veteran was totally impaired in most areas, and she checked symptoms that were not consistent with the Veteran's functioning. For example, the Veteran had been married 56 years, and he had relationships with his family. This indicated that the Veteran did not have an "inability to maintain relationships". 

The Board has additionally reviewed the balance of the Veteran's other medical treatment records from the period on appeal. The findings in the other medical treatment records are substantially similar to those noted in the VA examination and other treatment records described above.  

Considering the evidence of record described above, the Board finds that, during the period on appeal, the Veteran exhibited no worse than occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to such symptoms as depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often; near continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short and long term memory; flattened affect; difficulty understanding complex commands; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; obsessional rituals that interfered with routine activities; impaired impulse control; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. As a result, the symptoms associated with the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder during the period on appeal most closely paralleled the type of symptoms described in the criteria for the currently assigned 70 percent disability rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9440.

A higher rating of 100 percent is not warranted at any point during the period on appeal, as the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder did not result in total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; or disorientation to time or place. Id.    

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric examiners have found the Veteran to be cooperative. The Veteran's eye contact and speech were within normal limits. His thought processes were coherent, logical, and linear; and no unusual thought content was noted. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. He was capable of managing his financial affairs. The Veteran also reporting having a good relationship with his wife, children, and grandchildren; and he had a few friends with whom he was in contact. Thus, based on the evidence described above, the Board finds that the Veteran is appropriately assigned a 70 percent rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, during the period on appeal. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that his acquired psychiatric disorder is of a sufficient severity so as to warrant higher disability ratings than those described above. However, the competent medical evidence offering specific determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal. Thus, the Veteran's own assessment as to the severity of the symptoms and their relationship to the rating criteria are less probative than the opinions of medical practitioners who have specialized knowledge and skill in excess of him. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  

The Board finds the September 2024 VA examiner's report to be the more probative evidence of record concerning whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was severe enough to warrant higher disability ratings. The VA examiner's rationale was logical and well-reasoned and based on consideration of the Veteran's claims file, medical records, and post-service history. Thus, the Board is satisfied that the September 2024 VA examiner's report is competent, credible, persuasive, and probative for deciding this appeal.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that, for the period on appeal, the weight of the probative evidence is against the assignment of an evaluation in excess of the currently assigned 70 percent for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. In reaching the above determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the Veteran's claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  

II.	Entitlement to a Total Disability Evaluation Based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU)

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU). 

In the December 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182), the Veteran listed each of the issues for increased ratings adjudicated above to include entitlement to individual unemployability. Along with the VA Form 10182, the Veteran also submitted a VA Form 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (TDIU Application). The Board notes that, even prior to the December 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran has asserted that he is unable to work as a result of his service-connected disabilities. In light of the above, the Board has assumed jurisdiction of a claim of entitlement to a TDIU as part and parcel of the increased rating claims on appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 454-455 (2009).

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). A claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) may be raised as a separate claim, or it may be raised in the context of an initial rating or a claim for an increase. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 452-53 (2009).   

Unlike the regular disability rating schedule, which is based on the average work-related impairment caused by a disability, "entitlement to a TDIU is based on an individual's particular circumstances." Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 452 (2009). Therefore, when adjudicating a TDIU claim, VA must take into account the individual veteran's education, training, and work history. Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991) (level of education is a factor in deciding employability); Friscia v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 294 (1994) (considering Veteran's experience as a pilot, his training in business administration and computer programming, and his history of obtaining and losing 19 jobs in the previous 18 years); Beaty v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 532 (1994) (considering Veteran's 8th grade education and sole occupation as a farmer); Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991) (considering Veteran's master's degree in education and his part-time work as a tutor).

Age may not be considered as a factor when evaluating unemployability or intercurrent disability, and it may not be used as a basis for a total disability rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.19. There must be a determination that the service-connected disabilities are sufficient to produce unemployability without regard to advancing age or a non-service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. The sole fact that a claimant is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough. A high rating in itself is recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain or keep employment. The ultimate question, however, is whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the initial extra-schedular referral decision under § 4.16(b) should address whether there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities". Moreover, the Court defined the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in § 4.16(b) to include two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The non-economic component includes consideration of the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

For the period on appeal, service connection has been established for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease (CAD)) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, tension headaches, erectile dysfunction, and hypertension. 

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's hearing loss was rated as noncompensable (0 percent disabling) for the entire period on appeal, and the Veteran's tinnitus was rated at 10 percent disabling for the entire period on appeal. The Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct was rated at 30 percent for the period prior to September 29, 2023; and it was rated at 70 percent disabling for the period beginning September 29, 2023. The Veteran's arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent was rated 10 percent disabling for the entire period on appeal. His tension headaches were rated as noncompensable for the period on appeal beginning May 10, 2022. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction was rated as noncompensable for the period on appeal beginning May 10, 2022. His hypertension was rated as 10 percent disabling for the period on appeal beginning December 27, 2022.  

For the period on appeal prior to December 27, 2022, the Veteran had a combined evaluation of 40 percent. For the period on appeal between December 27, 2022, and September 29, 2023, the Veteran had a combined evaluation of 50 percent. For the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, the Veteran has had a combined evaluation of 80 percent. 

For the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023, the Veteran did not have at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and he did not have sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Thus, prior to September 29, 2023, the Veteran did not meet the schedular threshold for consideration of a TDIU. 

For the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, the Veteran had at least one disability ratable at 70 percent; and he had a combined evaluation of at least 80 percent. Thus, during the period beginning September 29, 2023, the Veteran met the schedular threshold for consideration of a TDIU. 

In the December 2024 VA Form 21-8940 Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability (TDIU Application), the Veteran stated that his adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct prevented him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. He stated that his disability affected his full-time employment in January 2013, and he last worked full-time in December 2014. He stated that he became too disabled to work in June 2022. The most he had ever earned in one year was $52,000.00 in 2012 when he was working as an assistant manager. 

The Veteran reported that he currently was self-employed mowing his neighbor's yard for $45 a week. Prior to that, between March 2016 and June 2022, he was self-employed in a yard work business where he worked 15 hours a week doing mowing, weeding, and leaf removal. In that position, his highest gross earnings per month were $1,600.00. Prior to that, the Veteran reported that he worked 40 hours a week as a manager, safety coordinator, and customer service representative at a stone company between January 2002 and December 2014. In that position, his highest gross earnings per month were $4,300.00, and he lost four days per year from illness. The Veteran stated that he left his last job because of disability. He reported that he finished one year of college, and he had no other education and training before or since he became too disabled to work. 

In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran owned his own yard care business as a part-time job, but he had to dissolve the business about 10 years ago because he could not do the tasks required anymore as a result of his service-connected disabilities. The Veteran's wife noted that the Veteran only took care of one yard a job on average.

In a September 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he worked for his brother-in-law's company from 2002 to 2014 as an assistant manager. He stated that there were times when he had to take time off occasionally because of his service-connected disabilities. Not all employees were allowed to do this, but his brother-in-law allowed him to do this. He performed several different jobs for his brother-in-law. Among these jobs, he was in charge of safety at his brother-in-law's company.

The Veteran reported that he did lawn care for his neighbor once a week from April to September every year. He stated that he had been doing lawn care for 60 years, but he was limited because of his conditions. He stated that his service-connected disabilities prevented him from being able to pursue lawn care as professional employment. 

In a September 2021 VA Psychiatric Consult, the Veteran stated that he had recently retired from being a safety director in the mining industry. 

In a January 2022 VA examination for mental disorders, the Veteran reported that he had completed three semesters of college. After active service, he worked at a department store for one year, after which he worked for a manufacturing company that produced leather goods for 10 years. He then became the plant manager for the leather goods company, and he started a new plant for the company. The Veteran reported he retired in 2015 from a management position with another company.  

In a September 2023 private disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the Veteran reported that he had a lawn care service from March 2016 to June 2022, and he retired due to heart issues. Prior to that, he worked for his brother-in-law as an assistant manager from January 2002 to December 2014. He noted that he was afforded accommodations in that he took breaks and missed work as needed. At the time of this DBQ, he mowed a neighbor's yard for $45 cash per week. 

Regarding the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, in statements from August 2023, September 2023, the Veteran reported that he struggled with tinnitus all day and every day. The ringing was constantly there; and it caused frustration, anxiety, and stress. It affected his sleep and his motivation. The tinnitus also caused or worsened his headaches. The Veteran stated that he would have to wear double hearing protection, or the loud sound of the lawn mower would affect the tinnitus. The Veteran stated that his hearing loss and tinnitus affected his ability to hear in meetings. He usually figured out what was being said, and he could work his way through it. However, it was stressful. The Veteran reported that being around a lot of people affected his hearing. In certain situations, he would carry on a conversation because the background noise prevented him from hearing what was being said. His hearing loss and tinnitus also affected his love of listening to music. When he watched TV, he required the captions in order to know what was being said.

At a February 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in the frequency range of 500 to 4000 Hz and in the frequency range of 6000 Hz. The Veteran's hearing acuity was worse in the left ear. The Veteran's hearing loss impacted his ability to work in that he could hear words, but he had trouble making out what the words were, especially when it was loud. He tended to avoid conversations. The Veteran reported having constant tinnitus that impacted his ability to work. He stated that the tinnitus affected his sleep, and he thought his tinnitus contributed to his anxiety and depression. 

The Veteran's VA medical treatment records indicate that the Veteran wore hearing aids. At an April 2023 VA Psychiatry Note, the Veteran stated that his tinnitus made him want to avoid interactions with others because he had difficulty hearing them clearly. 

In a September 2023 private assessment, the Veteran reported that he struggled to hear conversations, and he often pretended to hear what people were saying when he did not hear them. He reported poor sleep due to tinnitus. Dr. KG stated that the Veteran's tinnitus would cause him to be distracted and frustrated, further limiting his ability to effectively manage daily fluctuations in workload or expectations around productivity. 

Regarding the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, in statements from February 2023 and September 2023, the Veteran reported that he struggled with anxiety, motivation, frustration, and depression. He endorsed low energy, decreased motivation, and increased fatigue, as well as disturbances of motivation and mood. He lacked motivation because he was constantly fatigued. The Veteran stated that he used to enjoy playing golf frequently, but he could now only go occasionally. Even when he did go golfing, he could only play nine holes; and he would have to use a cart rather than walk on the golf course. He also did not go fishing as much as he used to because he did not have the motivation for it. The Veteran also had anxiety, and he found himself worrying about a lot of things he could not control. Also, being around people increased the severity of the anxiety, so he tended to stay at home. Because of his anxiety, he avoided going to the grocery store and church, and his wife complained because he did not want to go anywhere anymore. 

The Veteran also stated that he would become frustrated more than he used to. Anything could cause this, depending on the situation. He opined that this was primarily related to his inability to do and enjoy things like he used to, including hobbies and physical activities. He stated that, when he was frustrated, he tended to be quiet and keep to himself. The Veteran had issues with memory, so he would write everything down, including important dates and appointments, in order to have reminders. He always had his calendar with him, and he would write everything down on it. If he met someone new, he would not remember their name a week later. There were also times he would have trouble focusing in conversations. As a result of these things, he felt sad and depressed. 

The Veteran also stated that house and yard work were limited because of his lack of motivation and energy. He was not as motivated to do daily tasks as he used to be because he was always fatigued. The limitations caused frustration and anxiety. The Veteran stated that he used to be a very active person, but this had been significantly reduced over the years. He stated that there were always things that needed to be done around the house, but he could not keep up with those tasks. This led to further depression.

The Veteran noted that he took Sertraline for depression and anxiety, but Sertraline also caused a lack of motivation. His medications for anxiety and depression also caused symptoms of fatigue. Because of this, he would rest a lot during the day due to lack of energy. On average, he took two naps a day.  

The Veteran stated that, when he worked for his brother-in-law, he would have trouble staying focused on his work; and his anxiety and stress affected his ability to do work. When he was having a hard time, he would get up from his desk and go somewhere no one would bother him in order to cool down and calm down. The Veteran stated that he also used to trim, clean up leaves, and do a considerable amount of handyman work; but he had no energy or motivation to continue doing those types of activities anymore. 

In an August 2023 statement, the Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran struggled with anxiety, memory, motivation, and moods swings. These issues affected his life daily and caused limitations. His psychiatric disorder caused excessive worry, fidgeting, skin picking, gritting of teeth, poor sleep, constant tapping feet, and depression. Crowds bothered the Veteran. He had a hard time interacting with others, so he tended to isolate himself at home. He was obsessive over small things. He had severe mood swings, and he would avoid situations he knew were stressful. He would easily become overwhelmed. There were times where he would wear dirty or stained clothing. He had trouble sleeping every night. He averaged around six hours of sleep. He would toss, turn, and wake up frequently at night, which resulted in him being tired and fatigued during the day. The lack of sleep affected his focus and concentration, so he tried to take naps during the day to catch up on sleep. It was hard for him to keep up with household tasks and yard work because he lacked motivation. He had become reclusive. 

At a January 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct. The VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms that decreased work efficiency and the ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress; or symptoms controlled by medication. The Veteran denied the presence of depression. He reported that he had a positive relationship with his spouse. He reported that he had not been in contact with any mental health personnel, and he did not receive counseling or therapy. However, he had been prescribed Sertraline for depression and anxiety. 

The VA examiner found that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The Veteran reported that he had experienced some depressive symptoms, which had been a problem for three or four years. He described it as "daily depression" without suicidal ideation. He also reported that he experienced some difficulties with anxiety; and he would grind his teeth, which caused dental problems. He reported he was also a "skin picker" who constantly picked scabs and picked his face. He stated this was usually related to anxiety. He stated that he was a "neat freak" who straightened hangers and had a "perfect garage." He would compare various objects in a room to see if they were parallel. For example, he would often compare a doorframe to a wall to see if they were parallel. He stated that he was sometimes moody, but he tried to keep himself busy through his woodworking projects. He stated that he was not motivated at times, and he currently had some concerns regarding his shaking hands and his fear of motorized saws. He stated there were times when he used hand tools, particularly saws, in order to avoid the possibility of his shaking hands causing him to have an accident. Woodworking projects had historically been important to him, but he was not currently engaged in woodworking projects. The Veteran also reported that he did not do much socially, and he had poor hearing. The Veteran reported that he stayed busy in the summer mowing yards with a zero-turn mower for people in the neighborhood. The Veteran stated that he also took his spouse to church, and he would also take her shopping. They would occasionally go out to a restaurant, including every week after church.   

The VA examiner stated that, throughout the examination the Veteran's attitude was positive. His mood was reported to be anxious. He reported occasional difficulties with tearing up in absence of appropriate emotional stimuli. He also had sleep difficulties with middle-phase insomnia. He reported that his Sertraline medication caused a lack of motivation. The Veteran also reported some difficulties controlling his verbal impulses, occasionally blurting out things he did not desire to say; but this did not occur frequently. He reported that he would occasionally act out by throwing objects in his woodworking shop if there was a problem or if he had frustration with completion of his projects. The VA examiner observed that the Veteran's stream of conversation was relevant, coherent, and goal directed. His thought processes included special preoccupations involving his son's personal life or his own health. The Veteran denied the presence of auditory, visual, haptic, tactile, and olfactory hallucinations or illusions. He also denied periods of confusion or disorientation. His sensorium was clear; and he established orientation within the spheres of person, place, time, and situation. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's overall general level of verbal intellectual capacity was in the upper middle average range. Reality contact was clearly intact at the time of assessment. The Veteran's memory was intact. His abstract thought processes and his convergent and divergent thought processes were good. His judgment was good, and his insight was situationally and contextually appropriate. The Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs. 

In a September 2023 private disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) submitted by the Veteran, a private psychologist, Dr. KG, diagnosed the Veteran with adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions. Dr. KG found that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. The Veteran lived with his spouse of 55 years; and he had a daughter, a son, and six grandchildren with whom he was close. It was noted that the Veteran had intermittent outpatient mental health care over the past several years, and he took medications for his mental health condition. 

The Veteran stated that he struggled with focus, fatigue, motivation, and handling stressful situations. Dr. KG found that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occurred weekly or less often; near continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short and long term memory; memory loss for names of close relatives, his own occupation, or his own name; flattened affect; difficulty understanding complex commands; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals that interfered with routine activities; impaired impulse control; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs. 

In an accompanying private assessment, Dr. KG stated that the Veteran experienced low motivation, low mood, poor focus, and fatigue. The Veteran reported that he had attempted several trials of antidepressants, but he had experienced little symptom relief. The Veteran stated that he left his job working for his brother-in-law due to stress, fatigue, and anxiety. When Dr. KG interviewed the Veteran, he noted that he struggled in his lawn care business with stress and chronic low motivation. He stated, "Once you commit to someone's yard, you have to do it on a schedule". Keeping up with the schedule stressed him out. Combined with his lack of energy, he felt the pressure on him. He added that getting up in the morning was difficult in that he dreaded it. The Veteran stated that, since he stopped working, he struggled to complete simple daily tasks and noted these limitations exacerbated his mental health issues. He also noticed that he had become increasingly irritable with his family. 

Dr. KG observed that the Veteran was cooperative in the interview, but his attention was variable. His mood was depressed, and his affect was flat. His thought processes were coherent. No unusual thought content was noted. His speech was mildly slurred. He denied perceptual disturbances, and there was no evidence of a thought disorder. He denied suicidal thoughts. He reported insomnia and poor sleep due to his tinnitus. Due to low motivation, he often did not change his clothes, and his wife complained that he wore dirty or stained clothing. He also experienced rumination about health problems. His anxiety was heightened in crowds because he struggled to hear conversations, and he often pretended to hear what people said when he did not hear them. He noted that his anxiety was evident in that he would constantly fidget, wring his hands, and pick his skin. He also had poor dental health due to teeth grinding. He used to do woodwork as a coping skill; but due to poor focus and low motivation, he no longer did woodwork. He stated that he would also lose interest, and he could not stay focused. He recalled a recent accident where he cut his fingers on a table saw due to poor focus. Additionally, due to memory issues, his wife assisted with medication management. 

Dr. KG opined that, because of the Veteran's mental health issues, he would not be able to manage a competitive work environment. Dr. KG stated that such environments require employees to demonstrate cognitive and emotional agility to be effective with conflict resolution, to engage in some teamwork, and to tolerate various communication styles and personalities. It also required flexibility with regard to routine changes in productivity demands and expectations. Dr. KG stated that The Veteran had low energy, low motivation, anxiety (particularly with communication), and low frustration or stress tolerance, all of which posed significant problems with these expectations. 

Dr. KG further opined that the Veteran's persistent negative emotional state, combined with anxiety around communication, would lead him to be unable to interact effectively with coworkers or receive general feedback related to routine job tasks. Despite an affable demeanor, per his spouse, he was frequently irritable. Such issues would make for poor communication with others on the job. Relatedly, Dr. KG stated that the Veteran was not likely to communicate routine work issues or concerns effectively to supervisors, but rather, he would isolate and avoid such communication due to his anxiety around communication. Furthermore, his emotional distress as evidenced by psychomotor agitation (e.g., fidgeting, skin picking) would impair his focus and likely be a source of further embarrassment. The Veteran noted that excoriation on his face due to skin picking made him self-conscious. Also, due to memory and focus issues, he was expected to have difficulty meeting deadlines, prioritizing his tasks, and focusing. He left his lawn care business due to fatigue and difficulty being productive. Poor sleep and fatigue secondary to medications would also exacerbate these issues. Dr. KG stated that the aforementioned symptoms would make it likely that he would give up easily on rote tasks, particularly if left on his own, in the absence of structure and in a self-paced environment. Dr. KG estimated that the Veteran would be off-task 80 percent of the time. Dr. KG opined that it is more likely than not that Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct was severe enough to prevent gainful employment.

Dr. KG estimated that the Veteran would miss three or more days of work per month due to mental problems. He would need to leave early from the workplace because of mental health problems three or more days per month, and he would not be able to stay focused for at least 7 hours of 8-hour workday to complete simple repetitive tasks more than three days a month. Dr. KG opined that, if the Veteran were subjected to the normal pressures and constructive criticisms of a job, he would respond inappropriately and frequently decompensate when subjected to this type of pressure.

In a September 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with depression and anxiety, and the VA examiner found that the Veteran's psychiatric condition resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported that he was still married to his wife of 56 years. He talked to some of his family members and a few friends. He liked woodworking, birdwatching, gardening, and being in the yard. At the time of this examination, he was not working. He would cut his own grass, but he did not cut other people's grass. The Veteran reported that he saw a VA doctor every six weeks, and he had tried many medications.  

The VA examiner found that the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impairment of short- and long-term memory; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. The VA examiner observed that the Veteran's eye contact and speech were within normal limits. His mood was down, and his affect was flat. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, psychosis, and panic attacks. His thoughts were logical and linear. He had difficulty with concentration. He was capable of managing his financial affairs. 

The VA examiner also stated that the Veteran had been struggling with sleep issues, depression, and anxiety for many years. The Veteran stated that he worried about his own health, his son's personal life, and what is going on in the world, as well as things he had no control over. He stated that this affected his sleep. The Veteran did not like to be in crowds, as he had trouble hearing people; and he would forget people's names, which he found embarrassing. He stated that he would become irritable, but he was mostly mild mannered. He stated that he would not lash out at someone, but he might throw something across the room in frustration. 

Regarding the Veteran's arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, in statements from June 2022, September 2023, and December 2024, the Veteran reported that, as a result of his heart disease, he experienced fatigue, dizziness, shortness of breath, mild chest pain, and anxiety. He has had to curtail outdoor activities such as golf and gardening. He had previously played golf two or three times a week during the summer months, but he now played nine holes of gold once a week. He used to garden almost daily, but he now only gardened as necessary during the cooler hours of the day. Due to tiredness, he took one or two naps every day, and he rested often throughout the day. For work, he previously mowed six lawns per week, but he now mowed two lawns per week. The Veteran also reported that he experienced dizziness on a daily basis. When he physically exerted himself or bent over, he would become dizzy and feel the need to get off his feet to avoid falling for a minute. He also became dizzy if he stood up after sitting for a while. He also became short of breath after walking up a flight of stairs or walking briskly for about 100ft. He stated he would be tired all day every day. If he strained or overexerted himself, he would experience mild chest pain. 

The Veteran stated that his heart condition made it too difficult for him to maintain his lawn care service; and he was too limited in what he could do physically due to the shortness of breath, fatigue, and chest pains. The condition made it too much for him to work even part time. The Veteran currently did lawn care for his neighbor once a week between April and September, and the tasks included mowing and blowing. He stated that his heart condition caused fatigue and made him unable to cope with the heat. The condition made him concerned with overexertion. 

In statements from August 2023 and September 2023, the Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran had issues with his heart for which he took medication. When he participated in activities like walking on a treadmill, climbing stairs, or walking up a hill, he would become short of breath. This limited his ability to complete household tasks and participate in hobbies. He could not play 18 holes of golf anymore. Chest pain was an issue for him two or three times a week. He could walk for about 10 minutes before he would become short of breath, and he could stand for about 20 minutes before needing to sit down. This limited his ability to exercise because he could not stay on the treadmill long enough to get the cardiac benefit he needed due to his recent heart attacks. These issues also affected his anxiety because it was something he worried about on top of everything else. This affected his motivation because he avoided physical exertion due to the limitations he knew would come along with these activities.  

The Veteran's wife noted that the Veteran owned his own yard care business. When the Veteran started to have heart issues, he had to cut back on the yard care business. He would become short of breath while moving and trimming, so he had to take breaks quite often. Chest pain and tightness were also sometimes issues for him while working. Weeding was a strenuous part of the job for him because a lot of the weeds were on hills, and the work required walking up and down hills, which caused shortness of breath and chest pain. The Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran eventually had to dissolve the business because he could not do the tasks required anymore.

In a May 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran reported having exertional chest burning with radiation up to his neck occurring with pretty minimal levels of effort. The examiner gave an assessment of angina pectoris and a crescendo angina that occurred at minimal levels of effort.

In a June 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was reported to be physically active, and he was about to begin cardiac rehabilitation. The Veteran reported having postural lightheadedness, as well as issues with fatigue and sleep hygiene. The examiner gave an assessment of CAD involving native coronary artery of the native heart without angina pectoris. 

In the Veteran's VA treatment records, the Veteran reported that his heart was a concern for him, and he was trying to change his lifestyle. He used a treadmill, and he was trying to eat better. He noted that he had chest pain associated with his CAD. 

At an August 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD), unstable angina, and percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent. The Veteran reported that, since he had his coronary artery stent placed in May 2022, he no longer had chest pain or unstable angina symptoms. The Veteran was told to take nitroglycerin if he had chest pain recurrences, but he had not had such chest pain. No cardiac limitations were reported or documented. The Veteran was taking Plavix and Aspirin as per the standard of care after placement of a coronary artery stent. He also took Aspirin. In an interview-based METs test, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's METs levels were greater than 10, and the Veteran did not report any related symptoms. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's heart condition did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks. 

Regarding the Veteran's tension headaches, in a September 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he has headaches almost daily, and some headaches were worse than others. The headaches usually lasted for hours, and the headaches would go away after he lay down for a while. He stated that he had to lay down most of the times a headache came on. To control his headaches, the Veteran would sit down and rest without noise or light, and he would try not to focus on any problems. There were times when a headache would cause him to feel lightheaded, as well. The Veteran would also get headaches when he had tinnitus or anxiety or when he did not get enough rest at night. He took over-the-counter medication, which made the headaches more bearable. 

In statements from August 2023 and September 2023, the Veteran's wife stated that the Veteran had headaches about once a day or two or three times a week, and they would normally last two to four hours. The headaches would cause him to feel dizzy, lightheaded, and/or nauseous. Light and sound increased the severity of the headache. Tinnitus and anxiety would also worsen the headache. There were times when the Veteran would take off from work or cancel plans or appointments because of the headache. When he had a headache, the Veteran would lay down, and he would occasionally take Tylenol. Medication helped about half the time. 

At a February 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches. The VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced constant headache pain on both sides of the head that worsened with activity. The Veteran also experienced sensitivity to light and sound. The head pain typically lasted less than a day. The Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain with less frequent attacks than one in two months over the last several months. The Veteran's headache condition impacted his work in that it made it very difficult to focus on tasks at hand and perform prolonged activity; and over time, this decreased the Veteran's productivity.

At a November 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tension headaches. The VA examiner found that the Veteran experienced constant head pain. The Veteran reported daily headaches on both sides of the head. The Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain. The condition impacted the Veteran's ability to work. Specifically, the Veteran reported that, when the pain was severe, he would have to lie down in a quiet place; and he reported that he experienced a severe headache at least every three to four weeks.

At an April 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tension headaches. The Veteran reported having daily headaches with headache pain on both sides of the head that typically lasted less than one day. The Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain with less frequent attacks than one in two months over the last several months. The Veteran also had completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines or non-migraine pain; however, such attacks were less frequent than one in two months, and there was no indication that such headaches were productive of severe economic inadaptability. The Veteran's headache condition impacted his work in that the Veteran was unable to perform all activities during severe tension headache flare-ups, which may last several hours. 

Regarding the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, in a June 2022 statement, the Veteran reported that he was unable to get an erection firm enough to have intercourse, and he had had this condition for about one year. In a June 2022 private medical treatment note, the Veteran was noted to have erectile dysfunction due to arterial insufficiency. 

In a December 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with erectile dysfunction. It was noted that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction had worsened over the past year since being placed on psychiatric medications. The Veteran reported that he was not able to achieve erections most of the time, and he was totally unable to sustain an erection for penetration. 

Regarding the Veteran's hypertension, at a January 2023 VA examination, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with isolated systolic hypertension. At the time of this examination, the Veteran was not receiving regular treatment specifically for hypertension. He had been self-monitoring his blood pressure at home. He had also been counseled through his cardiac rehabilitation on diet and exercise and ways to manage his cardiac health, including his blood pressure. The Veteran noted that he had some increased tension and headache pain when his systolic blood pressure was elevated. The Veteran's hypertension impacted his ability to work in that he had decreased ability to focus during headache pain secondary to elevated blood pressure; and he had an overall decreased ability to perform repetitive strenuous physical tasks. 

The Board has additionally reviewed the balance of the Veteran's other medical treatment records from the relevant period on appeal. The findings in the other medical treatment records are substantially similar to those noted in the medical examinations and treatment records described above.   

As noted earlier, the Veteran did not meet the schedular threshold for consideration of a TDIU for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023; but he did meet the schedular threshold for consideration of a TDIU for the period beginning September 29, 2023. 

For the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023, resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence is in equipoise regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, including bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct, arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) with percutaneous placement of a coronary artery stent, tension headaches, erectile dysfunction, and hypertension, have precluded him from securing or following substantially gainful employment. Considering the Veteran's physical and psychiatric limitations, his vocational and educational background and other history are not such that indicate that he would be able to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation under the facts of this case for the period on appeal beginning September 29, 2023. Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU, effective September 29, 2023. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a Total Disability Evaluation Based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU) for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023

For the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023, the Veteran did not meet the schedular threshold for consideration of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU). Nevertheless, the claim may still be referred to the Director of Compensation Service for an extraschedular rating, if the evidence of record shows that the Veteran is "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities." 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Based on the evidence as described above, for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023, the Board finds that extraschedular consideration is warranted, and the issue of entitlement to a TDIU must be referred to the Director of Compensation Service

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the Veteran's claim of entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) to the Director of Compensation Service for extraschedular consideration pursuant to the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b); and have the Director of Compensation Service provide an opinion of whether a TDIU is warranted for the Veteran for the period on appeal prior to September 29, 2023.

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Leung, Dawn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.