Citation Nr: A25030432
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-467789
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include related radiculopathy, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from May 2014 to August 2017.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include any related radiculopathy, for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, to include related radiculopathy, is remanded.

While the Board regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, VA erred in failing to: (1) complete development for the Veteran's outstanding service treatment records; (2) associate the Veteran's VA-authorized treatment records with his claims file; and (3) obtain an adequate examination and opinion for the Veteran's claim.

First, the service treatment records that appear in the Veteran's claims file do not include a medical examination upon his separation from service. As the service treatment records reflect that the Veteran underwent laboratory tests for an expiration term of service (ETS) examination in June 2017, it is likely the records for that examination are incomplete. Although a May 2023 DD 2963 Service Treatment Record Transfer or Certification appears in the Veterans claims file, there is no evidence that VA took any further action to obtain the Veteran's missing service treatment records or otherwise determined that they were unavailable. Accordingly, remand is required to allow VA to obtain the Veteran's missing service treatment records or, if not available, to document such a determination and afford the Veteran an opportunity to submit additional evidence showing his condition is related to his service. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet.App. 362, 369-70 (2005).  

Second, review of the Veteran's VA treatment records reveals that the Veteran received VA-authorized treatment during the relevant period. See November 2023 VA treatment records. In addition, the Veteran provided treatment records to VA for the purpose of completing a health form for his employment, which included a physical assessment. See May 2023 VA treatment records. Although these records were in VA's possession, they have not been associated with the Veteran's claims file. As such, upon remand, VA should associate the Veteran's records with his claims file. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(1)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3).

Third, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for his claimed back condition in June 2023. The June 2023 examiner noted a diagnosis of chronic low back pain with a diagnosis date of 2022, and bilateral radiculopathy noted as "likely radiculopathy." VA attempted to obtain a clarification of the diagnosis, and, in September 2023, another examiner provided, "WITHOUIT EXAMINING THE VETERAN, WOULD SPECULATE A "MILD LUMBAR STRAIN." As VA has already noted, the June 2023 examiner did not adequately diagnose the Veteran's claimed low back condition when she noted that the Veteran had chronic low back pain and "likely" radiculopathy, as pain alone would not result in bilateral radiculopathy. Instead, as the September 2023 examiner indicated, an examination is necessary to accurately diagnose the Veteran's claimed low back condition and any related radiculopathy. Moreover, although the June 2023 examiner opined that the Veteran's low back condition had its onset during service, the reasoning that the Veteran's claimed condition continued from the time of his in-service complaint of back pain is at odds with the other medical evidence of record that shows the Veteran had an injury in 2022 that precipitated his more recent complaint of back pain. Upon review of the evidence of record, it appears, in August 2016, the Veteran complained of low back for eight months prior to his separation from service, which was noted as "lower back pain on the left side towards the midline" with pain that radiated up his back and down the back of his legs. See May 2023 service treatment records. A December 2020 VA treatment record shows the Veteran requested VA fill out a form for his employment as an underwater welder and indicated that the Veteran had no joint pains, no tingling, or numbness. A subsequent January 2021 VA treatment record similarly showed a notation that the Veteran "has no back pain, neck pain, moves all his limbs well" and had no tenderness over the spine, paraspinal muscles. A subsequent private treatment record showed the Veteran again complained of back pain for several weeks and had reported that it was precipitated by lifting a dummy. See May 2023 private treatment records. As such, upon remand, VA should obtain an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed low back condition, to include related radiculopathy, that adequately discusses the relationship between the Veteran's in-service injury, relevant treatment records following his separation from service, and his current claimed condition. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or obtain an opinion in connection with a service connection claim, it must provide or obtain one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made).

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain the Veteran's outstanding service treatment records, with attention to records of the Veteran's ETS examination, and associate them with the Veteran's claims file. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile. Any non-existence or unavailability of the Veteran's service treatment records must be verified, and the Veteran must be duly notified. All actions must be documented and associated with the Veteran's claims file.

2. Associate the Veteran's VA-authorized treatment records and records the Veteran has provide VA with his claims file, with attention to VA-authorized primary care treatment and records the Veteran provided to VA for the purpose of his employment as an underwater welder. See November 2023 VA treatment records. Document all searches and associate them with the Veteran's claims file.

3. Once the above is completed, schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed low back condition, to include any related radiculopathy. A copy of the Veteran's claims file, to include the above records as well as this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

The examiner should conduct all appropriate diagnostic testing and imaging. The examiner should then record all noted signs and reported symptoms, document all clinical findings, and provide a diagnosis for the Veteran's claimed low back condition, to include any related radiculopathy. 

For each diagnosed condition, the examiner should opine as to whether it was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) onset during his service or is otherwise the result of his service. 

In so doing, the examiner should address the Veteran's in-service reports of back and leg pain and relevant VA and private treatment records subsequent to his separation from service.

The examiner is further directed to address the Veteran's lay statements, including that his low back pain began in service. 

Each opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resorting to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, including whether it is due to a limitation of general medical knowledge, the examiner's knowledge, or information about the Veteran's medical history.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.