Citation Nr: A25030971
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240229-420910
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

A 20 percent rating for left knee painful scar is restored effective April 1, 2023.

A 50 percent rating for left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension is restored effective April 1, 2023.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In a January 2023 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) reduced the rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee painful scar disability from 20 percent to 10 percent without following the applicable VA regulations.

2. At the time of the reduction in the disability rating for left knee painful scar, the 20 percent rating had been in effect for a period of no less than five years.

3. In a January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension disability from 50 percent to 10 percent without following the applicable VA regulations.

4. At the time of the reduction in the disability for left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension, the 50 percent rating had been in effect for a period of less than five years.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for reduction of a 20 percent rating to a 10 percent rating for left knee painful scar are not met; restoration is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e); 3.344; 4.3; 4.7; 4.12a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7804.

2. The criteria for reduction of a 50 percent rating to a 10 percent rating for left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension are not met; restoration is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e); 3.344; 4.3; 4.7; 4.12a, DC 5261.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1983 to October 1989.

Procedural History

The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) finds that a discussion of the procedural history is of primary importance. In a February 2017 initial rating decision, the AOJ granted the Veteran service connection for three left knee disabilities as: (1) scars, painful, x3, left knee claimed as painful scars, evaluated at 20 percent disabling, under DC 7804; (2) left knee strain with instability due to cyst removal claimed as left knee with residuals, evaluated at 10 percent disabling, under DC 5257; and (3) scars x 3 linear, left knee s/p surgery evaluated as 0 percent disabling, under DC 7805. All ratings were effective September 28, 2016.

In an August 2019 VA Form 21-526-EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, the Veteran sought an increased rating for left knee strain/instability.

In an October 2019 rating decision, the AOJ continued the 10 percent rating for left knee strain with instability due to cyst removal claimed as left knee with residuals, under DC 5257. However, the AOJ granted service connection for a fourth left knee disability; specifically, a left knee internal debridement, based on limited extension, warranted a 50 percent rating, under DC 5261, effective August 1, 2019, the highest schedular evaluation allowed under the law for limitation of extension of the knee. The October 2019, Rating Decision Codesheet reflects a retitling of the knee disabilities as follows: (1) left knee internal debridement, DC 5261; (2) scars, painful, x3, left knee, DC 7804; (3) left knee strain with instability due to cyst removal, DC 5257; and (4) scars x 3 linear, left knee s/p surgery, DC 7805. 

Because the two disabilities titled as scars, painful, x3, left knee, DC 7804, and left knee internal debridement, DC 5261, are the subjects of the appeal before the Board, the remaining procedural history is limited to these two ratings.

In a July 2021 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Veteran challenged the evaluation and effective date of left knee internal debridement (the 50 percent rating). In an August 2021 higher-level review decision, the AOJ continued the rating.

In a July 2022, VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, the Veteran sought evaluation of left knee internal debridement to include entitlement to individual employability and submitted new evidence.

In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ proposed reducing the ratings for two (and retitled) left knee disabilities: (1) left knee instability with internal derangement, DC 5261, from 50 percent disabling to 10 percent; and (2) painful scars, left knee, DC 7804, from 20 percent disabling to 10 percent. 

In a January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ reduced the ratings for DC 5261, from 50 percent disabling to 10 percent; and DC 7804, from 20 percent disabling to 10 percent, both effective April 1, 2023. The AOJ retitled the disabilities again as left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension (DC 5261) and residual, painful scar, status post left knee surgery (DC 7804).

In a February 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Veteran appealed the January 2023 decision and claimed the two reductions were improper; they were made in clear error; the evidence must show sustained improvement that will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344; and the adjudicatory documents did not demonstrate the AOJ made the necessary findings under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344.

In a February 2023 higher-level review decision, instead of addressing the Veteran's appeal of the January 2023 decision reducing his ratings, the AOJ denied entitlement to increased ratings for left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension (DC 5261) and left knee painful scar (DC 7804) and continued the 10 percent evaluations. The AOJ determined the totality of the evidence of record did not reflect that the disabilities met the criteria for higher evaluations.

On the February 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran appealed to the Board and claimed (1) evaluation of left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension to include entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU) improper reduction of left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension; and (2) evaluation of left knee painful scar to include entitlement to TDIU. Therein, the Veteran seeks to appeal a March 7, 2023, rating decision; however, the Board notes that there is no corresponding rating decision for that date. Instead, there is a March 7, 2023, VA notification letter which included a copy of the AOJ's February 2023 higher-level review decision.

Therefore, this matter comes before the Board on appeal from a February 2023 higher-level review decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) AOJ.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Accordingly, as discussed in the procedural history above, because the February 2023 VA Form 20-0996 and February 2023 VA Form 10182 appeal the propriety of the reduced ratings for left knee scars under DC 7804 and limited extension of the left knee DC 5261, respectively, and entitlement to a TDIU based on these disabilities, they are the only claims presently before the Board.

Reduced Ratings

A Veteran's disability rating shall not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. 288, 292 (1999). Where a reduction in a rating of a service-connected disability is considered warranted and the lower rating would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments currently being made, a rating proposing the reduction or discontinuance must be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons, and the regional office must notify the Veteran that he has 60 days to present additional evidence showing that compensation should be continued at the present level. The Veteran is also to be informed that he may request a predetermination hearing, provided that the request is received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. If no additional evidence is received within the 60-day period and no hearing is requested, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the Veteran expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

VA's General Counsel has held that the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply where there is no reduction in the amount of compensation payable. VAOPGCPREC 71-91 (Nov. 1991); VAOPGCPREC 29- 97 (Aug. 1997). General Counsel reasoned that this regulation is only applicable where there is both a reduction in evaluation and a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payable.

Rating agencies will handle cases affected by change of medical findings or diagnosis, so as to produce the greatest degree of stability of disability evaluations consistent with the laws and VA regulations governing disability compensation and pension. VA benefits recipients may be afforded greater protections under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) & (b), which sets forth the criteria for reduction of ratings in effect for five years or more. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) & (b) stipulate that only evidence of sustained material improvement under the ordinary conditions of life, as shown by full and complete examinations, can justify a reduction and prohibit a reduction on the basis of a single examination. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 417-18 (1995).

In this case, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) are for application as there was a reduction in the amount of compensation payable. The Veteran's overall combined rating changed due to the reduction. See VAOPGCPREC 71-91 (Nov. 1991); VAOPGCPREC 29- 97 (Aug. 1997).

When a rating reduction results in a reduction in or discontinuation of compensation payments, 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) required certain procedural guidelines. First, a rating action proposing the reduction must be prepared, setting forth all material facts and reasons. The Veteran must be notified at his latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons, therefore. The Veteran also must be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level, and to request a hearing in accordance with the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2). Whether or not a predetermination hearing was conducted, a written notice of the final action shall be issued to the Veteran setting forth the reasons for the reduction and detailing the evidence upon which it is based. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2). The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the Veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2)(i).

When a rating has continued at the same rating level for five years or more, the underlying VA examination supporting a reduction must be at least as complete as the VA examination that formed the basis for the original rating, and there must be a finding that the condition at issue is not likely to return to its previous level. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a), (b), (c); Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 324 (1995). A reduction may be made if the evidence indicates that it is reasonably certain that improvement of the underlying injury or condition will be maintained under the "ordinary conditions of life, i.e., while working or actively seeking work," 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a). However, if a rating level has been in effect for less than five years, the regulatory requirements under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b) are inapplicable. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c). In such cases, reexamination need only show actual improvement for a reduced rating to be appropriate. See id.

In Brown, the Court held that a rating reduction which is improper must be resolved in the Veteran's favor. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421. In Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that the benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor when the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" and does not require exact equipoise.

Substantively, the standard to be applied to a rating reduction decision depends on how long the rating has been in effect. When a rating has continued at the same rating level for five years or more, the underlying VA examination supporting a reduction must be at least as complete as the VA examination that formed the basis for the original rating; and there must be a finding that the condition at issue is not likely to return to its previous level. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344; Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 324 (1995). A reduction may be made if the evidence indicates that it is reasonably certain that improvement of the underlying injury or condition will be maintained under the "ordinary conditions of life." 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a).

"If doubt remains, after affording due consideration to all the evidence developed by the several items discussed in paragraph (a), of this section, the rating agency will continue the rating in effect, continuing the former diagnosis with the new diagnosis in parentheses, and following the appropriate code there will be added the reference 'Rating continued pending reexamination _____ months from this date, § 3.344.'" 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(b); Kitchens, 7 Vet. App. at 324.

Significantly, in a rating reduction case, VA has the burden of establishing that the disability has improved. This is in stark contrast to a case involving a claim for an increased (i.e., higher) rating, in which it is the Veteran's responsibility to show the disability has worsened. A rating reduction case focuses on the propriety of the reduction and is not the same as an increased rating issue. See Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991).

As a preliminary matter, the Veteran does not contend, and the evidence does not reflect, noncompliance with the procedural requirements for rating reductions. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). however, the Board provides a brief review of the procedural requirements taken by the AOJ for the rating reductions.

In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ proposed the reduced ratings: (1) left knee painful scar from 20 percent disabling to 10 percent and (2) left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension from 50 percent disabling to 10 percent. On November 10, 2022, the AOJ notified the Veteran of the intent to reduce the evaluations and, as a result, the Veteran's overall evaluation would be reduced from 80 percent to 60 percent. The Veteran was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at their present level and to request a hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e)(i)(2). The Veteran did not request a hearing or new evidence; and, in a January 2023 rating decision, following a 60-day period, the AOJ reduced the ratings as proposed, effective April 1, 2023. As such, the AOJ complied with the procedural requirements for a rating reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). 

Accordingly, the substantive issues of the propriety of each reduction, along with the medical evidence, are addressed below.

1. The AOJ's reduction of the Veteran's left knee painful scar from 20 percent to 10 percent is void ab initio; restoration of a 20 percent rating for service-connected left knee painful scar is granted, effective April 1, 2023.

As discussed above, when the AOJ proposed the rating reduction, the 20 percent rating for left knee painful scar was in effect for more than five years, specifically, from September 28, 2016, through November 10, 2022. Therefore, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a) and (b) are applicable. According to these subsections, before reducing a rating, VA must find the following: (1) based on a review of the entire record, the examination forming the basis for the reduction is full and complete, and at least as full and complete as the examination upon which the rating was originally based; (2) the record clearly reflects a finding of material improvement; and (3) it is reasonably certain that the material improvement found will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. See Kitchens, 7 Vet. App. at 324; Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 419.

The Board finds that the rating reduction is improper; and the 20 percent rating must be restored. In the November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ identified certain medical records, not all of the medical evidence. The only VA examination identified was one conducted in October 2022. There is no finding in the AOJ's rating decision whether the medical evidence reflect improvement in the disability. The AOJ did not make the requisite findings that the October 2022 VA examination report was as full and complete as the January 2017 VA examination upon which the original rating was established. The AOJ also did not discuss whether any improvement in the Veteran's left knee scars would be maintained under ordinary conditions of life. Rather, a review of the medical records upon which the AOJ relied upon as justification for the reduction shows there is no material improvement. The January 2023 rating decision and February 2023 higher-level review decision also fail consider all of the medical evidence or make any findings regarding any material improvement of the left knee painful scar. The Board finds that the left knee painful scar was improperly reduced because the AOJ did not comply with § 3.344(b). At no point did the AOJ discuss the applicability of this regulatory provision and whether there is doubt as to whether the Veteran's condition has materially improved. Id.

Turning to the medical evidence, the January 2017 VA examination shows the Veteran had scarring secondary to surgical intervention (removal of cysts) to left knee. The longest scar is 4 centimeters by 1 centimeter on the medial side of knee directly above kneecap. The scar was tender to the touch. Two additional scars on the knee measure 3 centimeters by 1 centimeter and 2 centimeters by 1 centimeter; both were tender to palpation. The scarring on the left knee causes pain with range of motion (ROM), exercise, ambulation, and touch. As such, full use of the left knee and left leg is limited in regards to bending, walking, and muscle use. The examiner determined that due to pain and effects on ambulation, the Veteran would not be able to work at times when pain and decreased ambulation occurred. The Veteran reported this is daily. The examiner opined that the Veteran would be at risk for a work injury due to the fall risk and unstable ambulation. This examination is the examination in which the AOJ based its initial 20 percent evaluation.

VA treatment records show the Veteran had two surgeries for his left knee: the first, during active service, and the second in 2011. In September- and October 2018, the Veteran presented for acupuncture treatment for his low back and left knee pain. In April 2019, the Veteran received acupuncture for his left knee and scar pain. The Veteran described the pain as 7-8/10 level. The pain was, actually, above the left knee in a band about 3 inches wide. In May 2019, the Veteran presented for acupuncture treatment for his left knee, including his scars. A prior treatment consisted of working on the scars on the left knee; and it was better for three days. The pain was still above the knee and more to the medial aspect of the thigh, for about three inches above the knee. The Veteran reported that sometimes he cannot even have a blanket touching it. In June 2019, the Veteran received acupuncture treatment and complained of left leg pain from the thigh to the medial knee at a 5/10 level at rest, but he gets sharp shooting pain episodes. At a November 2021 therapy visit, the Veteran reported he found acupuncture helpful with his chronic pain previously but was not able to schedule as consistently as he thinks he needed.

At VA knee and lower leg examinations conducted in November 2017, September 2019, and September 2022, the Veteran reported- and the clinicians assessed the functional impact of the left knee painful scar as follows:

At the November 2017 examination, the Veteran reported a burning pain on the medial knee; and, across the top of the knee, it always feels bruised. None of the scars were tender on examination. The examiner did not address any functional impairment of the scars but indicated the examination was neither medically consistent nor inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss of the left knee. The examiner was unable to say without mere speculation whether pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination of the left knee significantly limit functional ability with flare-ups.

At the September 2019 examination, the examiner indicated that none of the knee scars were painful or unstable. There was no evaluation as to any frequency of functional impairment related to the scars, no comparison to the initial examination and evaluation, and no discussion of any material improvement.

At the September 2022 examination, the Veteran reported the scars are sore to the touch and are difficult to see. The examiner found that the scars were tender to palpation, but there was no functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work. There was no inquiry as to the frequency or severity of any scar pain. The medical opinion offered no comparison evaluation. There was no discussion of any material improvement or whether material improvement, if any, would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life.

The Board finds that November 2017, September 2019, and September 2022 VA examinations were not at least as full and complete as the January 2017 examination upon which the 20 percent rating was originally based. Moreover, the medical opinions are inadequate for the purposes of a reduced rating because they all fail to address the central question of whether there was any material improvement in the left knee painful scar that would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the rating reduction from 20 percent to 10 percent for the Veteran's service-connected left knee painful scar was improper.

Therefore, the reduction from 20 percent to 10 percent effective April 1, 2023, for the Veteran's left knee painful scar is void ab initio. See Greyzck, 12 Vet. App. at 292 (holding that where the VA Regional Office reduces a veteran's disability rating without following the applicable VA regulations, the reduction is void ab initio). Accordingly, the 20 percent rating for the left knee painful scar is restored, effective April 1, 2023.

Finally, the Board notes during the appeal period the Veteran did not seek an increased rating for his left knee painful scar; thus, the Board has no jurisdiction to determine whether he is entitled to a rating in excess of 20 percent.

2. The AOJ's reduction of the Veteran's left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension from 50 percent disabling to 10 percent is void ab initio; restoration of a 50 percent rating for service-connected left knee strain and internal derangement is granted, effective April 1, 2023.

In a February 2024, Brief in Support of Veteran's Claims, the Veteran's representative argued that the AOJ's reduction was improper because the AOJ did not make a finding with respect to whether the improvement noted reflected sustained improvement that can be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. The Board notes that, in the brief, the representative also argues for an increased rating for this disability. However, as clarified in the procedural history above, the issue of an increased rating is not properly before the Board at this time.

As discussed above, the Veteran does not contend; and the evidence does not reflect noncompliance with procedural requirements for rating reductions. The Board does not repeat that analysis here.

Turning to the issue of the propriety of the reduction, a 50 percent rating for the left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension (DC 5261) had been in effect for less than five years, specifically, from August 1, 2019, through November 10, 2022. Therefore, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c) apply; and the threshold question is whether adequate evidence showed the Veteran's left knee disability underwent actual improvement throughout the period between August 1, 2019, and November 10, 2022, to include improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

In the November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ identified certain medical records, but not all of the medical evidence, including, the October 2022 VA examination. The AOJ did not indicate whether the medical evidence showed improvement in the left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension disability. The AOJ did not make the requisite findings that the VA examination report was as full and complete as the January 2017 VA examination upon which the original rating was established. The AOJ also did not discuss whether there was any improvement of the left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension which would be maintained under ordinary conditions of life. Rather, a review of the medical records upon which the AOJ relied as justification for the reduction shows the functional impact of the disability is almost uniform in terms of the degree of severity. The Board finds that the left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension disability was improperly reduced because the AOJ did not comply with § 3.344(c). At no time did the AOJ discuss the applicability of this regulatory provision and whether there is doubt as to whether the Veteran's condition has materially improved.

Turning to the medical evidence, at the January 2017 VA examination the Veteran reported following a fall in 1985 during active service, cysts began to form; and surgeries were done to remove cysts. Since that time, the condition resulted in chronic pain, limitations to ambulation because of pain, and loss of ROM. He stated his condition had worsened. The Veteran reported that two- to three days per week he is unable to apply weight to his left leg due to pain and weakness; he has to stay in the chair on those days; he is unable to walk short distances due to pain and limited use of the knee. The examiner determined that flexion was 0 to 90 degrees and extension was 90 to 0 degrees and contributed to a functional loss, namely, limited mobility or the ability to bear weight. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue; the pain was moderately severe; and there was objective evidence of crepitus. The Veteran was unable to perform repetitive use testing due to knee pain. Fatigue, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over a period of time. The examination was not conducted during a flare-up; however, pain, fatigue, weakness and lack of endurance significantly limit functional ability with flare-ups. Additionally, there was less movement than normal, weakened movement, instability of station, interference with sitting, and interference with standing. Strength of flexion and extension was rated as 4/5; there was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis; no history of recurrent subluxation, history of lateral instability, or recurrent effusion. The Veteran reported often holding on to walls and railings to prevent falls due to pain and limited use of the left leg. The examiner opined that the Veteran's left knee disability impacts his ability to perform any type of occupational task. Weakness of the left knee prevents safe and steady ambulation. The Veteran, if working, would be a fall risk and may have excessive absenteeism due to limitation of the left leg. Regarding VA's Correia criteria, the examiner noted evaluation was not medically appropriate as it could cause injury to the Veteran. This examination is the examination for which the AOJ based its initial 50 percent evaluation.

At the November 2017 examination, the Veteran reported it's constant pain; it swells; and there is stiffness. Mainly it's pain in the lower back and the left knee. It's constant pain. There is immobility of the knee. After his fall, there were growths underneath the kneecap and behind the kneecap; the doctor cut them out; and he still had pain intermittently from then on. He described a burning pain on the medial knee; across the top of the knee always feels bruised; the knee is stiff; and, on the rainy days, it's more in the joint. He questioned catching in the knee; if he moves the wrong way, then he gets a sharp pain in it. Just walking and it will give away; he will go tumbling or catch himself if there is something nearby. This has been happening for years. The Veteran described his flare-ups: just about everything flares it up standing, walking, kneeling, squatting, standing to wash dishes, or doing any household chores. He just cannot do anything; and it makes him frustrated and angry. The Veteran regularly used a left knee brace to ambulate.

The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have any functional loss including to repeated use over time. The examiner indicated the Veteran's flexion was 0 to 110 degrees and extension was 110 to 0 degrees. There was evidence of pain with flexion and with weight bearing. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue and objective evidence of crepitus. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing, but he was not examined immediately after repetitive use over time. The examiner indicated the examination is neither medically consistent or inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss with repetitive use over time. The examiner was unable to say more without mere speculation whether pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over a period of time. The exam was not conducted during a flare-up. Strength of flexion and extension in the left knee was rated as 5/5; there was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis; no history of recurrent subluxation, lateral instability, or recurrent effusion. The examiner indicated frequent episodes of joint pain and joint effusion. The examiner determined that the Veteran's disability impacted his ability to perform any type of occupational task; specifically, weight bearing tasks were limited. Passive ROM testing could not be performed because it was physically impossible for the examiner to support the full weight of the Veteran's leg to assess the passive ROM of the knee.

At the September 2019 examination, the examiner indicated left knee instability, constant pain, weakness, and decreased flexibility. The Veteran takes naproxen for pain. He reported weekly flare-ups lasting three- to four days and precipitated by walking and climbing stairs or ladders. Some flares occur while sitting; nothing alleviates the pain. The left knee gives out unexpectedly. The examiner indicated flexion was 0 to 130 degrees and extension of 140-125 degrees. Pain was noted on the examination but did not result in functional loss; there was pain on extension and localized tenderness or pain on palpation. Pain was moderately severe. There was evidence of pain with weight bearing and evidence of crepitus. 

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing; there was an additional loss of function or ROM, pain, lack of endurance, and weakness. The examiner noted flexion at 0 to 125 degrees and extension of 0 to 120 degrees. The exam was conducted during a flare-up. There was reduced muscle strength; no muscle atrophy or ankylosis; and no history of recurrent subluxation. There was a slight history of lateral instability. The examiner noted the disability impacts the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task. Specifically, there is a decrease in activity tolerance; he is unable to stand, walk, or kneel for prolonged periods of time; there is decreased ROM and difficulty climbing ladders or stairs; and it is hard to get up from a sitting position; the left knee gives out unexpectedly.

In a July 2022 private medical opinion, the provider noted that the Veteran could no longer work as a field service technician because it required him to climb ladders, squat, and kneel. The Veteran is unable to stand or walk for more than fifteen- to twenty minutes at a time due to pain; he uses a cane to ambulate. 

At the September 2022 examination, the Veteran reported his left knee will buckle on him and locks at times; he has flare-ups when mowing grass, standing for more than thirty minutes or walking long periods. The examiner noted the Veteran did not report any functional loss including after repeated use over time. The Veteran had a history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee. The examiner noted abnormal ROM but did not respond as to whether the ROM contributed to functional loss. The examiner indicated flexion was 80 degrees and extension was 0 degrees; passive ROM flexion and extension were the same as active ROM. There was evidence of pain upon weight-bearing, active motion, and passive motion. Pain caused functional loss in that it limits movement. There was no objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness or pain on palpation at the TTP medial knee due to derangement. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing; and the examiner noted no additional functional loss or ROM. The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use of time; and the examination was not conducted during a flare-up. The examiner indicated that pain causes functional loss during flare-ups and estimated the ROM for flexion at 80 degrees and extension at 0 degrees. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis; there was recurrent subluxation or persistent instability; there was no recurrent patellar instability. The examiner also indicated the Veteran required a prescription for a cane and a brace, which he regularly used to ambulate due to his left knee disability. An October 2022 MRI showed no acute abnormality. Finally, the examiner indicated the left knee disability impacted the Veteran's  ability to perform any type of occupational task due to difficulty standing or walking for long periods.

The Board also reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment record as explained above. In September 2019, the Veteran presented for treatment of back and knee pain; medications were not helping. The Board notes that, in the January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ determined a 10 percent rating was warranted based on a November 22, 2022, orthopedic surgical record and following a two-month convalescent period; however, there is no record of any left knee surgery during 2022 (or since 2011).

Upon review, the November 22, 2022, treatment record reflects a referral for pain management; it is not a surgical record. Specifically, the provider informed the Veteran no surgical intervention was required. There is no apparent convalescent period related to the left knee. The Veteran reported pain in the front and side of the left knee with no radiation, tingling, or numbness of the extremity; he denied locking, giving sensation, or swelling of the knee. Anti-inflammatories provide temporary improvement. There was no effusion or erythema of the left knee. The Veteran healed from a previous procedure in the left thigh. ROM showed extension to -10 degrees and flexion of 120 degrees; flexion beyond 120 degrees is painful. An x-ray of the left knee showed no significant abnormalities; the October 2022 MRI showed early degenerative arthritis and probable extra-articular pathology. The Veteran was agreeable to try injections for his left knee disability. 

The Board finds that the VA clinicians' reports regarding the functional impact of the Veteran's left knee disability are almost uniform in terms of the degree of severity. More importantly, none of the medical opinions compare any improvement or discuss an improvement under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the rating reduction from 50 percent to 10 percent was improper because the AOJ did not make findings there was any improvement under the ordinary conditions of life and work. 

Therefore, the reduction from 50 percent to 10 percent effective April 1, 2023, is void ab initio. See Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. at 292. Accordingly, the 50 percent rating for the left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension is restored, effective April 1, 2023.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU rating based on service-connected disabilities is remanded.

Having determined that the Veteran's reduced ratings warrant restoration, the Board recognizes the Veteran's claim for TDIU was raised during the period on appeal.

TDIU may be assigned "where the schedular rating is less than total" and the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of his service-connected disabilities, from securing and following "substantially gainful employment" consistent with his education and occupational experience. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

During the instant appeal period, the Veteran's claim for service connection for depression and anxiety was pending. See December 2020 VA 21-526EZ. While the instant case was pending resolution before the Board, the claim for service connection for depression and anxiety was resolved by the AOJ in an April 2023 rating decision. He was granted service connection for major depressive disorder with unspecified neurocognitive disorder evaluated at 70 percent disabling, effective December 23, 2020. This necessarily predates April 1, 2023, the effective date of the restored ratings set forth above. Moreover, the record shows that the Veteran had a combined evaluation for compensation of 100 percent from July 28, 2022, and, subsequently, 90 percent, from April 1, 2023, the effective date of the reduced ratings.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 90 percent rating. Thus, there is a period where the schedular rating is "less than total," as required for a TDIU. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

The Board is cognizant of the fact that the receipt of a 100 percent schedular disability rating for a service-connected disability or disabilities does not necessarily moot the issue of entitlement to a TDIU because a TDIU rating based on a single service-connected disability may still form the basis for assignment of special monthly compensation pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s). See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008).

The Board is prohibited from assigning a TDIU in the first instance without ensuring that the claim is referred to VA's Director of Compensation for consideration of an extra schedular rating under 38 C.F.R. 4.16(b). Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001). Because it is unclear whether there is a period where the Veteran meets the schedular requirements or may be entitled to a 100 percent rating once the reduced ratings are restored, the issue is inextricably intertwined with the AOJ's restoration of the two ratings and a remand to readjudicate the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is warranted.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

After the restoration of the 20 percent rating for left knee painful scar and restoration of the 50 percent rating for left knee strain and internal derangement with decreased extension disability ratings, effective April 1, 2023, readjudicate the issue of entitlement to a TDIU rating.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Treadwell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.