Citation Nr: A25030266
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-453798
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for joint pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2013 to January 2019.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO).  On the Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) VA Form 10182, received in July 2024, the Veteran requested a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  In this regard, the Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for CFS is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for CFS.  Specifically, he asserts that since his deployment to the middle east, including Bahrain, he had experienced increasing fatigue that prevented him from performing regular daily functions.  See April 2023 Claim.

In October 2023, VA issued a memorandum verifying that the Veteran served in a 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and/or 38 U.S.C. § 1119 location.

He underwent a VA examination in November 2023.  He reported experiencing fatigue during his deployment which he initially thought was due to sleep deprivation.  The Veteran stated that his symptoms did not improve following his deployment and that he constantly felt drained even after a full night's sleep, and that exercise appeared to worsen his symptoms.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have CFS.   However, the examination report also documented symptoms attributable to CFS including debilitating fatigue, low grade fever, palpable or tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes, fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise, and headaches.  Cognitive impairment due to CFS included forgetfulness.  The frequency of his symptoms was nearly constant and resulted in at least 1 but less than 2 weeks of incapacitation per year.  A nexus opinion was not provided.

The Board finds the November 2023 VA CFS examination inadequate.  First, despite documenting symptoms attributable to CFS, the examiner did not provide an explanation as to why the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis.  Second, if the reported symptoms are not attributable to CFS, the remaining inquiry on appeal is whether the current symptoms are attributable to any known clinical diagnosis or are manifestations of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness.  The examiner did not address this.

For these reasons, a duty to assist existed at the time of the December 2023 rating decision to obtain an adequate VA examination, and a remand is warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for rhinitis and sinusitis.  With regard to rhinitis, he asserts having had allergy-like symptoms since his deployment to Southwest Asia.  Regarding sinusitis, he also asserts having sinus symptoms since his deployment, including nasal discharge, blocked nasal passages, difficulty breathing, and pain and swelling around his eyes and nose.  See April 2023 Claim.

The service treatment records (STRs) include a Dental Health Questionnaire with entries dated between January 2013 and November 2016 showing the Veteran reported having a chronic persistent cough and that he had a positive tuberculosis PPD test.  He underwent four months of medication treatment between June and October 2013.  He was assessed with latent tuberculosis in February 2013.  In October 2017, he was treated for an upper respiratory infection (URI).  He reported symptoms of chills, post-nasal drainage, and congestion.

A VA examination was obtained in August 2023.  The Veteran reported that he first noticed symptoms of a dry nose and throat while in Bahrain, and that it hurt to breath.  He also reported developing phlegm in his nasopharynx which caused a stuffy nose making it hard to breath, especially at night.  He reportedly began developing headaches.  Since his separation from service, he reported cycles of nasal dryness and irritation, and nasal stuffiness with a lot of phlegm.  He also reported that it was hard for him to blow his nose during those episodes, and when the weather was cold his nasal passages became dry and irritated, and difficulty breathing.  Symptoms reportedly occurred four to five times per year.  Upon examination, the Veteran did not have any findings, signs, or symptoms attributable to chronic sinusitis.  However, the examiner also noted that the Veteran had had 7 or more episodes of non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis characterized by headache, pain and purulent discharge or crusting in the past twelve months.  With regard to rhinitis, the examination did not reveal greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on either side, permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, or a granulomatous condition.

Based on medical literature, the examiner concluded that the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for chronic sinusitis.  With regard to the reported symptoms of intermittent nasal congestion, blockage, and dry nose, those symptoms were found to closely correspond to non-allergic rhinosinusitis which was characterized by paroxysms of sneezing, rhinorrhea, and nasal obstruction which could be triggered by aerosolized irritants and cold weather.  Accordingly, the Veteran was diagnosed with non-allergic rhinosinusitis.

Thereafter, the  same examiner provided a negative nexus opinion in November 2023.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated that the medical records did not support a finding that any currently diagnosed condition was caused by the October 2017 URI, which the examiner concluded was an acute event and noted that the STRs did not document any further episodes.  Symptoms related to rhinitis and sinusitis were also noted to have been denied by the Veteran during his August 2018 separation examination.  The examiner also stated that the Veteran's complaints of intermittent nasal congestion, stuffy nose, and dry nose worse in the wintertime did not meet the criteria for chronic rhinitis or sinusitis as they did not rise to the level of a pathologic condition.  Instead, his reported symptoms were found to be more consistent with episodes of acute allergic rhinitis as they lasted only a few days which did not fit the description of chronic non-allergic rhinitis.  Lastly, while addressing the Veteran's verified TERA, the examiner stated that there was no ILER report for the Veteran.

The Board finds the November 2023 nexus opinion inadequate.  Initially, the Board notes that although the examiner addressed the October 2017 STR documenting treatment for an URI, the examiner did not address the Veteran's in-service treatment for tuberculosis or the Dental Health Questionnaire documenting complaints of a chronic cough between January 2013 and November 2016.  This omission is problematic as the examiner based the negative nexus opinion, in part, on a finding that the Veteran had only one episode of an URI during service.

Additionally, the examiner appears to have provided conflicting findings between the August 2023 and November 2023 VA examination reports.  The August 2023 examination shows the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with recurrent acute rhinosinusitis.  However, in the November 2023 examination report the same examiner stated that the symptoms were more consistent with episodes of acute allergic rhinitis.  The finding that the Veteran did not have a chronic condition further appears to be contradicted by the examination report noting that the Veteran had had 7 or more episodes of non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the past twelve months characterized by headache, pain and purulent discharge or crusting.

The apparent conflicting findings are significant as VA has conceded that the Veteran served in areas subject to the presumptions provided by 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(2), presumptive chronic diseases associated with exposure to fine particulate matter include rhinitis and sinusitis, to include rhinosinusitis.  Therefore, diagnose(s) pertaining to the Veteran's symptoms are pertinent to the adjudication of these claims.  

Lastly, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's symptoms are attributable to any known clinical diagnosis or are manifestations of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness.

Accordingly, a duty to assist existed at the time of the December 2023 rating to obtain an adequate VA examination.

4. Entitlement to service connection for joint pain is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for joint pain on the basis that symptoms of joint pain in his knees, fingers, and elbows began following his deployment to Southwest Asia.  See April 2023 Claim.

A review of the STRs show he reported having a painful shoulder, elbow or wrist during his August 2018 separation examination.  The examining clinician did not offer further specificity.

In November 2023, a negative VA TERA nexus opinion was obtained.  The examiner noted the Veteran had complained of left knee, right ankle, right knee, left shoulder, and back pain, and that his pain was consistent and non-migratory.  The most likely source of the pain was found to be musculoskeletal in origin which the examiner stated was due to an injury or overuse during service.  As the symptoms were musculoskeletal in nature, the examiner opined that they were less likely than not caused by the Veteran's indicated TERA.

The Board finds the VA examination inadequate as the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements as to the reported pain experienced in his fingers and elbow.  Additionally, as noted above, the STRs document a report of a painful shoulder, elbow and/or wrist during the separation examination.  Despite this evidence, a direct service connection nexus opinion had not been obtained.  Regarding the examiner's finding that the musculoskeletal were related an injury or due to overuse during service, no rationale was provided.

Accordingly, a duty to assist existed at the time of the December 2023 rating decision to obtain an adequate examination.

5. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is sought on the basis that the Veteran reported developing persistent re-occurring migraines following his deployment to Southwest Asia.  See April 2023 Claim.

A negative TERA nexus opinion was obtained in November 2023.  The Board finds the rationale provide inadequate.  First, the examiner cited a medical study in stating that migraines had a strong genetic component, but that the full etiology or cause was not fully understood.  However, the examiner did not provide any further explanation as to the significance of the cited study.  

Second, in addressing the Veteran's conceded TERA, the examiner simply provided a negative nexus opinion without any further rationale.  Instead, the examiner appears to rely on a finding that there was no Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) to be reviewed as it pertained to any in-service TERA, despite the October 2023 TERA memorandum conceding the Veteran served in areas subject to the presumptions provided by 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.  As noted above, 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 pertains to exposure to fine particular matter and the examiner did not address the Veteran's conceded exposure event.

Accordingly, a duty to assist existed at the time of the December 2023 rating decision to obtain an adequate examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed disability related to the service connection claim for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS).  

The examiner should provide the following:

(a) Note and detail all reported symptoms related to the claim for CFS. 

(b) State whether the Veteran's symptoms are attributed to a known clinical diagnosis. 

(c) If there are any known diagnoses to which the complaints are attributable, the examiner should indicate whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active duty service. 

(d) If the Veteran has any symptomatology that is not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there are symptoms due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness resulting from service in Southwest Asia and his conceded exposure to fine particulate matter pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Reasons should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified.

2. Schedule an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed disability related to the service connection claims for rhinitis and sinusitis.  

The examiner should provide the following:

(a) Note and detail all reported symptoms related to the claims for rhinitis and sinusitis. 

(b) State whether the Veteran's symptoms are attributed to a known clinical diagnosis. 

(c) If there are any known diagnoses to which the complaints are attributable, the examiner should indicate whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active duty service. 

The examiner is asked to consider the STRs documenting treatment related to a positive tuberculosis PPD test, and the Dental Health Questionnaire with entries noting a chronic persistent cough between January 2013 and November 2016.

(d) If the Veteran has any symptomatology that is not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there are symptoms due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness resulting from service in Southwest Asia and his conceded exposure to fine particulate matter pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Reasons should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified.

3. Schedule an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed disability related to the service connection claim for joint pain.  

The examiner should provide the following:

(a) Note and detail all reported symptoms related to the claim for joint pain, including pain reported to affect that Veteran's knees, fingers, and elbows. 

(b) State whether the Veteran's symptoms are attributed to known clinical diagnoses. 

(c) If there are any known diagnoses to which the complaints are attributable, the examiner should indicate whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active duty service. 

The examiner is asked to consider the August 2019 separation examination showing the Veteran reported having a painful shoulder, elbow, or wrist. 

(d) If the Veteran has any symptomatology that is not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there are symptoms due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness resulting from service in Southwest Asia and his conceded exposure to fine particulate matter pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Reasons should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified.

4. Schedule an examination by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of any diagnosed disability related to the service connection claim for a headache disability.  

5. The examiner should provide the following:

(a) Note and detail all reported symptoms related to the claim for a headache disability. 

(b) State whether the Veteran's symptoms are attributed to a known clinical diagnosis. 

(c) If there are any known diagnoses to which the complaints are attributable, the examiner should indicate whether it is at least as likely as not that the disability is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active duty service. 

(d) If the Veteran has any symptomatology that is not attributable to a known clinical diagnosis, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there are symptoms due to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness resulting from service in Southwest Asia and his conceded exposure to fine particulate matter pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 and 38 U.S.C. § 1119.

Reasons should be provided for any opinion rendered.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, an explanation as to why this is so should be provided and any additional evidence that would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered should be identified. 

 

R. Feinberg

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lamb, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.