Citation Nr: A25030484
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-429894
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Prior to August 28, 2024, entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Prior to August 28, 2024, entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

1. Prior to August 28, 2024, the Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity was manifested by no more than moderate, incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

2. Prior to August 28, 2024, the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right lower extremity was manifested by no more than moderate, incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to August 28, 2024, the criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.14, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.

2. Prior to August 28, 2024, the criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.14, 4.124a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1986 to October 1989.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  

All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id.

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.  Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function that is substantially less than that which is described in the criteria for an evaluation for complete paralysis of this nerve, whether the less than total paralysis is due to the varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial nerve regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.

Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve is indicated where the foot dangles and drops, there is no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee is weakened or (very rarely) lost.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

The schedule further provides for evaluations of impairment of the sciatic nerve under DC 8620 for neuritis (characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant, at times excruciating pain) and DC 8720 for neuralgia (characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain), either of which, when present, "is to be rated on the same scale" for evaluations of paralysis of the sciatic nerve as listed under DC 8520 in § 4.214a.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

Words such as "mild," "moderate," "severe," and "pronounced" are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, so for context and illustrative purposes, the definition for "mild" includes not very severe.  WEBSTER'S II NEW COLLEGE DICTIONARY at 694 (1995).  In addition, a synonym for "mild" is "slight" and definitions for "slight" include small in size, degree, or amount.  Id. at 1038.  The definitions for "moderate" include of average or medium quantity, quality, or extent.  Id. at 704.  Finally, definitions for "severe" include extremely intense.  Id. at 1012.  It is also noted that the term "moderately severe" indicates impairment that is considered more than "moderate" but not to the extent as to be considered "severe."

During the pendency of this appeal, a February 2025 rating decision increased the ratings assigned for the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve to 20 percent, respectively, effective August 28, 2024, based on the receipt of the Veteran's VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).  Consequently, the Board finds the period on appeal ends as of August 28, 2024.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve.

The Veteran contends that his left and right lower extremity radiculopathy warrants a higher rating than his current 10 percent rating for each extremity.  Specifically, the Veteran stated his left and right radiculopathy symptoms included increased numbness, tingling, and extreme twitching in his left leg, feet, and toes.  His muscle spasms and cramps hindered daily activities.  Further, the Veteran states the VA did not consider medical evidence dated prior to 2015.  

This claim stems from a July 2023 initial service connection claim for left and right radiculopathy secondary to service-connected degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome.  A November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve effective July 12, 2023.  The Veteran filed a supplemental claim in November 2023 for an increased rating.  The April 2024 rating decision on appeal denied his claim.  Therefore, as the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim since July 2023, the period on appeal begins on July 12, 2023, and ends on August 28, 2024.

An August 2023 VA examination for back conditions shows findings of bilateral, mild constant pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness, as well as moderate intermittent pain, likely caused by his degenerative disc disease.  The examination report also reflects decreased sensation in the bilateral feet and toes.  The Veteran denied the use of assistive devices.  Functionally, the Veteran reported difficulty walking without pain and issues with decreased mobility due to neuropathy in lower extremities.

A January 2024 VA examination report reflects a 2012 diagnosis of bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms had worsened over time.  The left side was described as sciatica, with the Veteran reporting pain in the buttocks as well as numbness and tingling down in the foot.  He took ibuprofen and Diclofenac gel as needed.  The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran had bilateral, moderate constant pain that may be excruciating at times and moderate symptoms of paresthesias and/or dysesthesias.  Moderate numbness in the right lower extremity and mild numbness in the left lower extremity were also noted.  Further symptoms noted were moderately severe twitching to the right side below the knee that occasionally curled the right foot.  

No muscle atrophy and normal knee and ankle reflexes were noted.  There was decreased sensation testing on right lower leg/ankle but otherwise normal results.  No trophic changes were noted, his gait was normal, and muscle strength testing was 5/5, indicating normal strength, aside from right ankle plantar flexion, rated at 4/5, which indicated active movement against some resistance.  Overall, the VA examiner found the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy was best described as mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

VA and private treatment records were silent during the period on appeal for any complaints, treatment, or symptoms referable to radiculopathy.

Upon review, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy was productive of, at most, moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  In this regard, the Board notes the January 2024 VA examiner found the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy more nearly approximated only mild impairment overall.  Nevertheless, the Board notes that the Veteran's symptomatology involved bilateral, moderate constant pain that may be excruciating at times (January 2024); bilateral, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias (January 2024); bilateral, moderate intermittent pain (August 2023); and moderate numbness in the right lower extremity (January 2024).  Furthermore, the Veteran had the additional symptom of moderately severe twitching to the right side below the knee that occasionally curled his right foot in January 2024.  As the Veteran's symptoms primarily show a moderate level of severity, the Board finds that a rating of 20 percent, but no more, is warranted for each his left and right lower extremity radiculopathy.

However, the Board finds the Veteran's disability did not reach a level of moderately severe at any time during the period on appeal to warrant a higher rating, nor was there evidence of marked atrophy or complete paralysis.  Here, the medical evidence of record does not reflect symptoms described as "intense" or "extremely intense".  Notably, the Veteran did not need the use of assistive devices due to his radiculopathy, and while he reported difficulty walking without pain and issues with decreased mobility, the Board finds such does not rise to a level above that contemplated by a 20 percent rating for moderate impairment.  

The Board further finds the functional limitations with respect to lifting, bending, prolonged standing, weight bearing, impact activities, and physical exercise are considered by a 20 percent rating when compared to the Veteran's specific symptoms and the severity thereof.  Moreover, VA or private treatment records do not show anything to the contrary.  Overall, the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy does not more nearly approximate moderately severe impairment when considering the frequency and intensity of his symptoms.

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board again acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned disability rating.  In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule.  Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be persuasive.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings were warranted.  However, the aforementioned evidence indicates the Veteran's symptoms have remained stable throughout the appeal period.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings is not warranted.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the initial rating claims adjudicated herein.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Accordingly, the Board finds that higher ratings of 20 percent, but no more, are warranted for the Veteran's left and right lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve, respectively.  In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board has applied the benefit of the doubt doctrine and resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor, which has resulted in the partial awards assigned herein. However, insofar as the Board has denied higher ratings, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against such aspects of the Veteran's claims. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable, and his initial rating claims must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

M. M. CELLI

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Garey

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.