Citation Nr: A25030442
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210908-183782
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for Parkinson's disease is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

Entitlement to a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is granted.

Entitlement to a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to April 21, 2019, for the award of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied. 

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied. 

A rating in excess of 20 percent for diabetes mellitus is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted from April 21, 2019.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Parkinson's disease was not manifested during active service or at any time thereafter.

2. Left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy has been shown to be productive of no more than mild numbness. 

3. Right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy has been shown to be productive of no more than mild numbness. 

4. From April 21, 2019, the left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy has been shown to be productive of no more than moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness. 

5. From April 21, 2019, the right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy has been shown to be productive of no more than moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness.

6. In April 2019, an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, VA Form 21-526EZ, for service connection for PTSD was received on April 21, 2019. 

7. The record does not contain a formal claim for service connection for PTSD or an Intent to File such a claim which was received by VA prior to April 21, 2019.

8. The PTSD has been shown to be productive of no more than depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  

9. The service-connected diabetes mellitus has not been shown to require regulation of activities.

10. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have rendered him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for Parkinson's disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8515.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8515.

4. The criteria for a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

5. The criteria for a 30 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.71a, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.

6. The criteria for an effective date prior to April 21, 2019, for the award of service connection for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

7. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

8. The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for diabetes mellitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

9. The criteria for a TDIU are met from April 21, 2019. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from April 1968 to October 1969. 

This decision is on appeal from a September 2020 Higher-Level Review rating decision and a February 2021 rating decision. 

By way of background, in May 2019, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for PTSD, continued the 20 percent rating for type II diabetes mellitus, continued the 10 percent rating for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and denied service connection for Parkinson's disease.  In May 2020, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, VA Form 20-0996. 

In September 2020, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction identified a duty to assist error during the Higher-Level Review of PTSD, continued the 20 percent rating for type II diabetes mellitus, continued the 10 percent rating for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, continued the 10 percent rating for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and denied service connection for Parkinson's disease.  

In February 2021, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection for PTSD effective April 21, 2019.  

In September 2021, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, electing the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2019 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, or at the time of the February 2021 AOJ decision on appeal (PTSD), as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection for Parkinson's Disease 

The Veteran asserts that service connection for Parkinson's Disease is warranted. 

Service connection may be established for disability arising from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Service connection may be established for any disease diagnosed after separation from service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The service treatment records do not refer to Parkinson's disease.  Clinical documentation of record does not reflect Parkinson's disease has been diagnosed or otherwise identified at any time.

Parkinson's disease has not been diagnosed or otherwise shown at any time.  The Veteran's claim for service connection for Parkinson's disease is supported solely by his own lay statements.  Lay assertions may serve to support a claim for service connection by establishing the occurrence of observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis or etiology when: (1) a lay person is competent to identify a medical condition; (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  The Veteran did not offer any medical qualifications. The Board finds that the lay statements do not constitute competent evidence to establish a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.  The question of such a diagnosis requires medical training and testing and is too complex to be addressed by a layperson. Therefore, the Board finds that service connection for Parkinson's disease is not warranted.

Increased Rating for Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy 

The Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is rated under Diagnostic Code 8515, applicable to the median nerve. His lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is rated under Diagnostic Code 8520, applicable to the sciatic nerve. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8515, ratings are available for impairment associated with paralysis of the median nerve. For incomplete paralysis of the median nerve to a mild degree warrants a 10 percent rating for both the dominant (major) and non-dominant (minor) upper extremities; 30 percent and 20 percent ratings are available for a moderate degree of incomplete paralysis for the major and minor upper extremities, respectively; 50 and 40 percent ratings are available for a severe degree of incomplete paralysis for the major and minor upper extremities, and 70 and 60 percent ratings are available for complete paralysis (the hand inclined to the ulnar side, the index and middle fingers more extended than normally, considerable atrophy of the muscles of the thenar eminence, the thumb in the plane of the hand (ape hand); pronation incomplete and defective, absence of flexion of index finger and feeble flexion of middle finger, cannot make a fist, index and middle fingers remain extended; cannot flex distal phalanx of thumb, defective opposition and abduction of the thumb, at right angles to palm; flexion of wrist weakened; pain with trophic disturbances) for the major and minor upper extremities, respectively.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8515. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520, ratings are available for impairment associated with paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  Under these DC, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" with peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of loss or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to the varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124 (a).

Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe."  Spellers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 211, 219 (2018) ("DC 8520 does not define 'mild,' 'moderate,' 'moderately severe,' or 'severe,' or generally associate those terms with specific symptoms").  Although the Board has at times attempted to define these terms using dictionary definitions, those definitions are problematic because they "do little to explain the Board's understanding of these terms and do not 'disclos[e] that benchmark it employed to reach [its] conclusion.'"  Casey v. McDonough, No. 21-7569, slip op. at 3 (Vet. App. Jan. 24, 2023) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (quoting Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 255 (2018) (discussing the Board's attempt to define the terms slight, mild, moderate, and severe in DC 8515); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

In this case, the Board considers "mild" to correspond to slight symptoms sufficient to support the diagnosis, generally characterized by less persistent sensory deficits, or those affecting a small area, and or very minimal reflex or motor abnormalities.

The Board considers "moderate" to correspond to the maximum evaluation available for sensory-only impairment, characterized by symptoms described by the Veteran and considered significantly disabling medically, and/or involving a larger area in nerve distribution.  Additionally, moderate can correspond to combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes with or without sensory impairment, graded as medically moderate.

Finally, "severe" is characterized by motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability.  Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases.  Although severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than those for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contains signs or symptoms that resemble some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.  Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

The Veteran asserts that a rating in excess of 10 percent for left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is warranted. 

In the report of a May 2019 VA Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy examination shows the right hand dominant.  The Veteran reported intermittent numbness involving the hands for years.  There was no associated tingling or pain involving the hands.  There was mild numbness of the left upper extremity neuropathy.  Left elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist flexion, wrist extension, grip, and pinch were 5/5 normal strength.  Deep tendon reflexes for the left biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis was 2+ normal.  Light touch/monofilament testing for the left shoulder, inner/outer forearm, and hand/finger was normal.  Vibration sensation for left upper extremity was normal.  Cold sensation for left upper extremity was decreased.  There was no atrophy.  The examiner assessed the left median nerve as mild incomplete paralysis. 

The left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of only mild numbness and decreased cold sensation.  Therefore, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent left extremity peripheral neuropathy is not warranted because there are only slight sensory symptoms, which the Veteran described as intermittent, and are therefore less persistent. 

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

The Veteran asserts that a rating in excess of 10 percent for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is warranted.

In the report of a May 2019 VA Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy examination shows the Veteran is right hand dominant.  The Veteran reported intermittent numbness involving the hands for years.  There was no associated tingling or pain involving the hands.  There was right upper extremity neuropathy mild numbness.  Right elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist flexion, wrist extension, grip, and pinch were 5/5 normal strength.  Deep tendon reflexes for the right biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis was 2+ normal.  Light touch/monofilament testing for the right shoulder, inner/outer forearm, and hand/finger was normal.  Vibration sensation for the right upper extremity was normal.   Cold sensation for right upper extremity was decreased.  There was no atrophy.  The examiner assessed the right median nerve as mild incomplete paralysis.

The right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of mild numbness and decreased cold sensation.  Therefore, a rating in excess of 10 percent right extremity peripheral neuropathy is not warranted because there are only slight sensory symptoms, which the Veteran described as intermittent, and are therefore less persistent.

3. Entitlement to a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is granted.

The Veteran asserts a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

In the report of a May 2019 VA Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy examination the Veteran stated that he suffers from tingling sensations and burning pain involving the soles of both feet since the last 7-8 years.  He reported imbalance, but that he walks unassisted and had no falls.  The left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness.  Left knee extension, knee flexion, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion were 5/5 normal strength.  Deep tension reflexes for the left knee were 2+ normal and for left ankle was 1+ decreased.  Light touch/monofilament testing results for the left knee/thigh and left ankle/lower leg were normal and left foot/toes were decreased.  Vibration sensation and cold sensation for left lower extremity were decreased.  There was no muscle atrophy.  The examiner assessed the left lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the sciatic nerve as mild incomplete paralysis.

The left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness.  Therefore, with reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is warranted. 

4. Entitlement to a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is granted.

The Veteran asserts a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. 

In the report of a May 2019 VA Diabetic Sensory-Motor Peripheral Neuropathy examination shows that the Veteran stated that he suffers from tingling sensations and burning pain involving the soles of both feet since the last 7-8 years.  He reported imbalance, but that he walks unassisted and had no falls.  The right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness.  Right knee extension, knee flexion, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion were 5/5 normal strength.  Deep tension reflexes for right knee were 2+ normal and for right ankle was 1+ decreased.  Light touch/monofilament testing results for the right knee/thigh and right ankle/lower leg were normal and right foot/toes were decreased.  Vibration sensation and cold sensation for right lower extremity was decreased.  There was no muscle atrophy.  The examiner assessed the right lower extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the sciatic nerve as mild incomplete paralysis.

The right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was shown to be productive of moderate constant pain, intermittent pain, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness.  Therefore, with reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, a 20 percent rating, but no higher, from April 21, 2019, for right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is warranted. 

Earlier Effective Date for PTSD 

The Veteran asserts that an effective date prior to April 21, 2019, for the award of service connection for PTSD is warranted. 

Generally, the effective date for an award of service connection is the day after service separation or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if the claim is received within one year of the date of separation from service.  Otherwise, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2)(i).

On and after March 24, 2015, claims for VA benefits are to be submitted on the appropriate claims form. A claimant may indicate a desire to file a claim for benefits by submitting an intent to file a claim to VA.  If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by the Secretary of VA within one year of receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155.

In April 2019, an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, VA Form 21-526EZ, for service connection for PTSD was received on April 21, 2019. 

VA clinical documentation from May 2019 states "DSM-5 Diagnosis: Unspecified Anxiety Disorder PTSD." 

In May 2019, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for PTSD. 

In May 2020, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, VA Form 20-0996. 

In September 2020, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction identified a duty to assist error during the Higher-Level Review of PTSD. 

The report of a February 2021 VA PTSD examination showed a diagnosis of PTSD. 

In February 2021, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection for PTSD effective April 21, 2019. 

PTSD was initially shown in May 2019.  The Veteran's April 2019 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, VA Form 21-526EZ, seeking service connection for PTSD was received on April 21, 2019.  The record does not contain a formal claim for service connection for PTSD or an Intent to File such a claim which was received by VA prior to April 21, 2019. Therefore, the appropriate effective date for the award of service connection for PTSD is April 21, 2019, the date of receipt of the Veteran's claim.  Accordingly, an effective date prior to April 21, 2019, for the award of service connection for PTSD is denied.

Increased Rating for PTSD 

The Veteran asserts entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD. 

Disability ratings are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms during the relevant period with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for PTSD where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting himself or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  However, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that such symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage.  Vazquez Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran filed a claim in April 2019.

VA Clinical documentation from May 2019 upon mental status examination states, General appearance: casual attire with appropriate grooming and hygiene.  Behavior/Engagement: cooperative and easily engaged.  Motor activity: ambulatory.  Mood/affect: irritable mood with congruent affect.  Eye contact: direct.  Speech: clear, conversational, and fluent with normal rate, tone, and volume.  Thought content/process: logical/linear/goal-directed/future-oriented.  No AVH/Paranoia.  Orientation/memory: AOx4 (person, place, time, situation)/Adequate.  Attention span/concentration during this visit: able to follow conversation today.  Insight/judgment: fair/fair. 

VA clinical documentation from June 2019 states, he denied current suicidal and homicidal ideations, intent, and plans.  He did not appear in imminent risk of harm to self and others during the session.  Orientation: Alert and orient to person, place, time, and situation.  Attitude: cooperative.  Psychomotor activity: he sat facing provider and eye contact sustained.  Speech: normal rate, tone, volume, and fluent.  Affect: congruent.  Mood: euthymic.  Thought process: linear.  Delusions and hallucinations: no evidence and none reported.  He denied thoughts of self-harm, intent, plan and reports protective factors such as plans for the future.  He was participating in psychoactive medication management. 

VA clinical documentation from July 2019 states, he was alert and oriented.  He was dressed and groomed appropriately.  He appeared calm and engaging during the session.  Speech was fluent without abnormality of rate or verbal expression.  He denied current suicidal or homicidal thoughts.  There was no expression or observation of hallucinations or delusions.  He denied current suicidal or homicidal ideations, intent, or plans.  He did not appear to be at imminent risk for harm to self or others at the time of the session.  He can be managed safely on an outpatient basis.

VA clinical documentation from November 2020 states, married to his wife for 49 years with 3 children.  He was complaint with medication.  He was proud he has not smoked for 3 to 4 months.  He denied any stress or crisis, depression, anxiety, hopeless, worthless, suicidal/homicide ideation or intent, problems with temper, mood swings, racing thoughts, problems with sleeping, anxiety attacks, abuse of alcohol or drugs, and smoking.  He did not verbalize any PTSD symptoms. 

In the report of February 2021 VA PTSD examination determined that there was occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  He married in 1970 and felt supported by his spouse.  He had three children, two of which are still living.  He was distant from his children.  He tended to isolate and rarely left the house.  He experienced hypervigilance in public and avoids crowds.  He felt no one can be trusted and viewed the world as a completely dangerous place.  He reported he could not keep a job for a while.  He worked as a supervisor for C&N Machines for 33 years until 2014.  He earned his GED and attended college briefly but did not complete a degree. He was prescribed sertraline. He had difficulty falling and staying asleep.  He experienced fatigue and difficulty concentrating.  He experienced excessive worry and feared that something bad will happen.  He experienced panic attacks on average 2-3 times per month.  He compulsively engages in safety checking behaviors multiple hours/day.  He denied any legal charges.  He did not use any recreational substances, including alcohol.  He experienced depressed mood and lack of pleasure or engagement in significant activities.  He rarely smiles or laughs.  He experienced lack of motivation to engage in self-care activities.  He had a history of neglecting his hygiene.  He experienced passive suicidal ideation one week ago.  He denied experiencing suicidal plan, means, desire, intent, or attempts.  Symptoms for VA rating purposes included: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  He arrived on time for the scheduled C&P Evaluation.  He was oriented x 4 (person, place, time, and purpose) and cooperative throughout the evaluation.  He appeared dysthymic and exhibited flattened affect throughout the evaluation.  He was capable of managing his financial affairs.  He noted he often experienced irritability around others. 

The service-connected PTSD has been shown to be productive of no more than occupational and social impairment in most areas to include work, judgment, and mood due to symptoms such depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  Such symptoms warrant a 70 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 9411.  In the absence of symptoms reflecting total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting himself or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Increased Rating for Diabetes Mellitus

A 20 percent rating is warranted for diabetes mellitus which requires the use of insulin and a restricted diet or the use of an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet. A 40 percent rating requires the use of insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities. A 60 percent rating requires the use of insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities; episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, and complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated. A 100 percent rating requires more than one daily injection of insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities); episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider; and either a progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately evaluated. Compensable diabetic complications are to be separately evaluated unless they are part of the criteria used to support a 100 percent schedular ratings. Noncompensable complications are to be considered part of the diabetic process under Diagnostic Code 7913. 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

The report of a May 2019 diabetes mellitus examination conducted for VA states that the service-connected diabetes mellitus required prescribed oral hypoglycemic agents but did not require regulation of activities.  He visited his diabetic care provider less than two times per month for episodes of ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia.  There were no hospitalizations in the past twelve months and no unintentional weight loss or loss of strength attributable to diabetes mellitus. 

The service-connected diabetes mellitus has not been shown to require regulation of activities.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent for diabetes mellitus is not warranted.  The Board notes that the criteria of DC 7913 are successive, meaning that the evaluation for each higher disability rating includes the criteria of each lower disability rating; if a component is not met at any one level, the Veteran can only be rated at the level that does not require the missing component.  Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2009).  Having found that the criteria for a 40 percent rating were not met, the Board implicitly finds that the criteria for higher ratings also were not met.

Entitlement to a TDIU is granted from April 21, 2019

While the above-noted increased rating appeals were pending, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-8940, contending that he is unemployable as a result of his service-connected disabilities. Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has been raised as part and parcel of the increased rating claims. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). 

A total disability rating may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

Service connection is currently in effect for PTSD, diabetes mellitus and bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.  The Veteran's combined rating is 90 percent from April 21, 2019, including a single 70 percent rating for PTSD. As such, the Veteran meets the criteria for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis for the period beginning April 21, 2019. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Accordingly, what remains to be determined is whether the functional impairment associated with his disabilities are of such nature and severity as to preclude substantially gainful employment.

The determination as to whether a veteran can secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation includes an economic component and a noneconomic component. The economic component means that a veteran must not receive income from employment outside of a protected environment that exceeds the poverty threshold for one person. The noneconomic component requires consideration of a veteran's ability to secure or follow substantially gainful employment, including factors such as the veteran's history of education, skill, and training, as well as his ability to perform the physical and mental activities required by the occupation in question. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).

In a November 2021 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran contended that all of his service-connected disabilities prevented him from securing or following substantially gainful employment.  He worked as a machinist from 1981 to 2014. He reported that he last worked full time in February 2012 and became too disabled to work in March 2014.  The Veteran reported 12 years of high school but no college and no other education and training.  

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran is not able to follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy and psychiatric disorder.  Regarding his peripheral neuropathy, the evidence shows that these disabilities impair his ability to walk, stand, hold and grasp objects. Such impairment would make securing and maintaining manual or non-sedentary employment extremely difficult. Although these disabilities alone might allow for sedentary employment, his PTSD results in, among other things, difficulty concentrating and regulating emotions, which would be necessary for the vast majority of sedentary jobs. His limited education would further restrict the pool of potentially available sedentary jobs. 

Given the above-cited evidence, and the Veteran's level of education and occupational background, the Board finds that the Veteran has been unable to secure or maintain a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected peripheral neuropathy and PTSD.  Accordingly, a TDIU is established for the entire appeal period, from April 21, 2019.

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Smith, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.