Citation Nr: A25030914
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 250213-512097
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need of regular aid and attendance of another person is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in physical impairment which required care or assistance on a regular basis from the hazards or dangers of the daily environment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance of another person are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114 (l), 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 (b), 3.351(c), 3.352(a), 3.400, 3.401.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from January 1966 to January 1970. See DD Form 214. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) denying the claim. In February 2025, the Veteran appealed the denial to the Board, and he selected the direct review docket. See February 2025 VA Form 10182. 

APPLICABLE EVIDENTIARY WINDOW

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. The appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered. See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. Entitlement to a SMC based on the need of regular aid and attendance of another person.

The Veteran contends that he requires regular aid and attendance based on the impairment attributable to his service-connected disabilities. See September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; February 2025 VA Form 10182. 

SMC (l) (aid and attendance) is payable when, as a result of a service-connected disability or disabilities, the Veteran has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or of one hand and one foot, or is blind in both eyes, with 5/200 visual acuity, or is so helpless (due to physical or mental incapacity), that he requires the aid of another person to perform the personal functions required in everyday living. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 (b), 3.351(b), 3.352(a).

A Veteran will meet the criteria for payment at the aid and attendance rate if any of the following factors are met: (i) he has anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or one hand and one foot (38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l)); (ii) he is blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to 5 degrees or less (38 C.F.R. § 3.351 (c)(1)); (iii) he is a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity (38 C.F.R. § 3.351 (c)(2)); (iv) he is permanently bedridden or with such significant disabilities as to be in need of regular aid and attendance (38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350 (b), 3.352(a)); or (v) there is a factual need (38 C.F.R. § 3.351 (c)(3)).

The following factors are considered in determining the need for regular aid and attendance: inability of a claimant to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid; inability of a claimant to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, either physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a).

The above are only factors for consideration, and it is left to the Board to determine whether a veteran is factually in need of regular aid and attendance. The particular personal functions that a veteran is unable to perform are also considered in connection with their condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need, however the need must be caused solely by service-connected disabilities. Further, there is no schedular threshold for the award of SMC(l) when granted on the basis of a need for regular aid and attendance.

The Veteran is service connected for the following disabilities: degenerative disc disease, left and right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy, left and right lower extremity femoral nerve radiculopathy, right and left shoulder rotator cuff, tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, allergic rhinitis, and back scar. 

He does not have anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or one hand and one foot. He is not blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to 5 degrees or less. He is not a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity and is not permanently bedridden or with such significant disabilities as to be in need of regular aid and attendance.

However, the Board finds that aid and attendance is warranted because there is a factual need for care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.

In February 2024, the Veteran was provided with a VA Aid and Attendance or Housebound Examination. At that time, the examiner noted that the Veteran needed help with ambulating, grooming, bathing, dressing, feeding, administering medication, and taking care of his finances. See February 2024 VA Examination Report. During the physical examination, the Veteran's gait appeared antalgic and unstable, he stooped forward with his cane due to back and knee arthritis, and when standing up straight he felt like falling backward. Id. Notably, the Veteran regularly endorsed the regular use of a cane and a walker to ambulate. Id. With respect to his functional impairment, the examiner noted that due to his inability to stand for prolonged periods of time and difficulty with balance, the Veteran required help with preparing his own meals, as well as assistance in bathing due to difficulty with balance getting in and out of the shower, standing up from the shower seat, and due to lack of shoulder strength to hold onto the shower support bar. Id. The Veteran also endorsed the need for assistance tending to other hygiene needs due to lack of flexibility in doing self-hygiene. Id. Furthermore, the arthritis in both shoulders severely limited the Veteran's ability to lift his arms or do any overhead movement, and his limited fine movements and grip. Id. For these reasons, the Veteran endorsed wearing only t-shirts and shorts, to also limit movements that required fine-motor skills, and/or grip. Id. The Veteran also indicated that he cannot pick up small items due to his right lower peripheral neuropathy. Id. Moreover, he endorsed frequent falls due to the left foot drop, and admitted that he cannot pick himself up after a fall. Id. Due to his poor balance and vertigo, the Veteran endorsed leaving the house only with the assistance of his spouse who drove him to medical and dental appointments, and to the barber shop. Id. The examiner also noted that the Veteran's spouse ensured the Veteran's compliance with his medications, arranged for refills and delivery of such medications, and took care of the Veteran's finances. Id. 

The February 2024 back and shoulder conditions VA examinations confirmed the Veteran's functional impairment due to his service-connected back, bilateral radiculopathy and bilateral shoulder disability. Specifically, the VA examiner found that the back and bilateral radiculopathy disabilities caused limitation with bending, lifting, carrying a load greater than 20 pounds, and that his pain and stiffness in his shoulders limited his overhead or above-shoulder movements, and prevented him from carrying, lifting, or pushing more than 20 pounds, or throwing a ball. See February 2024 VA Examination Reports.

In September 2023, the Veteran's spouse submitted a statement indicating that she assisted the Veteran with his daily chores, to include helping him to get out of his chair, getting a shower, getting dressed, ensuring compliance with medications, doing laundry, preparing his meals, purchasing groceries, and driving him to his appointments. See September 2023 Correspondence. 

The Veteran's examinations and functional assessment indicate that the Veteran needs assistance with many activities of daily living due to impairment in standing, ambulating, sitting, and disturbance of locomotion. 

Due to the impairment attributable to his service-connected disabilities, the Veteran requires aid and attendance to help him with self-care, keeping himself safe in his dwelling, taking his medications, and taking care of his finances.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another is granted.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fiorito, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.