Citation Nr: A25030981
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-460629
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to December 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

After reviewing the evidence of record, and in light of Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the Board has recharacterized the issue of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) to encompass any acquired psychological disorder, to include major depressive disorder.

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder.

The Veteran contends that her currently diagnosed major depressive disorder was caused by an incident of military sexual trauma (MST) that occurred during her active service.  See November 2023 VA Form 21-0781. 

The Board notes that a personal trauma incident/marker worksheet was completed by VA in February 2024.  This worksheet indicated that markers exist in the record that suggest an MST event occurred in service, as there is evidence in the Veteran's service treatment records of instances of treatment for miscellaneous injuries in the months following the reported MST event including treatment for a laceration/bump on the head requiring stitches, unexplained dizziness and nausea, and an onset of migraines.  Given the Veteran's consistent lay statements concerning her experience of MST during service and the finding by the VA mentioned above, that markers exist in the record that suggest an MST event occurred in service, the Board will, at this time, develop the claim with the factual premise that the Veteran experienced MST during service. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2024.  The examiner opined that despite reported symptoms, the Veteran does not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD, and there is no evidence of MST in her records, making it less likely than not that the evidence of record aligns with the occurrence of an MST stressor event.  The examiner continued that although the Veteran currently meets the criteria for major depressive disorder, this disorder is linked to previous marital stressors rather than MST, as per the Veteran's report, and it is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

The Board finds that the March 2024 opinions are inadequate as they appear to be based on the premise that the Veteran did not experience MST during service, as the examiner stated that there is no evidence of MST in the Veteran's records.  However, as mentioned above, the Board notes that the evidence of record includes consistent lay statements from the Veteran regarding her experience of MST during service and a finding by VA that markers exist in the Veteran's service treatment records that suggest an MST event occurred in service.  As such, the opinions are inadequate as they are based on an inaccurate factual premise and a remand is warranted in order to obtain an adequate opinion. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claim file along with a copy of this REMAND to a clinician with appropriate expertise to provide an opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder.  The examiner should conduct a thorough review of the claim file and note such review was conducted.  Thereafter, the examiner should provide an opinion as to the following:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depressive disorder, is related to her active service?

				(Continued on next page)

The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's lay statements on experiencing MST during service and the February 2024 personal trauma incident/marker worksheet that indicated that markers exist in the record that suggest an MST event occurred in service as there is evidence in the Veteran's service treatment records of instances of treatment for miscellaneous injuries in the months following the reported MST event including treatment for a laceration/bump on the head requiring stitches, unexplained dizziness and nausea, and an onset of migraines. 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Melissa Cook, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.