Citation Nr: A25030688
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230413-343617
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The appeal concerning the claim for service connection a back disorder is dismissed.

The appeal concerning the claim for service connection a right foot disorder is dismissed.

The appeal concerning the claim for service connection a left foot disorder is dismissed.

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Service connection for a heart disorder, claimed as chest pain, is denied.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with anxiety and depression is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for a right shoulder disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a left shoulder disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a right hand disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a left hand disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a right ankle disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a left ankle disorder is remanded.

Service connection for a respiratory disorder is remanded.

Service connection for headaches is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In light of the December 2023 rating decision that granted service connection for a lumbosacral strain and bilateral metatarsalgia, there remains no matter in controversy as to these issues.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his tinnitus manifested within one year of separation from active service as a result of in-service noise exposure.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a heart disorder at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The Veteran's PTSD with anxiety and depression is directly related to an in-service assault.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of appeal of the claim for service connection for a back disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for dismissal of appeal of the claim for service connection for a right foot disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for dismissal of appeal of the claim for service connection for a left foot disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

5. The criteria for service connection for a heart disorder, claimed as chest pain, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for PTSD with anxiety and depression have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2018 to August 2021.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the April 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for service connection for a back disorder, right foot disorder, left foot disorder, PTSD, tinnitus, and a heart disorder, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the remaining claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran listed insomnia on the April 2023 VA Form 10182. However, the March 2023 rating decision on appeal did not adjudicate a claim for service connection for insomnia. Thus, an appeal of that issue is not properly before the Board.

Dismissal

In a December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for a lumbosacral strain and bilateral metatarsalgia, effective August 18, 2021, the day after the Veteran's discharge from active duty. The post-service medical evidence does not show any other diagnoses with respect to the back or feet. In light of that decision granting service connection for a back disorder, right foot disorder, and left foot disorder, there remains no matter in controversy as to these matters. Accordingly, the appeal of these matters must be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104(a), 7105(d)(5).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Service connection requires competent evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) the incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury during service; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Where a Veteran served for 90 days or more of active service, service incurrence shall be presumed for certain chronic diseases, including organic diseases of the nervous system, if the disease manifested to a compensable degree within one year from the date of separation from active service. Sensorineural hearing loss is an organic disease of the nervous system. Tinnitus is deemed an organic disease of the nervous system when there is evidence of acoustic trauma. Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015). While the disease does not need to be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown by acceptable lay or medical evidence that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time. The presumption is rebuttable by affirmative evidence to the contrary. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Tinnitus

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated his tinnitus was due to in-service noise exposure from light medium tactical vehicles, the gun range, and machines in the motor pool.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not show any complaints, findings, or diagnoses of tinnitus. His service discharge form shows he served as an automated logistical specialist, which the Board observes is similar to a laborer or freight mover, performing maintenance management and warehouse functions. December 22, 2022 DPRIS Response.

At a February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus began one year ago, noticing it while speaking to his significant other one day. He reported in-service noise exposure from the motor pool, warehouse, power tools, machinery, vehicles, and cranks. He reported post-service noise exposure from firearms, heavy machinery, power tools, chain saws, and wood work and working in construction, landscaping, asphalt work, and welding. The examiner stated tinnitus can result from many things, including hearing loss, medications, noise exposure, and injury. The examiner stated delayed onset tinnitus due to noise exposure is unlikely to occur and tinnitus was not reported during service time. The examiner noted that the Veteran is exposed to hazardous noise without hearing protection at his current job. The examiner noted that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) has a low probability of hazardous noise exposure. The examiner observed that there was no significant threshold shift in either ear during service and hearing remained within normal limits. The examiner concluded the Veteran's tinnitus is not due to an event during service.

In the March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ conceded the Veteran's exposure to hazardous noise in service based on his MOS of automated logistics. The AOJ also acknowledged the Veteran has been diagnosed with tinnitus. Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise related to service, to include conceded noise exposure.

The Board notes that the examiner opined the Veteran's tinnitus was not due to in-service noise exposure. However, as the examiner stated the Veteran's MOS only indicated a low probability of hazardous noise exposure, it is unclear whether the examiner properly considered the Veteran's conceded in-service noise exposure in rendering the opinion. In that regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to give evidence about observable symptoms such as tinnitus. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). At the examination, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus began one year ago, which would date the onset of his tinnitus to February 2022, six months after separation from service. In light of the circumstances in this case, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that his tinnitus manifested within one year of separation from active service as a result of in-service noise exposure. 38 U.S.C. § 5107. Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

Heart disorder 

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he had chest pain from the coughing associated with upper respiratory infections and being in a cold environment at Fort Carson.

At a February 2023 VA heart conditions examination, the Veteran reported chest pain, chest tightening, and sickness, which the examiner indicated were respiratory in nature; the Veteran reported he did not know the impact of his current symptoms. Examination revealed no abnormalities. The examiner noted that recent electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and chest X-rays were normal. The examiner stated the Veteran denied experiencing any symptoms attributable to a cardiac condition with physical activity. The examiner noted the Veteran's report of chest pain but indicated he does not have a current heart condition. The examiner stated there is no diagnosis of a heart condition because there are no findings, signs, or symptoms to support a diagnosis. In a separate medical opinion, the examiner concluded the claimed condition was not incurred in or caused by service as there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis.

VA treatment records likewise do not show that the Veteran has a heart condition. Of note, while a November 2022 record reflects complaints of chest tightness, that was associated with an upper respiratory infection. December 22, 2022 CAPRI.

Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. In the absence of proof of present disability, there can be no valid claim. Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). Given the above, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a heart disorder at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. While the Veteran reported current symptoms, he did not know of or report any functional impairment of earning capacity associated with those symptoms.  As there is no disability that can be related to service, the claim for service connection for a heart disorder must be denied. While the evidence indicates the Veteran may have a respiratory disorder, that will be addressed below in the remand section. Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection for a heart disorder is not warranted. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

PTSD

In a December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he had PTSD due to in-service personal trauma. In an accompanying statement, he indicated he had PTSD from the way the service treated him regarding a domestic violence allegation and from being threatened by a fellow soldier with a gun, and from the way the service handled that situation. December 10, 2022 VA 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD.

Subsequent to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal and while this Board appeal was pending, the AOJ erroneously adjudicated Supplemental Claims on the issue of entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression received from the Veteran in April 2023 and November 2023.  While the AOJ initially continued to deny service connection in a June 2023 rating decision, the AOJ issued a January 2024 rating decision in which it granted service connection for PTSD to include anxiety and depression as directly related to an in-service personal assault, effective November 30, 2023.  The Veteran currently has a pending request for a Higher-Level Review of the January 2024 rating decision, seeking an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for PTSD.

The Board agrees that the entitlement to service connection for PTSD is warranted.  See Green v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 127, 136-48 (2024); Bailey v. Wilkie,

33 Vet. App. 188, 204 (2021); see also Warren v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 214, 221 (2016) (holding that a subsequent AOJ decision cannot divest the Board of jurisdiction over the prior appeal; therefore, an AOJ grant of service connection cannot finally decide the claim of service connection already on appeal to the Board).

A diagnosis of a mental disorder, including PTSD, must conform to the criteria of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). 38 C.F.R. § 4.125. There are requirements for establishing PTSD under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f), which are separate from those for establishing service connection generally. Arzio v. Shinseki, 602 F.3d 1343, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Service connection for PTSD requires (1) medical evidence diagnosing the disorder in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between the current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f). 

If a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than the veteran's service records may corroborate the veteran's account of the stressor incident. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5). Examples of such evidence include, in pertinent part: records from mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians; statements from family members; and evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5). 

A November 2022 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran's complaints of anxiety that he attributed to hate speech from a drill sergeant before leaving the Army. A November 2022 VA mental health consult reflects complaints of worsening anxiety and depression that started during his childhood but worsened in the past four years after his divorce. He reported childhood physical abuse by his stepfather. He was diagnosed with PTSD, major depressive disorder, and anxiety. December 22, 2022 CAPRI.

A February 2023 VA mental health consult reflects the Veteran's report of childhood physical abuse and an in-service event during which a fellow soldier drove over a line of animals while he was a passenger in the vehicle. The clinician noted possible delusional thoughts related to what people may or may not have done to him in service and present day and indicated they needed to be ruled out. The clinician provided a diagnosis of PTSD rule out psychotic disorder and placed a new consult with the next available therapist. March 22, 2023 CAPRI.

Given the above, the Veteran seeks service connection for PTSD due to the way the Army handled a domestic violence allegation and his report of being threatened by a fellow soldier, including that underlying incident. The medical evidence reflects a diagnosis of PTSD and that it may be due in part to childhood physical abuse and the way people treated him in service, including hate speech from a drill sergeant. While a new consult to further evaluate the Veteran's psychiatric disorder had been placed, it was not accomplished by the time of the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. However, based on the AOJ's favorable finding in the January 2024 rating decision that the Veteran's PTSD to include anxiety and depression are related to being assaulted on duty by a fellow solider with a fire arm multiple times, , the Board finds that it is at least as likely as not he has PTSD related to an in-service personal assault. 38 U.S.C. § 5107. Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection for PTSD is warranted.

To the extent that other psychiatric disorders have been diagnosed, there is no indication that there are distinct psychiatric symptoms attributable to such disorders, and all psychiatric symptoms will therefore be attributed to the now service-connected PTSD. See Howell v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 535, 540 (2006); Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998) (VA must apply the benefit of the doubt doctrine and attribute the inseparable effects of a disability to the claimant's service-connected disability). Consequently, consideration of whether the Veteran's other psychiatric disorders are related to his military service is unnecessary.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. ?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).? 

Service connection for a right shoulder disorder 

Service connection for a left shoulder disorder 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for right and left shoulder disorders are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ did not provide a VA examination. However, based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the March 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinion were required to determine whether the Veteran had a disability of either shoulder that began in or was related to service.

In McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) provides that an examination or opinion is necessary if the evidence of record: 1) contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; and 2) establishes that the Veteran suffered an event, injury, or disease in service; and 3) indicates that the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the established event, injury, or disease in service, but 4) does not contain sufficient medical evidence for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. The Court noted that the third prong of 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) is a low threshold standard.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he had a bilateral shoulder disorder from carrying too much weight on his shoulders from the ruck sack and walking very long distances. 

As service treatment records did not show any complaints of shoulder problems, the AOJ did not provide the Veteran with an examination. However, the Veteran is competent to give evidence about observable symptoms such as shoulder pain. Layno, 6 Vet. App. 465. He also filed his claim less than one and one half years after separation from service, suggesting a temporal relationship. Lastly, while not asserted by the Veteran, his duties as an automated logistical specialist, similar to those of a laborer or freight mover, in a warehouse and at the motor pool may have added some stress on his shoulders. Thus, the AOJ should have provided him with an examination to obtain an opinion on the matters.

Service connection for a right hand disorder 

Service connection for a left hand disorder 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for right and left hand disorders are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained medical opinions in February 2023. However, the opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's hand disorders began in or were related to service.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he had hand pain, noting that his hands shake frequently, including while writing, and that started from the stress in service and going through a lot of trials.

At a February 2023 examination, the Veteran reported that the pain in his hands began in 2018. He indicated he noticed the pain while climbing ropes, shooting for long periods of time, exercising as in physical training, typing for a long time, and when out in the cold on canvas. He indicated his hands feel tense, knuckles ache, and fingertips and hands do not feel sturdy. He reported that he has not sought any treatment. He stated it is very hard to hold things or write for a long time. Range of motion testing revealed decreased range of motion of both thumbs but full flexion and extension of all fingers. The examiner noted the Veteran's report of hand pain but indicated he does not have a current hand condition. The examiner stated there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs, or symptoms to support one. In separate medical opinions, the examiner concluded the claimed conditions were not incurred in or caused by service as there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis.

While the examination revealed no limitation of motion of the fingers of either hand, there was limitation of motion of the thumbs, indicative of current disability. Also, the Veteran's report of difficulty holding things and writing for a long time indicates functional impairment. Moreover, a February 2023 VA treatment record, added to the claims file after the examination, reflects the Veteran's complaints of left hand stiffness and pain for about a month when he comes in from the cold, primarily in the metacarpal bones that make the fingers lock, and color changes in the fingers. He reported a history of several hand sprains as well as symptoms that resembled frostbite during service. The clinician suspected secondary Raynaud's syndrome and requested laboratory workup to rule out primary Raynaud's disease. March 22, 2023 CAPRI. 

Given the above, despite the examiner's conclusion there was no musculoskeletal disorder of the hands, the evidence of record, including the Veteran's report at the examination, indicated a disability of the hands in terms of functional impairment. Examination also showed limitation of motion of the thumbs. Thus, the AOJ should have requested supplemental opinions taking the above into account. In that regard, service treatment records show the Veteran injured his right hand when he fell off a skateboard in November 2020. Specific to Raynaud's syndrome/disease, the AOJ should have provided the Veteran with an examination for diseases of the arteries and veins to clarify whether the Veteran had that disorder and whether it began in or was related to service. In that regard, while service treatment records do not show any complaints regarding frostbite, on the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated his hands started to shake in service and he served in a cold climate. Lastly, as noted above, the Veteran's filing of his claim less than a year and a half after separation suggests a temporal relationship and his duties as an automated logistical specialist in a warehouse and at the motor pool may have added some stress on his hands.

Service connection for a right knee disorder 

Service connection for a left knee disorder

The issues of entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disorders are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained medical opinions in February 2023. However, the opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's knee disorders began in or were related to service.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he developed knee strains from hitting the sides of his knees on the inside of the light tactical vehicles while driving for long hours. 

At a February 2023 examination, the Veteran reported that he developed bilateral knee pain in 2018, waking up with inflammation in the back of both knees, having a weird movement in the knees, and pulling the sides of both knees. The examiner provided a diagnosis of right and left knee strains. In separate medical opinions, the examiner concluded the Veteran's knee strains were not incurred in or caused by service. The examiner explained that the service treatment records revealed no record of treatment for the knees.

While the Board appreciates the examiner's opinions, they were not based on a complete review of the claims file. Service treatment records show the Veteran injured his left knee when he fell off a skateboard in November 2020. In addition, a November 2022 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of having had bilateral knee pain since boot camp. December 22, 2022 CAPRI. The record also is unclear whether the examiner properly considered the Veteran's statement on his December 2022 claim that he developed knee strains from hitting the sides of his knees on the inside of the light tactical vehicles while driving for long hours. Thus, the AOJ should have requested a supplemental opinion that considered the above. The Board reiterates that the Veteran's filing of his claim less than a year and a half after separation suggests a temporal relationship and his duties in a warehouse and the motor pool may have added some stress on his knees.

Service connection for a right ankle disorder 

Service connection for a left ankle disorder 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for right and left ankle disorders are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained medical opinions in February 2023. However, the opinions do not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's ankle disorders began in or were related to service.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he sprained his ankle when he fell down the steps in the motor pool while counting inventory and he rolled his ankle twice at the National Training Center.

At a February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran indicated he injured his ankles in 2019 during physical training and noticed some elasticity in the sides of the ankles. The examiner provided a diagnosis of bilateral chronic/recurrent lateral collateral ligament sprain. In separate opinions, the examiner concluded the Veteran's ankle strains were not incurred in or caused by service, noting that the service treatment records revealed no record of treatment for the ankles.

While the Board appreciates the examiner's opinions, they were not based on a complete review of the claims file. Service treatment records show the Veteran injured his right ankle when he tripped on the stairs in September 2019. Also, a February 2023 VA treatment record shows a history of ankle pain for two or so years. March 22, 2023 CAPRI. The record also is unclear whether the examiner properly considered the Veteran's statement on his December 2022 claim that he rolled his ankle twice during training. While he did not specify which ankle he rolled, he indicated at the examination he injured both ankles during training, and such would be consistent with his overall claim for service connection for right and left ankle disorders. Thus, the AOJ should have requested a supplemental opinion that considered the above. The Board reiterates that the Veteran's filing of his claim less than a year and a half after separation suggests a temporal relationship and his duties in a warehouse and at the motor pool may have added stress on his ankles.

Service connection for a respiratory disorder 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disorder is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ did not provide an examination specific to a respiratory disorder. However, based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the March 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinion were required to determine whether the Veteran had a respiratory disorder that began in or was related to service.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated he had a respiratory disorder from being shipped out to different weather conditions that resulted in many upper respiratory infections. He also indicated he had chest pain from the coughing associated with upper respiratory infections and being in a cold environment at Fort Carson. 

A November 2022 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of having frequent upper respiratory infections, having been treated with antibiotics a few times, and current symptoms of chest tightness, a productive cough, intermittent sore throat, and low grade fever. The clinician prescribed Mucinex, which the Board observes is used for coughs and chest congestion. December 22, 2022 CAPRI.

As noted earlier, the AOJ provided the Veteran with a heart conditions examination in February 2023, at which time he reported chest pain, chest tightening, and sickness, which the examiner indicated were respiratory in nature. There were no cardiovascular abnormalities on examination and the examiner indicated the Veteran does not have a heart condition. Given the Veteran's reports of chest pain and chest tightness, and the examiner's indication those symptoms were respiratory in nature, the AOJ should have provided the Veteran with a respiratory conditions examination to obtain an opinion on whether he had a respiratory disorder that began in or was related to service. The Board reiterates that the Veteran's filing of his claim less than a year and a half after separation suggests a temporal relationship. The AOJ also should have requested an opinion as to the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). The Veteran indicated on his claim that he worked at the motor pool and at the February 2023 examination on tinnitus that he worked in a warehouse, both of which would have associated exposures.

Service connection for headaches

The issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2023 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ provided an examination and obtained an opinion in February 2023. However, the examination is inadequate and the opinion does not provide an adequate rationale regarding whether the Veteran's headaches began in or were related to service.

On the December 2022 claim for disability compensation, the Veteran indicated his headaches were from overly thinking and too much stress in service. 

At a February 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his headaches began in 2018.  There is a note in the medical history section relaying that the headache worksheet provided to the scribe was blank. The examiner indicated the Veteran does not experience headache pain. The examiner indicated the Veteran does not have and has not been diagnosed with a headache condition. In a separate medical opinion, the examiner concluded the claimed condition was not incurred in or caused by service as there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis.

Initially, in light of the note that the headache worksheet provided to the scribe was blank, the Board is unable to find that the VA examination report is adequate. Also, the Board finds troubling the examiner's indication the Veteran does not experience headache pain and that a diagnosis, even of tension headaches, was not rendered or a comment as to the headaches being associated with another underlying condition not made. Thus, the AOJ should have provided the Veteran another examination. 

As before, the AOJ should request an opinion as to whether the Veteran has a headache disability from the head injury when he fell off a skateboard. The AOJ also should have requested an opinion as to the Veteran's TERA. The Veteran indicated on his claim that he worked at the motor pool and at the February 2023 examination on tinnitus that he worked in a warehouse.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any disorder of the right or left shoulder. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. 

(a.) The examiner should state whether the Veteran has had a disability of either shoulder, by diagnosis or functional impairment, at any time during the period on appeal (since December 2022), even if resolved.

(b.) As to each shoulder disability identified, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disability had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include carrying a heavy ruck sack and walking very long distances and his duties as an automated logistical specialist in a warehouse and at the motor pool. 

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records and VA medical records. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

2. Request a supplemental opinion from the VA examiner who completed the hand and fingers examination in February 2023.

(a.) The examiner should state whether the Veteran has had a disability of either hand, by functional impairment due to pain, at any time during the period on appeal (since December 2022), even if resolved.

(b.) As to each hand disability identified, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disability had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include an injury to the right hand in November 2020 and his duties as an automated logistical specialist in a warehouse and at the motor pool.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records showing an injury to the right hand in November 2020 and VA medical records showing complaints of left hand stiffness and pain in February 2023. March 22, 2023 CAPRI. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an arteries and veins conditions examination to determine the nature and etiology of any disorder of the right or left hand, to include Raynaud's syndrome. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not any disorder of the right or left hand had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include serving in a cold climate and his hands shaking when writing due to stress. 

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records and VA medical records showing complaints of left hand stiffness and pain and suspected Raynaud's syndrome in February 2023. March 22, 2023 CAPRI. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. See December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

4. Request a supplemental opinion from the VA examiner who completed the knee examination in February 2023. The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not any disorder of the right or left knee had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include an injury to the left knee in November 2020, hitting the sides of his knees on the inside of light tactical vehicles, and his duties as an automated logistical specialist in a warehouse and at the motor pool.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records showing an injury to the left knee in November 2020 and VA medical records showing a history of bilateral knee pain since boot camp reported in November 2022. December 22, 2022 CAPRI. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

5. Request a supplemental opinion from the VA examiner who completed the ankle examination in February 2023. The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not any disorder of the right or left ankle had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include injuring the right ankle on the stairs, rolling the ankles during training, and his duties as an automated logistical specialist in a warehouse and at the motor pool.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records showing an injury to the right ankle in September 2019 and VA medical records. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

6. Schedule the Veteran for a respiratory conditions examination to determine the nature and etiology of any respiratory disorder. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not any respiratory disorder had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include his report of having had frequent upper respiratory infections while serving in a cold climate and working at the motor pool and in a warehouse.

The examiner must consider a) the total potential exposures at the motor pool and warehouse; and b) the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERA. The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the Veteran's claimed disability and the TERA.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records and VA medical records showing complaints of frequent upper respiratory infections, some requiring antibiotics, and current symptoms of chest tightness, a productive cough, intermittent sore throat, and low grade fever in November 2022. December 22, 2022 CAPRI. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. See December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

7. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any headache disorder. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report.

(a.) If a headache disorder is diagnosed, then the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the disorder had its onset during active service or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service, to include the fall from the skateboard and working at the motor pool and in a warehouse.

(b.) If a headache disorder is not diagnosed, then the examiner should state whether the Veteran's headaches are a symptoms of another underlying disorder.

The examiner must consider a) the total potential exposures at the motor pool and warehouse; and b) the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERA. The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the Veteran's claimed disability and the TERA.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records showing complaints of a headache in November 2020 after the skateboard accident and VA medical records. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. December 10, 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.W. Kim

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.