Citation Nr: A25030694
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240524-443630
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability, to include foot pain, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current left knee disability.

2. The evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current left ankle/foot disability.

3. The evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current TBI disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left ankle/foot disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a TBI have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2000 to April 2010.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider with regard to her claim, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Generally, service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A current disability exists when a veteran has the disability at the time that the claim for service connection is filed or at any point during the pendency of the claim.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); see also Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013). 

Pain in conjunction with functional loss can constitute a disability for purposes of service connection.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the claimant will receive the benefit of the doubt.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is warranted.

The first element of service connection is the existence of a current disability.  VA received the service connection claim in March 2022.  Evidence in favor of a current disability includes the following.  When submitting the service connection claim, the Veteran reported a left knee.  See March 2022 Fully Developed Claim.  Notably, the Veteran did not report any further details about the supposed disability at that time, including what the disability was, whether there was pain, and whether there was functional loss.  

Evidence against a current disability includes the following.  The April 2023 VA knee examination did not find a left knee disability, did not find pain, and did not find functional loss.  The examination found that there was no evidence of a left knee disability.  See May 2023 C&P Exam.  The Board notes that the Veteran did not report any functional loss from the left knee at that time.  Additionally, it does not appear that any medical records around the time of the claim or during the appeal period show left knee problems.  The Board finds this medical evidence highly probative.

The Board has carefully reviewed the record, including the above evidence, and finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current left knee disability.  Specifically, the Board finds the medical evidence of record highly probative concerning no current disability or pain resulting in a functional loss, and the Veteran has not identified a current disability or reported pain resulting in a functional loss.  

In the absence of proof of a current disability due to disease or injury, there can be no valid claim.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). Therefore, discussion of the remaining criteria for service connection is not warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability, to include foot pain, is denied.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a left ankle/foot disability is warranted.

The first element of service connection is the existence of a current disability.  VA received the service connection claim in March 2022.  Evidence in favor of a current disability includes the following.  When submitting the service connection claim, the Veteran reported a left ankle disability, to include foot pain.  See March 2022 Fully Developed Claim.  Notably, the Veteran did not report any further details about the supposed disability at that time, including what the disability was and whether there was functional loss.  

During April 2023 VA ankle and foot examinations, the Veteran apparently reported taking ibuprofen for the ankles and that with cold weather or significant amounts of hiking, there would be pain in the feet.  The Board notes that the Veteran did not report functional loss at that time.  The April 2023 VA foot examination found left foot pain during flare-ups.  An opinion stated that the left foot and ankle had trauma during service and that a nexus had been established.  See May 2023 C&P Exam.  

The Board finds the Veteran competent to report pain and finds the reports credible.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  

Evidence against a current disability includes the following.  The April 2023 VA ankle examination did not find a left ankle disability, did not find pain, and did not find functional loss.  The ankle examination found that there was no subjective or objective evidence to support a left ankle diagnosis.  The Board notes that the Veteran did not report any functional loss from the left ankle.  

Additionally, although the April 2023 VA foot examination found left foot pain during flare-ups, it also found that the flare-ups did not result in functional loss, and it did not find a left foot disability.  The Board notes that the Veteran apparently did not report any functional loss from the left foot pain.  It also does not appear that any medical records around the time of the claim or during the appeal period show left ankle or left foot problems.  The Board finds the above medical evidence highly probative.  

Furthermore, although the April 2023 VA examination stated that there was a left foot and left ankle injury during service and that a nexus had been established, such was not possible because the examinations had found that there was no current left foot disability, no current left ankle disability, and no functional loss.  As such, the Board finds the opinion about a nexus not probative.  The Board also notes that the opinion may have mistakenly mentioned the left foot and ankle instead of the right foot and ankle since the rest of that opinion appears to only discuss a right foot disability, which service connection has since been granted for.

The Board has carefully reviewed the record, including the above evidence, and finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current a left ankle/foot disability.  Specifically, the Board finds the medical evidence of record highly probative concerning no current disability or pain resulting in a functional loss, and the Veteran has not identified a current disability or apparently reported pain resulting in a functional loss. 

In the absence of proof of a current disability due to disease or injury, there can be no valid claim.  See Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 223 (1992). Again, discussion of the remaining criteria for service connection is therefore not warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle/foot disability is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a TBI is denied.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a TBI is warranted.

The first element of service connection is the existence of a current disability.  VA received the service connection claim in March 2022.  Evidence in favor of a current disability includes the following.  When submitting the service connection claim, the Veteran reported a TBI disability.  See March 2022 Fully Developed Claim.  Notably, the Veteran did not report any further details about the supposed disability at that time.  

Medical records from 2022 showed that the Veteran may have been looking to claim a disability of head trauma.  See February 2022 Medical Treatment Record.  Notably, the Veteran did not report any further details about head trauma at that time.     

The Board finds that the Veteran is not competent to report having a TBI, as the question of whether a TBI exists does not lie within the range of common experience or common knowledge and requires special experience or special knowledge in that medical field.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  As the evidence does not show that the Veteran has this medical expertise, the Veteran's lay assertions of a medical diagnosis cannot constitute evidence upon which to grant the claim for service connection.

Evidence against a current disability includes the following.  An April 2023 VA TBI examination found no current disability and that the Veteran had never had a TBI.  The official criteria for a TBI were not met. Furthermore, no signs or symptoms, or other residual functional impairment related to a TBI or head injury were identified on examination. No service treatment records following the Veteran's reported head injury during service indicated any symptoms or residuals typically seen in a TBI.  See May 2023 C&P Exam.  Additionally, it does not appear that any medical records around the time of the claim or during the appeal period show a TBI or residuals of a head injury.  The Board finds this medical evidence highly probative.

The Board has carefully reviewed the record, including the above evidence, and finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current TBI disability.  

In the absence of proof of a current disability due to disease or injury, there can be no valid claim, and the remaining criteria for service connection need not be discussed.  See Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 223 (1992).

Entitlement to service connection for a TBI is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for left and right hip disabilities is warranted.

An April 2023 VA hip examination found that the left and right hip disabilities were not related to service because there was an absence of service treatment records for medical evaluation.  See May 2023 C&P Exam.  The Board finds this opinion inadequate because it was based solely on the absence of evidence in the service treatment records.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 39 (2007).

Therefore, a remand is needed for a VA medical addendum opinion.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is warranted.

An April 2023 VA knee examination found that the right knee disability was not related to service because the "right knee" began during training, following a hard landing after fast roping.  The Veteran reported that the knee was swollen at the time.  There were no service treatment records to review.  An MRI in 2012 showed chondromalacia patella.  See May 2023 C&P Exam.  

The Board finds this opinion inadequate because it did not provide an adequate rationale and did not consider or address all of the relevant evidence of record.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Specifically, it seems like the opinion was stating that the right knee disability began during service, and thus, would seem to be related to service.  The opinion did not actually explain why the right knee disability did not have its onset in service.  Additionally, the examiner indicated that there were service treatment records to review, which suggests that service treatment records were not considered.  Finally, the opinion did not consider or address service treatment records which may show pain in the knees.  See February 2022 STR.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.     

Therefore, a remand is needed for a VA medical addendum opinion.    

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain one or more VA medical addendum opinions from an appropriate examiner for the Veteran's (a) left hip, (b) right hip, and (c) right knee claims.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  Inform the examiner that "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Following a review of the claims file and a copy of this remand, the reviewing examiner is requested to furnish an opinion with respect to the following:

(A) Identify all (a) left hip, (b) right hip, and (c) right knee related disabilities which have existed at any point since March 2022, even if they became asymptomatic or resolved during the appeal period.

(B) For each identified disability, is it at least as likely as not that such disability had its onset in, or is otherwise related to service, including but not limited to, the motor vehicle accident during service and/or the Veteran's MOS?

A complete rationale for all opinions offered should be provided.  Address the Veteran's documented history and assertions.

All necessary tests and studies should be conducted.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation stating why.  In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is due to the limits of the medical community's knowledge or due to the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which the Veteran has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

G. E. Wilkerson

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dougan, Adam T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.