Citation Nr: A25030343
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-468196
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for chronic myelogenous leukemia is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from January 1986 to September 1994.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for leukemia, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection for Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia 

The Veteran contends that his leukemia is due to his Gulf War service, to include his exposure to burn pits and other toxins in service. Here, a remand is required to correct a duty to assist error--to obtain an adequate medical opinion so that VA may determine the etiology of the Veteran's leukemia.

The Board notes that the August 2023 rating decision lists favorable findings related to the Veteran's claim, to include that he performed service in Southwest Asia from August 1990 to July 1991, that he has a current diagnosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia, and that he was exposed to toxins during his military service. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) does not reveal complaints or treatment for leukemia or symptoms related to leukemia, or a diagnosis of leukemia.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his leukemia in May 2023. However, in August 2023, the examiner provided an opinion that cannot be used to deny the Veteran's claim, as it lacks an adequate rationale. The examiner stated that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a causal relationship between the development of chronic myelogenous leukemia and toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs). Without providing any details or specifics, the examiner also stated that other factors outside of military service, i.e., hereditary, post-military, congenital, occupational, and lifestyle (smoking), outweigh the TERA factors identified. The examiner did not show how these factors specifically relate to the Veteran, or how they relate to the Veteran's current diagnosis of leukemia. The examiner then concluded that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's leukemia was caused by the indicated TERAs, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities. 

A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). Here, as the examiner did not provide a rationale that is sufficient to support the conclusion given-one that can be used to make a well-informed decision on this claim-the Board finds the August 2023 medical opinion (the only medical opinion of record) to be inadequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) ("Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim, VA must provide an adequate one"). Not affording the Veteran an adequate medical opinion, when one is required and requested, is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, for which the Board finds a remand is necessary to correct. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his chronic myelogenous leukemia. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, and note such review in the examination report. All necessary tests and studies should be conducted, and the findings reported in detail.

After evaluating and interviewing the Veteran, and reviewing the claims file, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that chronic myelogenous leukemia had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's active service, to include the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activities during service.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is asked to consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's military deployment and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

The examiner should consider the Veteran's specific military history, medical history, risk factors, and any other circumstances deemed relevant by the examiner in rendering an opinion.

The examiner must not rely solely on the absence of diagnosis or treatment in service, or the lack of medical documentation, as the basis for a negative opinion. 

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.