Citation Nr: A25030543
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240315-424301
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for low back disability, claimed as low back pain, is denied.

REMANDED

An initial compensable evaluation for broken teeth is remanded.

An initial compensable evaluation for scar to chin is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for infection, claimed as stitches/infection, to include enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a ow back disability that began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for low back disability, claimed as low back pain, are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1986 to March 1992. See DD 214 See Military Personnel Records (August 2023). The Veteran is a Persian Gulf veteran as he has qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e). See Military Personnel Records (reflecting service in Saudi Arabia between August 1990 to January 1991 and from January 1991 to April 1991).  VA has conceded the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his SWA service. See Other (conceding presumptive toxic exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1119, specifically in Southwest Asia theatre of operations) (January 2023); VA Memo (conceding presumptive toxic exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 in Southwest Asia) (January 2023).

The rating decision on appeal was issued on March 2, 2024, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2, 2024, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for low back disability, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for broken teeth, entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for scar to chin, and entitlement to service connection for dental infection, claimed as stitches/infection, to include enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)); 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).

On August 10, 2022, the President of the United States signed into law the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (2022 PACT Act). Significantly, this legislation added requirements for record development of a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) and for VA examination and opinion where a TERA is implicated. Here, VA concedes the Veteran's participation in a TERA based on qualified deployment to the Southwest Asia theater of operations. See VA Memo (January 2023). However, a TERA examination is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma, and in this case, the Veteran asserts his back disability is a result of physical trauma during service as identified below. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). Therefore, the Board finds that the AOJ had no duty to obtain an examination and opinion prior to issuing the decision on appeal under 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Entitlement to service connection for low back disability. 

The Veteran contends his low back disability, claimed as low back pain, began during active duty in October 1987 while working on AMTRAC (amphibious track vehicle). See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) (October 2023). The Veteran also reports onset of his low back symptoms in 2011, described as low back pain and muscle spasms, when he "threw his back out one day at work." See C&P Exam (January 2024) (describes treatment as muscle relaxers and stretches).

VA has conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a low back disability of lumbosacral strain, as confirmed in the January 2024 Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). See C&P Exam (January 2024). The Board is bound by this favorable finding. See Rating Decision-Narrative (March 2024). 

The Board concludes that the persuasive evidence of record weighs against finding that the Veteran has a low back disability that had its onset during active duty service or is otherwise related to an injury, event, or disease incurred during active duty service. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

Turning to the facts, a June 1986 Report of Medical History (ROMH) and Report of Medical Examination (ROME) at enlistment reflect the Veteran denied having, or having had, recurrent back pain and reflects normal clinical evaluation for spine and other musculoskeletal.  STRs reflect no signs, symptoms, complaints, or abnormal pathology of the back. STRs reflect no indication of injury to the back or any injury involving an AMTRAC although service records show that he was assigned to the 1st Tracked Vehicle Battalion in 1987. See Military Personnel Records (MPRs) at 2 (August 2023). The Veteran was administratively separated effective March 1992. See STR - Medical at 8 (August 2023) (includes Board of Corrections of Naval Records review of Veteran's military service to include basis for administrative discharge; and determination for discharge upgrade to honorable).

Post service treatment records reflect no complaints or abnormal pathology of the back, although there are complaints for right great toe pain followed by podiatry,  and that he was a North Carolina state employee in 2022. An April 2021 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran presented to establish VA care and denied any chronic pain, musculoskeletal joint pain, and stiffness; at this time, he reported pain in his right great toe. An April 2022 VA treatment note reflects no spinal tenderness upon examination. See CAPRI (July 2023). An October 2023  VA emergency department note reflects that the Veteran presented for abdominal pain and denied flank pain. See CAPRI (December 2023).  A November 2023 VA treatment note reflects that the Veteran denied tenderness in the back. See CAPRI (December 2023). 

Following service discharge, the first documented indication of any low back condition is in October 2023-more than 30 years after service, on the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, VA disability claim. See VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (October 2023). 

A January 2024 Back (Thoracolumbar Spine) Conditions DBQ reflects a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain. See C&P Exam (January 2024). By history, the Veteran reported onset of low back symptoms in 2011, described as low back pain and muscle spasms, when he "threw his back out one day at work." See C&P Exam (January 2024) (describes treatment as muscle relaxers and stretches).

The Board finds that, although the Veteran has a diagnosed low back condition, the more persuasive evidence weighs against finding that his condition had its onset during active duty service or is related to in-service injury, event or disease. Neither the Veteran's STRs nor MPRs document any in-service back symptoms or history of injury during his active duty. The first indication of a low back disorder comes decades after service discharge and the Veteran has been an inconsistent historian as to the onset of symptoms.

The Veteran is competent to report that he injured his back and that symptoms had their onset in service. However, to the extent that the reports a 1987 AMTAC injury to his back with continuity of symptoms since service, the Board finds that this is less than credible as it is inconsistent with other evidence of record. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995) (noting that the credibility of a witness may be impeached by a showing of interest, bias, inconsistent statements, consistency with other evidence), aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). First, the Veteran has been an inconsistent historian as to onset of back symptoms and injury. He reported on his October 2023 VA disability claim that he injured his back injured his back working on an AMTRAC in October 1987; but he later reported during his VA back examination that his low back symptoms began in 2011 when he "threw his back out one day at work," roughly 19 years after service. Second, the Veteran denied symptoms involving his back during treatment encounters for other conditions. For instance, he denied any chronic pain, musculoskeletal joint pain, and stiffness during VA care in April 2021; he denied spinal tenderness in An April 2022; he denied flank pain in October 2023; and he denied tenderness in the back in November 2023 VA treatment note reflects that the Veteran. See CAPRI (December 2023). Plus, none of the Veteran's treatment records reflect any history of injury during his active duty service.

Given, the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports of both injury and continuity of symptoms are less than credible. Therefore, they have little probative value.

The record does not contain competent, credible evidence that the Veteran's diagnosed lumbosacral strain had its onset in service, or that the Veteran sustained an in-service injury with continuity of symptoms since service. The Veteran had not reasonably identified any relevant outstanding non-VA treatment records prior to the AOJ issuing the decision on appeal. The Veteran is reminded that VA's duty to assist is a two-way street.  If the Veteran wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential to establishing his claim.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991).

At this time, the more persuasive evidence of record weighs against the claim in view of the Veteran's most recent statement on examination that his symptoms began roughly 19 years after service when at work, coupled with the absence of any in-service complaints or findings, and the absence of any post-service documented complaints or findings, apart from those on the January 2024 Back DBQ.

On balance, the weight of the evidence is against the claim.

Accordingly, the claim is denied. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Lastly, the Board finds that the AOJ had no duty obtain a medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's back condition because there is not credible evidence of any in-service injury or symptoms. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). As discussed above, an in-service back injury has not been established.  Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010) (VA is not required to provide a medical examination when there is no credible evidence of an in-service event, injury, or disease). Other than the Veteran's report of injury and symptoms in service on his VA claim, there is no indication that he has a disability incurred in or related to his active duty service. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278-79 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (holding that conclusory lay assertion of nexus is insufficient to entitlement claimant to provision of VA medical examination). To the extent that the Board below remands for non-VA treatment records scanned into VA's electronic healthcare system, the VA treatment records make abundantly clear that these records are not relevant to any back disability, but rather pertain to his dental/oral cavity infection//disease claim; thus, remand would serve no useful purpose and only delay the Veteran from obtaining evidence to possibly substantiate his claim as well as filing a supplemental claim with new and relevant evidence. See Soyini v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 540, 546 (1991) (strict adherence to requirements of law is not warranted when adherence would result in unnecessarily imposing additional burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the veteran).  

REASONS FOR REMAND

VA will also consider all lay and medical evidence of record in order to adjudicate entitlement to benefits for the claimed condition as well as entitlement to any additional benefits for complications of the claimed condition[.] 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2). Here, the Veteran is unrepresented in these matters and the Board has broadly construed his claim for "stitches/infection" to include enlarged lymph nodes  and granulomata in view of the medical evidence submitted by the Veteran in support of his claim. Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79 (2009) (a claimant is not required in filing a claim for benefits to identify a precise medical diagnosis or the medical cause of his condition; rather, they sufficiently file a claim for benefits "by referring to a body part or system that is disabled or by describing symptoms of the disability.").

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions. Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand. 

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for broken teeth is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for scar to chin is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for dental infection, claimed as stitches/infection, to include enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma, is remanded. 

A March 2, 2024, rating decision granted service connection for broken teeth and for scar to chin, assigning initial noncompensable disability ratings effective October 13, 2023. This appeal arises from the Veteran's disagreement with the initial ratings assigned. See VA Form 10182 (March 2024). Thus, the rating review period begins on October 13, 2023-the date of the grant of service connection; and ends on March 2, 2024-the date of the rating decision on appeal. 

As to the claim for service connection for dental infection, claimed as stitches/infection, to include enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma, the Veteran contends this is due to or the result of a January 1991 infection while serving in Desert Storm, when the Veteran was injured by a tank hatch falling on his head, causing a laceration on his chin which required sutures. The Veteran further contends he first had an infection in his mouth and on the scar of his chin after a February 2022 tooth removal. After the February 2022 treatment, the Veteran asserts his infection returned due to a foreign object in the chin as a result of his in-service injury, requiring surgery in August 2023 to remove and treat. See Id.; VA 21-0781a, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD Secondary to Personal Assault; Military Personnel Record (August 2023); See Id: CAPRI (September 2019).    

The Veteran reports receiving dental surgery in February 2022 to treat an infected tooth near the chin and tooth in-service injury site. See CAPRI at 106 (the Veteran states "a tooth near the injury was infected 'from the inside' and was extracted by an oral surgeon who had to remove the tooth with a chisel") (March 2024). However, the Veteran did not provide specificity as to the name of the provider, date, or location of surgery. 

Service treatment records (STR) reflect that in May 1991 STR the Veteran had treatment for a broken tooth. See Military Personnel Record (MPR) at 19 (August 2023). A December 1991 STR reflects the Veteran had a staple removed with no signs or symptoms of infection or swelling. Id. at 6 (August 2023). The Veteran was administratively separated and it appears no separation examination was obtained. 

The first documented indication of an oral infection is in August 2023-more than 20 years after service, in an August 2023 VA primary care messaging note. See CAPRI at 17 (September 2023) (Veteran email correspondence reads "Dr. Hughley at Duke needs to do surgery on the inside of my mouth and the outside of my chin where the bacterial infection has set in and where a mass is located").

Private medical records from Duke Head and Neck Surgery and Communication Sciences, dated August 2023, reflect that the Veteran was referred by Dr. Schilke for evaluation of "enlarged lymph notes and a painful swelling inside the mouth". See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility (August 2023). By history, in February 2022, the Veteran had a tooth pulled that broke off, requiring chisel removal of broken tooth, that later worsened with swelling in June 2022 and, at that time, he noticed a lump under the chin that he thought would resolve. The lump did not resolve and increased in size-he notified his primary care provider in January 2023, and he had an ultrasound in July 2023 that showed enlarged lymph nodes with abnormal morphology.  CT in July 2023 showed multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes. An August 2023 biopsy revealed non necrotizing granulomata. At this evaluation, the Veteran noted that since his biopsy "he is no longer having pain with putting his flipper too on" and "noticed his neck lymph nodes have gotten smaller." The impression was bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy with concern for possible hematologic or metastatic malignancy.

VA treatment record, dated in August 2023, reflects an assessment of oral mucosa, anterior vestibule mouth, punch biopsy: "Squamous mucosa with non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, skeletal muscle, and focal minor salivary gland tissue. GMS and AFB stains are negative for micro-organisms. Negative for dysplasia and malignancy. See note. Note: The differential diagnosis includes sarcoidosis, exposure/toxins/trauma reaction, or inflammatory/autoimmune etiologies. Clinical correlation is recommended." A February 2024 note reflects a history of lower gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma excision, thought to be related to long standing foreign body reaction in early 90s from trauma; and past surgery in June 2023 to surgically remove mass at Duke Raleigh. Clinical evaluation of the oral cavity revealed "good dentition, missing mandibular incisor with removable prosthesis" and "gingivobuccal sulcus with submucosal fullness, firm, non mobile with no mucosal changes" along with "palpable submucosal right lower lip lesion, unchanged." 

These matters are remanded to correct a duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the March 2, 2024, rating decision.

First, VA has a duty to assist in making reasonable efforts to obtain records in the custody of a federal department or agency, including medical records from VA medical facilities. Here, VA treatment record, dated November 15, 2023, reflects Non-VA Care consult (completed by provider Dr Hughley) were scanned into the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA). See CAPRI at 46 (March 2024) (noting relevant care for oral vestibule lesion with Dr. Hughley at Duke ENT). However, the referenced records are not associated with the claims file and were within VA's constructive possession prior to the AOJ issuing the decision on appeal. Sullivan v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 786 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611 (1992).

Second, VA has a duty to make reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private records that the claimant adequately identifies.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(1).  The duty to assist is a "two-way street" wherein the claimant may be required to provide additional information or the necessary authorization for VA to obtain relevant records. Here, prior to the decision on appeal, the record reasonably identified relevant records of Dr. Schilke and Dr Hughley. Veteran-provided copies of private treatment records show that he had seen these providers in connection with his enlarged lymph nodes and granulomata, which are relevant to these claims. However, the AOJ did not obtain an authorization for release of these records prior to issuing the decision on appeal.

Third, VA's duty to assist claimants in the development of their claims includes obtaining an examination and/or opinion when necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Further, once an examination or opinion is obtained, VA must ensure that it is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that it is adequate). 

Here, the January 2024 VA-obtained Oral and Dental Conditions Including Mouth, Lips and Tongue Disability Benefit Questionnaire (Dental DBQ) reflects incongruent findings that the AOJ did not return for clarification. Specifically, the Dental DBQ reflects in one location that the Veteran has "Other dental or oral conditions, pertinent physical findings or scars due to dental or oral conditions" with an instruction that "if checked, complete #7 below". See C&P Exam at 3 (February 2024). However, it also reflects in another location that the Veteran does not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the conditions listed in the diagnosis. See C&P Exam at 2, 3 (January 2024) (the clinician subsequently marked "no" when answering #7, which asks "Does the Veteran have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the conditions listed in the diagnosis section above?").  There is no explanation for the seemingly incongruent findings. Thus, the Board finds the Dental DBQ is inadequate for adjudicative purposes as it is internally inconsistent and subject to differing interpretations. See Adams v. Principi, 256 F.3d 1318, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Also, the February 2024 Dental DBQ and opinion reflect that the Veteran had broken a couple of upper and lower anterior teeth, and lacerated chin-requiring stitches-in service; and that 30 years later the doctor found that he had an infection where the scar had been. The doctor removed the infection in August of 2023, but it returned about 2 months ago. It was noted that he is to see "Dr. Hughlee" his previous doctor and that VA had referred him out to another oral surgeon. The clinician opined that the claimed condition is at least as likely as not related to service.  The rationale was that:

... between a broken tooth, infection, and swelling, there is indeed a correlation between these conditions. Here are some key points: 

Broken Tooth: A broken or fractured tooth can occur due to trauma, decay, or biting on hard objects. When a tooth breaks, the protective outer layer (enamel) may be compromised, exposing the inner layers of the tooth, including the dentin and pulp. 

Infection: When a broken tooth is left untreated or not properly restored, bacteria can enter the exposed tooth structure and reach the dental pulp. The pulp contains nerves and blood vessels, and if infected, it can lead to an abscess or localized infection.

Swelling: Infection in the tooth can lead to localized swelling in the surrounding gums and tissues. The body's immune response to the infection causes increased blood flow and inflammation, resulting in swelling and tenderness.

Dental Treatment: To address a broken tooth with infection and swelling, it is important to seek dental treatment. Depending on the severity of the condition, treatment options may include dental fillings, root canal therapy, or extraction.

As to the claim for "infection," this medical opinion is inadequate because it does not clearly address the question of whether the Veteran's diagnosed enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma status post excision are due to or a result of his in-service broken teeth and/or infection after injury/stitches to the chin. The Veteran is separately rated for dental disability (broken teeth) and scar, chin (residual foreign object removal), but these awards do not take into account the Veteran's claim that he had other residual disability arising from the in-service broken teeth or infection (e.g., post service enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma).

Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist errors on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Associate a copy of the below private treatment record scanned into the VistA Imaging system.

VA treatment record, dated November 15, 2023, reflects Non-VA Care consult (completed by provider Dr Hughley) were scanned into VistA. See CAPRI at 46 (March 2024) (noting relevant care for oral vestibule lesion with Dr. Hughley at Duke ENT). H

2. Ask the Veteran to complete VA Form 21-4142 for relevant outstanding treatment records (1) Dr. Schilke and (2) Dr. Hughley at Duke Head and Neck Surgery and Communication Sciences. Make two requests for the authorized records from all identified sources unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile. 

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected broken teeth. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

The clinician should provide an addendum to the February 2024 Dental DBQ as to whether the Veteran has any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the condition.

Consider that the Veteran is service-connected for dental disability (broken teeth) and scar, chin (residual foreign object removal), but he believes that he has other residual disability arising from the in-service broken teeth or infection (e.g., post service enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma).

4. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the etiology of the Veteran's infection claim to include enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma, claimed as infection due to in-service broken teeth and/or removal foreign object from chin with infection and residual scar. 

The entire claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the clinician. The phrase "at least as likely as not" means the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal. 

Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran post service diagnosed enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma is at least as likely as not due to in-service broken teeth or removal foreign object from chin with infection. Explain. 

Address the Veteran's theory that his post service diagnosed enlarged cervical lymph nodes and/or gingivobuccal sulcus granuloma is a residual of service connected scar of the chin to include removal foreign object from chin with infection and/or broken teeth; or related to the underlying injury in service from a tank hatch slamming down on is head, causing broken teeth and laceration of the chin. 

 

 

C.A. SKOW

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kenney, K. A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.