Citation Nr: A25030547
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 201231-136013
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 60 percent for status post right knee replacement is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating of 60 percent for status post left knee replacement is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's status- post right knee replacement has been manifested by severe painful motion and weakness.

2. The evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's status- post left knee replacement has been manifested by severe painful motion and weakness.  

3. Throughout the rating period on appeal, degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine has been manifested by forward flexion of 30 degrees or less due to flare-ups and functional loss, without ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, with no showing of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating of 60 percent for status post right knee replacement have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5010-5055.

2. The criteria for a rating of 60 percent for status post left knee replacement have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5010-5055.

3.  The criteria for a rating of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

These matters came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2020 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) which denied increased ratings for status post right and left knee replacements and granted a 20 percent disability rating for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine, effective October 7, 2019.  In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  

In May 2024, the Board denied increased ratings for the knees and lumbar spine.  The Veteran filed a timely appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  Pursuant to an October 2024 Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) and Court Order, the Board's decision was vacated and remanded for action consistent with the JMR.  

In this decision, the Board will consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2020 rating decision, and evidence submitted within 90 days of the election of the Evidence Submission docket.  The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the VA Form 10182 was received.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

INCREASED RATINGS

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Rating Schedule. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

In the case of an initial rating, the entire evidentiary record from the time of a veteran's claim for service connection to the present is of importance in determining the proper evaluation of disability, and staged ratings are to be considered in order to reflect the changing level of severity of a disability during this period.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App.?119 (1999).  However, where entitlement to compensation has already been established and increase in disability rating is at issue, present level of disability is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

Additionally, the Board must consider whether the disability has undergone varying and distinct levels of severity while the claim has been pending and provide staged ratings during those periods.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).  In the case of a staged rating, the effective date of an increase will be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable from all evidence of record that an increase in disability had occurred.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or if there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, with the appellant prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against a claim, in which case, the claim is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.21.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

When evaluating the evidence of record, the Board must assess the credibility and probative value of the evidence, and, provided that it offers an adequate statement of reasons or bases, the Board may favor one medical opinion over another.  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991).

Bilateral knees

The Veteran is currently in receipt of separate 30 percent ratings for his service-connected right and left knee disabilities pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5010-5055.  He asserts that he is entitled to higher disability ratings.

The Board notes that during the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a were amended, effective February 7, 2021.  85 Fed. Reg. 230 (Nov. 30, 2020).  These amendments revised select diagnostic codes "to ensure that this portion of the rating schedule uses current medical terminology and provides detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities."  Id.

Under the previous version of Diagnostic Code 5055, a 100 percent rating is in effect for one year following implantation of knee prosthesis.  The current version of Diagnostic Code 5055 states that a 100 percent rating is to be assigned for four months following implantation of knee prosthesis or resurfacing.  After that period, under both the old and new criteria, a minimum 30 percent rating applies.  A 60 percent rating is assigned for chronic residuals consisting of severe painful motion or weakness in the affected extremity. Intermediate degrees of residual weakness, pain, or limitation of motion are to be rated by analogy to Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5261, or 5262.  

In this case, the Veteran underwent total right and left knee replacements in August 2012 and May 2013, respectively.  His increased rating claim was received in October 2019.  Thus, the 100 percent rating is inapplicable for the rating period on appeal.

Diagnostic Code 5256 provides ratings for ankylosis of the knee.  However, in this case, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has ankylosis of either knee, to include the functional equivalent of ankylosis.  Therefore, Diagnostic Code 5256 is inapplicable to this case.

Diagnostic Code 5261 provides a 30 percent rating for extension of the leg limited to 20 degrees, a 40 percent rating for extension limited to 30 degrees, and a 50 percent rating for extension limited to 45 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5262 applies to impairments of the tibia and fibula, including medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS, or shin splints) under the current criteria. However, in this case, the evidence does not indicate that the Veteran has any impairment of the tibia and fibula, including MTSS.  Therefore, Diagnostic Code 5262 does not apply to the present facts.

The Veteran underwent a C&P knee examination in March 2020.  He reported that he did not have daily pain since his knee replacement.  His left knee replacement was in May 2013 and his right knee replacement was in August 2012.  He reported that during flare-ups pain increases to a 7 on a 10- point scale.  The pain is sharp and anterior to bilateral knees.  Pain is due to being immobile for long periods of time, will last for 1-2 hours, and is relieved by changing position.  He had no functional loss or impairment.  Range of motion of both knees was normal, from 0 to 140 degrees.  There was no evidence of pain on examination.  There was no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue.  There was no evidence of pain with weight bearing nor objective evidence of crepitus.  There was no additional loss of motion with repetitive motion testing.  Pain, weakness, fatigability or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over a period of time.  Pain significantly limits functional ability with flare-ups resulting in flexion to 90 degrees in both knees; no limitation in extension was indicated.  Additional contributing factors were swelling and interference with standing and being in cars for long periods of time.  Muscle strength was normal in both knees.  There was no muscle atrophy.  There was no ankylosis.  There was no history of recurrent subluxation, lateral instability, or recurrent effusion.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had intermediate degrees of residual weakness, pain, or limitation of motion in both knees associated with his total knee joint replacements.  He did not use any assistive devices.  Functional impact includes prolonged sitting, walking and squatting.  There was objective evidence of pain when used in non-weight bearing.  Passive and active range of motion were the same.

A December 18, 2020 statement from the Veteran asserts that since his surgeries his knee symptoms have continued to worsen.  He reported that he experiences severe issues with pain, weakness, and limited movement in both knees, which drastically affects his mobility.  Frequently, he experiences knee pain so excruciating that it limits his ability to walk and perform other physical activities because he cannot bend his knees at all.  Going downstairs can be nearly impossible when he has these episodes.  The pain in his knees gets so bad that he can hardly bend it, and his knee essentially becomes locked.  02/05/2021 Correspondence.  

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a knee Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) completed by A.L., D.O., on December 29, 2020.  Dr. L. indicated that he reviewed the Veteran's claims file and sworn statements from the Veteran; it is not known if an in-person or telehealth examination was performed.  It was noted that the Veteran's knees have progressively worsened over time in regard to pain, stiffness, and periodic reductions in range of motion.  He experiences flare-ups of knees resulting in extreme pain and severe limitation of motion.  Flare-ups are usually associated with any periods of weight bearing, such as walking, standing and using stairs.  He reported pain and restricted motion causing difficulty ambulating.  Range of motion was normal, 0 to 140 degrees, with regard to both knees.  There was no change on repetitive motion testing.  There was no localized tenderness or pain to palpation of joints or soft tissue.  The Veteran reported pain on active and passive range of motion with weight bearing and non-weight bearing.  Contributing factors of disability include less movement than normal, pain on movement, disturbance of locomotion, and interference with standing.  Pain significantly limits functional ability during flare-ups resulting in flexion to 10 degrees in both knees.  The examiner commented that pain alone decreases his ability to perform activities of daily living.  Muscle strength was normal with no atrophy.  There was no ankylosis.  There was no history of recurrent subluxation, lateral instability, or recurrent effusion.  With regard to his total knee replacements, Dr. L. checked the box for 'chronic residuals consisting of severe painful motion or weakness.'  He does not use any assistive devices.  Dr. L. commented that the Veteran has chronic knee pain with frequent flare-ups that significantly limit his functional ability and activities of daily living.  During such exacerbations, the Veteran reports that he is unable to bend his knees even the slightest amount without significant pain, such that he is unable to walk, stand or sit for prolonged periods of time.  Dr. L. explained that virtually all chronic musculoskeletal conditions are subject to acute episodes of flares that can result in increased joint pain and consequent fatigue and reduced range of motion of the affected joints.  The periodic limitations reported by the Veteran are consistent with such flare-ups.  The ranges of motion reported reflect his best estimates of the functional impairment the Veteran experiences during flare-ups based on his knowledge of the onset and course of their condition and consideration of all evidence pertinent to such a determination, including the medical history and subjective descriptions.  The examiner noted consideration of prior treatment records and exams to accurately assess the severity of the Veteran's condition, including the medical history and subjective descriptions.  

After considering the evidence, the Board finds that separate disability ratings of 60 percent are warranted for the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities.  As detailed, during the March 2020 examination his range of motion was normal in both knees and reduced to 90 degrees during flare-ups, and were manifested by intermediate degrees of residual weakness, pain, or limitation of motion in both knees associated with his total knee joint replacements.  As detailed, the Veteran's December 2020 lay statement describes severe issues with pain, weakness, and limited movement in both knees which affects his mobility.  The Veteran had reported to the March 2020 examiner that he has pain after being immobile and with prolonged sitting, walking and squatting, while in December 2020 he reported that is knee pain is "so excruciating" that it limits his ability to walk, and descending stairs is "nearly impossible."  As detailed, in December 2020 Dr. L. found that his flexion in both knees was reduced to 10 degrees during flare-ups and that he had chronic residuals consisting of severe painful motion or weakness following his total knee replacements.  

While there is clearly a disparity in the findings contained in the March 2020 examination versus the December 2020 examination, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and based on his specific lay assertions regarding the severity of his knees, the Board will assign separate 60 percent disability rating per Diagnostic Code 5055.  Such ratings compensate the Veteran for severe residuals consisting of severe painful motion or weakness in the knees.  The 60 percent ratings in effect for the entire appeal period constitutes the maximum assignable rating following total knee surgery.  The Board need not consider whether higher or separate ratings are warranted as Diagnostic Code 5055 pertains specifically to evaluations of total knee replacement disabilities and the Veteran's disabilities will not be rated by analogy to any of the other diagnostic codes.  Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, at 337 (2015).  Even if it were possible to rate by analogy, the Veteran's left and right knee disabilities would remain at 60 percent.  Other than the assignment of a temporary 100 percent evaluation for one year following the implantation of a prosthesis, a 60 percent disability rating is the highest rating that can be assigned pursuant to the eight diagnostic codes applicable to the evaluation of knee and leg disabilities, in addition to the six diagnostic codes for rating disabilities involving prosthetic implants.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5256 to 5263 and 5051 to 5056.

The Board notes that Diagnostic Code 5055 suggests rating intermediate degrees of symptoms by analogy under 5256, 5261, or 5262.  The Board also recognizes that the Veteran's left and right knees have caused him pain and impacts his ability to engage in certain physical activities.  However, this is contemplated by the assigned 60 percent disability ratings, and, as stated above, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum rating for the residuals of his disability and to rate intermediate degrees of symptoms under 5256, 5261, or 5262 would only allow for a 30 percent rating.

Further, the "amputation rule" precludes the Board from assigning the Veteran a rating higher than 60 percent or any further separate ratings.  The "amputation rule" provides that the combined rating for disabilities of an extremity shall not exceed the rating for the amputation at that elective level, were amputation to be performed.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.68.  A 60 percent rating is provided for an amputation of the thigh, above the knee, at the middle or lower third.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, DCs 5162, 5163, 5164.  Because the Veteran's disabilities are in the knees, or below the middle third of the thigh, the amputation rule precludes a schedular evaluation in excess of 60 percent.

Lumbar spine

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 20 percent rating for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242.  He asserts that he is entitled to a higher rating.

Diagnostic Code 5242 applies the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula).

Under the General Rating Formula, a 20 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.

A 40 percent rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

Finally, a 100 percent rating is awarded for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

The Board notes that the February 7, 2021 amendments to the musculoskeletal rating criteria only changed Diagnostic Code 5242 in that the criteria now state that the Diagnostic Code does not apply to intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS).  There were no changes to the General Rating Formula.

The Veteran underwent a C&P spine examination in March 2020.  He reported lower back pain as a 3 on a 10-point scale.  The pain was aching, chronic, and occurred daily.  He experienced intermittent numbness and tingling to his right leg.  Pain is in his right hip and radiates in his leg.  During flare-ups, pain increased to an 8.  Pain was sharp, increases with daily activity, occurs at least once a week, lasts for 2-3 hours, and is relieved with rest, heat packs, and Tylenol.  

On range of motion testing, flexion was to 75 degrees with pain, and with normal extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right lateral rotation.  Functional loss affected squatting and prolonged walking.  There was no additional motion loss with repetitive use testing, and the examiner indicated that the Veteran would have no further loss after repeated use over time.  The examiner indicated that pain reduces flexion to 45 degrees and extension was limited to 15 degrees during flare-ups.  His combined thoracolumbar range of motion was 180 degrees during flare-ups.  There were no muscle spasms and no guarding.  He had less movement than normal, disturbance of locomotion, and interference with standing.  Functional loss affects prolonged walking, bending over, and squatting.  There was no evidence of ankylosis.  He had radiculopathy in the right lower extremity.  He does not have IVDS and does not use any assistive devices.  

In a December 18, 2020 statement the Veteran reported that his back condition is far more severe than reflected in the VA assessment.  He experienced frequent back pain, and his back goes out causing severe pain when he moves his back in any direction.  The pain could be so severe that it pretty much prevents any movement in his back.  He experienced flare-ups with heavy lifting and if he just moved the wrong direction.  The pain that follows could be completely immobilizing.  He reported that he has been experiencing these flares for years, with increasing frequency.  The flares lasted several hours to several days, during which the pain makes any sort of back movement impossible due to the pain.  During these periods, the pain and spasms made it nearly impossible to bend forward.  

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a back DBQ completed by Dr. L. in December 2020.  Dr. L. indicated that he reviewed the Veteran's claims file and statements from the Veteran; it is not known whether an in-person or telehealth examination was conducted.  The DBQ contains the same initial range of motion findings as those in the March 2020 VA examination.  However, Dr. L. stated that, after repeated use over time and during flare-ups, the Veteran would have his low back forward flexion limited to 25 degrees and his extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right lateral rotation limited to 20 degrees.  Thus, according to Dr. L., the Veteran would have had a combined thoracolumbar range of motion of 125 degrees during flare-ups and after repeated use over time.  There was no evidence of ankylosis.  Dr. L. stated that his range of motion estimates during flare-ups are based on his "knowledge of the onset and course of their condition and consideration of all evidence pertinent to such a determination, including the medical history and subjective descriptions."  

After considering the evidence, the Board finds that a 40 percent disability rating is warranted for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability.  As detailed, during the March 2020 examination flexion was to 75 degrees reduced to 45 degrees during flare-ups.  As detailed, the Veteran's December 2020 lay statement describes severe issues with pain and limited movement especially during flare-ups.  As detailed, in December 2020 Dr. L. found that flexion in the lumbar spine was reduced to 25 degrees during flare-ups.  While there is clearly a disparity in the findings contained in the March 2020 examination versus the December 2020 examination, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and based on his specific lay assertions regarding the severity of his lumbar spine, the Board will assign a 40 percent disability rating contemplating flexion 30 degrees or less.  This 40 percent rating contemplates forward flexion 30 degrees or less as a result of limitations of functional ability with flare-ups resulting in pain, fatigue, weakness, and lack of endurance.  Unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine is not shown, thus a rating in excess of 40 percent is not shown.  

The 40 percent disability rating constitutes the maximum compensable rating which could be assigned for limitation of motion as contemplated by 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Consideration has also been given to assigning a higher rating under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  However, he does not have IVDS and there is no indication that he has been prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes.   

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.