Citation Nr: A25030822
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240315-435213
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an arm disability, to include limited movement, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a knee disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for stress fractures of the bilateral feet is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for external hemorrhoids is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent prior to April 5, 2023, for right bicipital tendonitis, labral tear, including SLAP with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating of 40 percent from April 5, 2023, for right bicipital tendonitis, labral tear, including SLAP with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent prior to August 24, 2022, for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome is denied.

Entitlement to a rating of 40 percent from August 24, 2022, for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a chronic arm disability began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

2.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a chronic knee disability began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

3.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a chronic migraine headache disability began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

4.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a chronic bilateral foot disability began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

5.  The Veteran cancelled a VA hemorrhoid examination scheduled for February 2024 and made no showing of good cause.

6.  The Veteran cancelled a VA sinusitis examination scheduled for February 2024 and pulmonary function testing and x-rays as part of his June 2023 VA examination (considered necessary by the examiner to rate the sinusitis) and made no showing of good cause.

7.  Prior to April 5, 2023, the Veteran's right shoulder disability was manifested primarily by pain with resulting limited motion of the major extremity.

8.  Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, from April 5, 2023, the Veteran's right shoulder disability more closely approximated flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from the side.

9.  Prior to August 24, 2022, the evidence does not support that the Veteran's low back disability manifested in worsening spine symptomatology to the level required for a 40 percent or higher rating.

10.  From August 24, 2022, the evidence supports that the Veteran's low back disability manifested in worsening spine symptomatology to the level required for a 40 percent or higher rating.

11.  During the entire appellate time period, the Veteran's right and left lower extremity radiculopathy was manifested by pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, numbness, intermittently decreased sensation, and slightly decreased muscle strength.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an arm disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a knee disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability, to include stress fractures, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5.  The claim of entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for external hemorrhoids is denied as a matter of law.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

6.  The claim of entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for sinusitis is denied as a matter of law.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

7.  Prior to April 5, 2023, the criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for right bicipital tendonitis, labral tear, including SLAP with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5003-5201.

8.  From April 5, 2023, the criteria for a rating of 40 percent for right bicipital tendonitis, labral tear, including SLAP with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5201.

9.  Prior to August 24, 2022, the criteria for a rating greater than 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5237.

10.  From August 24, 2022, the criteria for a rating of 40 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5237.

11.  The criteria for a rating greater than 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, DC 8520.

12.  The criteria for a rating greater than 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from June 1991 to July 2002.

As to the shoulder, back, and right and left lower extremity radiculopathy claims, the rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

As to the remaining claims, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of these issues most recently addressed in prior rating decisions, from February 2021 and earlier.  In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 (shoulder, back, and right and left lower extremity radiculopathy) and February 2024 (arm, knee, migraine, feet, hemorrhoids, and sinusitis) AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Additional disabilities were listed on the March 2024 VA Form 10182 either were previously appealed in prior VA Form 10182s or were untimely, as the Veteran was informed by the AOJ in a March 2024 letter.  As such, these issues are not adjudicated herein.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

1.  Entitlement to service connection for an arm disability, to include limited movement

2.  Entitlement to service connection for a knee disability 

3.  Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches 

4.  Entitlement to service connection for stress fractures of the bilateral feet

The Veteran contends that he has arm, knee, migraine, and bilateral foot disabilities that were incurred in service or otherwise caused by service.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service if they were shown as chronic (reliably diagnosed) in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service, with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

In February 1991, the Veteran complained of left knee pain.  The assessment was left knee strain for the previous 6 days.  

In October 1991, the Veteran discussed right lower leg pain and right great toe pain.  The assessment was overuse right shin splints and contusion of the right great toe.  

In July 1992, the Veteran described right elbow pain.  In October 1993, the Veteran complained of right knee pain for the past 2 weeks.  The assessment was bursitis.  An April 1998 EMG test of the right upper extremity was normal.  An undated service treatment record documented right and left knee tendonitis.  

In February 2001, the Veteran reported a past history of stress fractures in both feet and migraines that were treated with shots.  A February 2001 Report of Medical History included a report of a history of foot trouble, knee trouble, and impaired use of the arms, legs, hands, or feet.  In a contemporaneous Report of Medical Examination, the Veteran had mild tenderness to palpation of the bilateral feet dorsally by the fifth metatarsophalangeal joint.  In March 2001, the Veteran reported a history of pain in the feet with prior stress fractures of both feet.  He had experienced pain and swelling in the feet on two occasions and had been told by a medical professional that he had stress fractures of the feet.  With 6 weeks of rest with no running the symptoms resolved.  Currently, he had increasing foot pain with any prolonged walking or any running activities.  Symptoms included a "bruise" sensation along the ball of the foot, which resolved with avoiding running for 2 weeks.  Examination of the feet showed no abnormal plantar callosities.  There was some hyperpronation with full weight bearing (though a flexible pes planus was present as well).  There was some mild migration of the plantar fat pad distal to the metatarsal head bilaterally and there was some tenderness to palpation of the metatarsal heads bilaterally.  The orthopedic diagnoses included bilateral foot pain, history of bilateral foot stress fractures, and bilateral patellar tendonitis.  

A May 2001 medical evaluation board proceedings noted diagnoses of bilateral patellar tendinitis (Childhood injury) (that existed prior to service), bilateral foot pain (from 1989), and history of bilateral foot stress fractures (from 1989).    

In a February 2002 Report of Medical History, the Veteran denied any foot trouble or "trick" or locked knee.  

In September 2002, the Veteran noted that he had recently separated from service and had past surgeries on both knees.  The assessment included multiple injuries, probably resulting in degenerative arthritis.  

In a September 2002 claim, the Veteran indicated that he had experienced knee pain form 1992 and had been treated for the knees from 1992 to 2002.  

A November 2002 VA general medical examination report included the Veteran's report of sustaining stress fractures to both feet during basic training that was documented in a bone scan.  He was treated with rest and the stress fractures appeared to have healed.  On examination, both feet appeared normal and there was no pes planus or pes cavus deformity.  Range of motion of the toes was normal.  The final diagnoses included status post stress fracture of both feet.  November 2002 x-rays of the feet noted a past history of bilateral stress fractures of the feet, but x-rays were normal.  

In July 2004, the Veteran discussed problems with knees and headaches.  On examination, the feet were in no active distress.  The assessment included arthralgia of the knees.  

In January 2007, past medical problems included knee pain and headaches.

In November 2008, the Veteran stated that 3 weeks previously he heard a popping noise in the right knee.  He had worn a knee brace in the past.  In December 2008, the Veteran discussed a past history of an arthroscopy of the right knee and migraine headaches.

In December 2013, the Veteran reported headaches that were similar to headaches experienced in the past.  

An August 2020 MRI report of the right knee noted that the Veteran had a history of knee arthroscopy in the 1990s and presented with medial right knee pain and effusion.  The impression was small horizontal tears at the anterior horn and body of the medial meniscus with parameniscal cyst measuring 2.9cm, partial small intrasubstance tear at the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) involving under 25 percent thickness, minimal to mild degenerative arthritis of the right knee joint without joint space narrowing, mild quadriceps tendinosis, and mild patellar tendinosis.  

In August 2022, the Veteran had a diagnosis of unspecified disorder of synovium and tendon, right upper arm.  

In November 2022, the Veteran underwent a left open cubital tunnel release to treat cubital tunnel syndrome.  

A November 2022 MRI showed a chronic full-thickness tear of the distal biceps tendon with high-grade proximal retraction, low-grade partial thickness tearing of the common extensor origin occurring the setting of moderate tendinopathy, and low-grade partial thickness tearing of the common flexor origin occurring in the setting of mild tendinopathy.  

An April 2023 VA peripheral nerves examination report noted symptoms that included severe constant pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right upper extremity and the same symptomatology in the left upper extremity that was described as moderate in nature.  The examiner specifically was for the service-connected right and left lower extremity sciatica and did not include a diagnosis as to the right or left upper extremity neurological symptoms.  Right upper extremity muscle strength was 4 out of 5 and left upper extremity muscle strength was normal.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy and had normal bilateral upper extremity reflexes.  Sensation was decreased in the right shoulder, right inner / outer forearm, and right and left hand / fingers.  The Veteran had no trophic changes.  The examiner indicated that he had incomplete paralysis of the right and left ulnar nerves that was severe on the right and moderate on the left.  

In April 2023, the Veteran reported issues with neuropathic-like pain in the right arm.  The Veteran described arthroscopy and meniscus repairs of both knees between 1993 and 1995.  

In a June 2023 letter, a private fitness consultant indicated treatment with the Veteran from 2012 to 2017 and his complaints included right knee pain.  "Every day that I saw him, he wore a knee brace on his right knee, sometimes on both knees, and had his arm in a sling occasionally as well.  On many occasions, I witnessed his difficulties in performing basic activities while working."  

A June 2023 letter from a fellow service member and medical professional noted that the Veteran had complaints of right knee pain that often limited some range of motion.  

In October 2023, the Veteran requested that all scheduled VA examinations be cancelled due to distance, which were 300 miles from his home in Alaska.  The Veteran had medical issues.  The record indicated, "I explained to [the Veteran] that I would reschedule his exams and request that the contractor possibly conduct the exams near his home."  Subsequent VA contract examination requests were cancelled in February 2024 because the Veteran was unavailable.

As to the Veteran's knee and foot claims, as an initial matter the Board notes that while the Veteran reported knee problems from childhood and foot fracture and other difficulties from 1989 prior to his active service, he was not diagnosed with such disabilities at entrance into service and there have been no medical professionals attributing the Veteran's current knee and foot problems with disabilities that preexisted his active service.  As such, there is insufficient evidence of preexisting knee or foot disabilities and the Veteran will be presumed to have entered service in sound condition as to the knees and feet.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  

The Board notes that as to several issues on appeal there is unclear evidence as to whether the Veteran has a current disability.  For the purposes of this decision alone, the Board will presume that the Veteran has current diagnoses of arm, knee, migraine headache, and bilateral foot disabilities.  The relevant question, therefore, is whether these disabilities were incurred in service or otherwise caused by service.

As noted above, the Veteran declined to attend scheduled VA examinations to evaluate the etiology of any diagnosed claimed disability.  When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original service connection claim, regulations provide that the claim will be decided on the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).  In this case, the sole evidence in support of the Veteran's claims are the fact that he filed a claim listing these disabilities and his general appeal of the denial of the claims in the VA Form 10182 discussed above.  The Veteran has not reported a continuity of symptoms from service (including during the medical treatment visits documented above) or any other evidence demonstrating the existence of current disabilities that had their onset in service or otherwise were caused by service.

The sole evidence of current and ongoing symptomatology of the arm, knee, migraine headaches, and bilateral feet from service that could reach the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity are the Veteran's representations.  The Board, however, finds as a fact in this case that the Veteran is not competent to attribute his arm, knee, migraine headache, and bilateral foot symptomatology to his active service.  The issues are medically complex, as they require specialized medical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

Therefore, the Board concludes that the evidence is persuasively against the claims and that service connection is not warranted.  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claims must be denied.  See generally Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed Cir. 2001).

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate DCs identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.  If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  VA must consider whether the Veteran is entitled to "staged" ratings to compensate when his or her disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of his or her appeal.

The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is generally to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  The critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various DCs is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the disabilities is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other disability.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

1.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for external hemorrhoids

The Board contends that a higher rating is warranted for his external hemorrhoids.

As an initial matter, a March 2025 Board decision continued the Veteran's 20 percent rating for hemorrhoids and granted an earlier effective date of March 29, 2023, for the increased 20 percent rating for hemorrhoids.  The March 2025 Board decision considered the increased rating for hemorrhoids claim from a June 30, 2023, rating decision.  A July 2023 rating decision adjudicated the issue an earlier effective date for the 20 percent rating for hemorrhoids.  The February 2024 rating decision adjudicating the issue of entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for external hemorrhoids stemmed from a March 29, 2023, supplemental claim where the hemorrhoid issue was last adjudicated more than 1 year (February 2021) prior to the supplemental claim.  As the March 2025 Board decision considered the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for hemorrhoids from March 29, 2023, to June 30, 2023, the Board will limit consideration of the increased rating for hemorrhoids from July 1, 2023, to February 28, 2024.

38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) provides that when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  In contrast, when the examination was scheduled in connection with, among other things, a claim for increase, "the claim shall be denied."  In this case, the Veteran was scheduled for an additional VA examination in February 2024.  As discussed in the service connection section above, the Veteran has declined to appear for any additional VA examinations.

The Board finds that the Veteran has not established good cause for his refusal to submit to his scheduled VA examination in February 2024.  The record states that he cancelled the examination.  The Veteran has not argued that he had good cause to refuse his examination.  The Veteran declined to attend the original examination more than 300 miles from his home, but failed to appear for the contractor examination scheduled closer to his home.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran has not established good cause for his refusal to submit to the VA examination in February 2024 and his increased rating claim for hemorrhoids must be denied under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

2.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 10 percent for sinusitis 

The Veteran asserts that a higher rating is warranted for his sinusitis.

The Veteran's sinusitis is currently rated under DC 6513 for chronic maxillary sinusitis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6513. 

DC 6513 provides that the disability rating is to be assigned according to the General Rating Formula for Sinusitis (DCs 6510 through 6514), which states that a noncompensable rating is assigned for sinusitis when it is detected by x-ray only.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis [an incapacitating episode of sinusitis is one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician] requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged antibiotic treatment, or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 50 percent rating is warranted following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6513.

The criteria for compensable ratings of sinus conditions are stated in the conjunctive, which means that all three conditions must be met (headaches, pain, and crusting or purulent discharge) to warrant a rating of 10 percent or greater.  See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360, 366 (2007) (finding that the use of the conjunctive "and" in the criteria for a 40 percent rating for diabetes - "insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities" - meant that entitlement to that rating required all three criteria to be met.)

In April 2023, the Veteran denied any sinus problems.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023.  Current symptoms included daily nasal discharge (brownish color) and bleeding with sneezing.  The symptoms cleared with the daily use of allergy medication.  The Veteran also experienced sinus headaches 3 to 4 times per week and intermittent pressure and nasal obstruction.  The Veteran treated the symptoms with Cetirizine and Flonase.  The examiner did not specifically evaluate the Veteran's sinusitis because the Veteran failed to appear for pulmonary function testing or sinus x-ray appointments.  The examiner indicated that without the x-rays, the Veteran's chronic sinusitis could not be evaluated.  As to the Veteran's separately service-connected rhinitis, the Veteran did not have greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis.  The Veteran did not have complete obstruction on the left or right side due to rhinitis.  He also did not have permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates, nasal polyps, or granulomatous conditions.  The Veteran had no other pertinent physical findings and no associated scars.  The Veteran's sinusitis / rhinitis did not affect his ability to work.

Again, 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b) provides that when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  In contrast, when the examination was scheduled in connection with, among other things, a claim for increase, "the claim shall be denied."  In this case, the Veteran was scheduled for an additional VA examination in February 2024.  As discussed in the service connection section above, the Veteran has declined to appear for any additional VA examinations.  Similarly, while the Veteran attended a June 2023 VA examination, the examiner could not evaluate the Veteran's sinusitis claim because the Veteran failed to appear for pulmonary function testing or sinus x-ray appointments.

The Board finds that the Veteran has not established good cause for his refusal to submit to his scheduled VA examination in February 2024 or his June 2023 pulmonary function testing or x-rays.  The record states that the Veteran cancelled the February 2024 examination.  The Veteran has not argued that he had good cause to refuse his examination.  The Veteran declined to attend the original examination more than 300 miles from his home, but failed to appear for the contractor examination scheduled closer to his home.  While the Veteran did attend the June 2023 VA examination, he did not attend the appointments for associated pulmonary function testing and x-rays necessary to evaluate his sinusitis claim.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran has not established good cause for his refusal to submit to the VA examination in February 2024 or testing associated with the June 2023 examination and his increased rating claim for sinusitis must be denied under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

3.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for right bicipital tendonitis, labral tear, including SLAP with acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis

The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted for his right shoulder disability.  Prior to June 14, 2023, the right shoulder disability was rated under DC 5003-5201 and under DC 5201 from that date.

DC 5003 provides that degenerative arthritis that is established by X-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate DCs for the specific joint or joints involved.  (DC 5010 provides that traumatic arthritis is to be rated under DC 5003.)  When there is some limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints involved that is noncompensable (0 percent) under the appropriate DCs, DC 5003 provides a rating of 10 percent for each such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion, to be combined, not added under DC 5003.  Limitation of motion must be objectively confirmed by findings such as swelling, muscle spasm, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion.  When there is limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints that is compensable (10 percent or higher) under the appropriate DCs, the compensable limitation of motion should be rated under the appropriate DCs for the specific joint or joints involved.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  Effective February 7, 2021, DC 5003 was changed from "Arthritis, degenerative (hypertrophic or osteoarthritis)" to "Degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic."  Otherwise, DC 5003 remained unchanged.

Under DC 5201, limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major and minor extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder warrants a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating for the major extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm to 25 degrees from side warrants a maximum 30 percent rating for the minor joint and a maximum 40 percent rating for the major joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.

DC 5201, "does not provide separate ratings for limitation of motion in the flexion and abduction planes, but rather is addressed generically to limitation of motion of the arm." Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Effective February 7, 2021, VA amended DC 5201 to reflect that limitation of motion may be shown by flexion and/or abduction and clarified the degrees of limitation of motion that correspond to each rating.  Now, limitation of motion at the shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 90 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major and minor extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder level (flexion and/or abduction limited to 45 degrees) warrants a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating for the major extremity.  Flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees from the side warrants a maximum 30 percent rating for the minor joint and a maximum 40 percent rating for the major joint.

An October 2020 VA examination report documented right shoulder pain, loss of movement, numbness, swelling, and loss of strength.  The Veteran was right hand dominant.  The Veteran had flare-ups that occurred when he moved the wrong way.  The flare-ups were severe and lasted for weeks.  There were no precipitating factors and were alleviated by time, heat, ice, and lack of moving.  Flare-ups occurred monthly.  The Veteran had functional loss due to an inability to lift overhead.  Right shoulder ranges of motion testing showed flexion to 130 degrees, abduction to 120 degrees, external rotation to 60 degrees, and internal rotation to 50 degrees.  The right shoulder showed no further loss of motion following repetitive use testing.  The examiner did not believe there would be further loss of motion with repeated use over time and during flareups the examiner estimated that flexion would be further reduced to 120 degrees, abduction to 110 degrees, external rotation to 60 degrees, and internal rotation to 50 degrees.  Right shoulder muscle strength was 4 out of 5, with no muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  Testing for rotator cuff impairment was positive, including Hawkins' impingement test, empty-can test, and external rotation infraspinatus strength test.  The Veteran had suspected shoulder instability, dislocation, or labral pathology.  Crank apprehension and relocation test was positive for instability.  The Veteran had right acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis.  Cross-body adduction testing was positive.  The Veteran had no loss of head, nonunion, or fibrous union of the humerus or malunion of the humerus.  The Veteran regularly used a shoulder brace.  The impact on the Veteran's ability to work was an inability to lift overhead or lift for extended periods due to right shoulder pain.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in November 2020.  Current symptoms included achy sharp pains at times that decreased during ranges of motion.  He often was unable to lift heavy objects.  The Veteran had treated the symptoms with steroid injections in 2000, as well as the use of a TENS unit and physical therapy in the past.  The Veteran was right hand dominant.  The Veteran denied flare-ups regarding the right shoulder.  The Veteran was unable to lift anything heavy, such as a gallon of milk.  He had owned a gym, but sold it due to not being able to help spotting members during weight lifting due to the shoulder issues.  Right shoulder range of motion was from 0 to 170 degrees of both flexion and abduction.  The Veteran had noted pain on examination, but the pain did not cause functional loss.  With repetitive use testing, the Veteran had no further loss of motion.  The examiner estimated that with repeated use over time that the right shoulder ranges of motion would be further decreased to 165 degrees of flexion and abduction and 75 degrees of external and internal rotation.  Right shoulder muscle strength was 4 out of 5.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  The Veteran did not have a suspected rotator cuff condition, instability, dislocation, labral pathology, or clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular joint, or sternoclavicular joint condition.  The Veteran had no loss of head or fibrous union of the humerus or malunion of the humerus.  The Veteran used no assistive devices for the right shoulder.  The functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work was an inability to lift anything heavy (for example a gallon of milk or help members at the gym he owned to lift weights).  

In September 2022, the Veteran reported problems with the right shoulder.  

An April 5, 2023, VA shoulder examination report included reports of current symptoms of a pain level of 10 out of 10, with pulling pain from behind the right ear to underneath the right axilla.  There was crunching in the shoulder and occasional locking and a positive apprehension test.  The Veteran treated the symptoms of rest, ice / heat, a sling as needed, and Tylenol and motrin as needed.  The Veteran denied flare-ups of shoulder pain and associated symptoms.  The Veteran had functional loss involving the right shoulder due to limited lifting, holding / carrying, and reaching, as well as an inability to do overhead work.  Right shoulder range of motion testing showed flexion to 45 degrees, abduction to 45 degrees, internal rotation to 10 degrees, and external rotation to 25 degrees.  The Veteran had pain in all areas of motion.  Passive ranges of motion were the same as active motion.  The Veteran had crepitus and tenderness to palpation that was moderately severe.  The examiner was unable to complete repetitive-use testing.  The examiner estimated that with repeated use over time the right shoulder would have flexion and abduction to 20 degrees, internal rotation to 0 degrees, and external rotation to 10 degrees.  The Veteran had right shoulder muscle atrophy, with a definite deformity of the biceps muscle.  The right shoulder was ankylosed.  Hawkins' Impingement and Empty Can testing was negative.  Other testing could not be accomplished.  The examiner suspected a rotator cuff condition, as there was crepitus over the front of the rotator cuff and there was weakness of the arm more than expected with a labral tear.  The Veteran had a positive Crank Apprehension and Relocation Test.  The Veteran had shoulder instability, dislocation, or labral pathology.  The Veteran had current residuals of recurrent dislocation (subluxation) of the glenohumeral (scapulohumeral) joint, with frequent episodes and guarding of all arm movements that affected range of motion.  A Cross-body adduction test was positive for possible acromioclavicular joint pathology.  The Veteran had distal right clavicular osteolysis, but without malunion or nonunion of the clavicle or scapula.  The Veteran had no loss of head (flail shoulder), nonunion (false flail shoulder), or fibrous union of the humerus.  He also had no malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity.  In 1994, the Veteran had undergone arthroscopy and debridement, showing a small labral tear that was not repaired.  The Veteran occasionally used an arm sling for the right shoulder symptoms.  

A June 2023 letter from a fellow service member and medical professional noted that the Veteran had complaints of right shoulder pain that often limited some range of motion.

The Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination in August 2023.  The Veteran reported constant right shoulder pain throughout the joint, which was worse with reaching movements or any single-handed lifting.  Treatment included physical therapy, sling, and a brace.  He had gone through shoulder cortisone injections several times in the past.  The Veteran described flare-ups that occurred 3 to 4 times a week and lasted for most of the day.  Characteristics included sharper more intense pains that lingered and involved swelling in the hands from holding the arm below the level of the heart.  Precipitating factors for flare-ups were random, but predictably occurred with overhead reaching movements and repetitive lifting.  Alleviating factors included rest, immobilization, and pain medication.  The Veteran described the severity of the flare-ups as moderate.  The Veteran had functional loss that limited certain activities.  He had to put the belt on his pants before getting dressed and used his left hand for most tasks, including brushing his teeth.  Right shoulder range of motion testing showed flexion to 80 degrees and abduction to 75 degrees.  The Veteran refused testing of internal and external rotation.  The Veteran had pain on flexion and abduction.  Passive ranges of motion were the same as active motion.  The Veteran had evidence of pain on weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, active and passive motion, and on rest / non-movement.  There was tenderness to palpation.  Left shoulder testing was entirely normal.  The Veteran had no further loss of motion with repetitive motion testing.  With repeated use over time and during flare-ups, the examiner estimated that motion would be limited to 70 degrees of flexion and 60 degrees of abduction.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy or ankylosis of the right shoulder.  Specific testing of the right shoulder (Hawkin's Impingement, Empty Can, External rotation / infraspinatus strength, and lift-off scapularis testing could not be accomplished.  MRI imaging showed a rotator cuff tear and tendinitis.  The Veteran also had MRI evidence of a labral tear, so associated testing was not done.  The Veteran had no residuals of recurrent dislocation (subluxation) of the glenohumeral (scapulohumeral) joint.  MRI testing showed acromioclavicular arthritis, so associated testing was not attempted.  The examiner had no loss of head (flail shoulder), nonunion (false flail shoulder), or fibrous union of the humerus.  The Veteran had no malunion of the humerus with moderate or marked deformity.  The Veteran occasionally used a brace / sling for the right shoulder.  The right shoulder disabilities affected the Veteran's ability to work in that he could not perform overhead reaching or repetitive tasks with his right arm, especially using only the right hand.  

An August 2023 VA scars examination report noted arthroscopic surgical scars of the right shoulder.  The scars symptomatology had stayed the same and were not painful or unstable.  The Veteran had 4 related shoulder scars that were 2cm by 1cm; 2cm by 1cm; 1cm by 1cm; and 1cm by 0.5cm.  The total area was 5.5 square centimeters.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that because the Veteran failed to report to the VA examination scheduled in connection with a claim for increase the claim may be denied; however, as the Veteran did appear for multiple VA examinations during the appellate time period, the Board will evaluate the claim based on the evidence of record.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

Prior to April 5, 2023, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent for the Veteran's right shoulder disabilities.  The evidence of record shows that the Veteran is right-handed.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and that there was functional loss due to difficulties with reaching, single-hand lifting, and overhead activities.  However, even considering the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected by the statements would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating limitation of motion of the arm to 25 degrees from the side of the minor extremity.  Even accounting for limitation during flare-ups and with repeated use over time the Veteran does not have limitation that would more closely approximate the limitations necessary for a higher rating.

From April 5, 2023, the Board affords the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and concludes that his symptomatology more closely approximates the rating criteria for a 40 percent rating under DC 5201.  The April 2023 VA examination report indicated that with repeated use over time the Veteran's right shoulder would be limited to 20 degrees of abduction and flexion.  The Board acknowledges that the August 2023 VA examination did not show the same level of symptomatology with respect to ranges of motion, but the report did note that no specific testing other than range of motion testing could be accomplished due to the Veteran's multiple shoulder disabilities.  In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's overall disability picture more closely approximates the criteria for a 40 percent rating for the entire period from April 5, 2023, under DC 5201.  This is the highest rating under DC 5201.

The Board notes that the Veteran's functional loss was considered, as the medical evidence shows that the Veteran has consistently complained of pain in the right shoulder.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45; see also DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  However, the limitation of motion documented in the medical records and lay reports as resulting from pain is already contemplated in the disability rating currently assigned.  Prior to April 5, 2023, the Veteran clearly had pain and difficulty with his right shoulder with reaching and overhead activities, but during this time period there is no evidence of muscle atrophy.  Thus, despite the Veteran's reported problems associated with the right shoulder, he clearly was able to use the shoulder in close to a normal manner, to include duration of use, and, in fact, did so.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 (noting that, "A little used part of the musculoskeletal system may be expected to show evidence of disuse, either through atrophy, the condition of the skin, absence of normal callosity or the like.").  There is otherwise no evidence of significant impairment of motor skills, muscle function, or strength attributable to the Veteran's right shoulder disability prior to April 5, 2023. Consequently, the Board finds that a higher disability rating based on functional loss is not warranted.  From April 5, 2023, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum rating based on functional loss due to limitation of motion and, as such, a higher rating under the foregoing criteria is not warranted.

The Board has considered whether any other DCs related to disabilities of the shoulder would provide for a higher disability rating.  There are other DCs relating to shoulder disorders, such as DC 5200 (ankylosis of the shoulder) and DC 5202 (impairment of the humerus).  However, the Veteran's right shoulder disability is not manifested by an impairment of the humerus, and therefore DC 5202 is inapplicable.  Ankylosis is "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, surgical procedure."  Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992) (citing Saunders Encyclopedia and Dictionary of Medicine, Nursing, and Allied Health at 68 (4th ed. 1987)).  The Veteran is able to move his right shoulder, albeit with pain, so it is clearly not ankylosed.  The Veteran has distal right clavicular osteolysis that impairs range of motion, which is currently compensated in the assigned ratings.  The Veteran does not have other symptomatology otherwise attributable to the clavicle disability not already contemplated by the assigned ratings.  As such, the evidence does not support a separate rating under DC 5203.

The Board observes that the Veteran had atrophy of the right biceps noted during the April 2023 VA examination.  The Veteran had no limitation of arm / shoulder movement not already contemplated in the assigned 40 percent rating under DC 5201.  As such, assigning separate or higher ratings under 38 C.F.R. § 4.73, DCs 5301 through 5306 is not warranted.

The Veteran's right shoulder scars are separately service connected and he has not reported any symptoms associated with that disability.  As such, further consideration is not warranted.

Finally, the Board has considered the Court's recent holding in Ingram v. Collins, 23 Vet. App. 1798 (2025) that the Board is to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted in assessing musculoskeletal ratings as such effects are not contemplated therein and, therefore, taking medication may make a veteran appear less disabled than in reality.  In this case, prior to April 5, 2023, the evidence does not indicate the use of medication for the right shoulder disability.  The Veteran had used steroid injections with limited success.  From April 5, 2023, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum rating available for the right shoulder limitation of motion, absent ankylosis that is not present.  Furthermore, the Veteran had declined to appear for any additional VA examination.  As such, a remand for an additional VA examination or medical opinion is not necessary.  

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's appeal for a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to April 5, 2023, and that a 40 percent rating is warranted from that date.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to April 5, 2023, or greater than 40 percent from that date, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

4.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome 

5.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve

6.  Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve

The Veteran contends that higher ratings are warranted for his low back and right and left lower extremity radiculopathy.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2020.  Current symptoms included constant pain, numbness, intermittent difficulty walking, and loss of strength.  The Veteran described daily flare-ups that were severe and lasted for 2 to 3 days, which were not precipitated by any specific event or activity and was alleviated by head, lying on a hard floor, aspirin, and hot Epsom salt.  There was functional loss due to an inability to bend, lift, or stand.  Thoracolumbar range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right and left lateral flexion each to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation each to 30 degrees.  The Veteran had no further loss of motion with repetitive use testing.  The examiner estimated that there would be no further loss of motion with repeated use over time, but during flare-ups range of motion would be further limited to 60 degrees of forward flexion, right lateral rotation to 25 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 15 degrees, with no change in other planes of motion.  The Veteran had guarding and muscle spasm resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour.  Muscle strength testing was normal, with no muscle atrophy and normal reflexes.  The Veteran had decreased sensation in the right lower extremity and normal sensation in the left lower extremity.  Straight leg raising testing was positive on both sides.  The Veteran described constant pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness that was mild in the left lower extremity and moderate in the right lower extremity.  The Veteran had radiculopathy involving the bilateral sciatic nerves that the examiner found to be mild in nature.  The Veteran had no ankylosis of the spine and no neurologic abnormalities related to the thoracolumbar spine.  The Veteran did not have intervertebral disc syndrome.  The Veteran regularly used a back brace.  The back disability affected the Veteran's ability to work due to an inability to sit or stand for extended periods or bend repetitively.  

A November 2020 VA back examination report included the Veteran's report of back pain, discomfort, and decreased range of motion over the past 2 years.  He was unable to tolerate the pain at times, but pushed through it (due to not liking to take medication).  The Veteran had tenderness to palpation over the lower lumbar region, sharp shooting pains, and achy pains every morning.  The daily pain was from 5 to 6 out of 10.  The Veteran denied flare-ups, but stated that if he overused his back and was unable to stand up straight, unable to walk or stand for a prolonged period of time, and had lost the ability to lift or bend as he did 2 years previously.  Range of motion was greatly decreased.  Thoracolumbar spine range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 85 degrees, extension to 25 degrees, and right and left lateral flexion and rotation each to 25 degrees.  The Veteran had no further loss of motion on repetitive motion testing.  With repeated use over time, the examiner estimated that motion would be further reduced to 80 degrees of forward flexion, extension and right lateral flexion each to 20 degrees, and left lateral flexion and right and left lateral rotation each to 15 degrees.  Right and left lower extremity muscle strength was normal, with no muscle atrophy.  The Veteran had normal bilateral lower extremity reflexes and normal sensation.  Straight leg raising testing was negative bilaterally.  The Veteran had no ankylosis of the spine or neurologic abnormalities.  The Veteran used no assistive devices for the spine.  The back disability affected the Veteran's ability to work due to an inability to stand up straight if overusing the back, an inability to walk or stand for a prolonged period of time, an inability to lift or bend as well as he could 2 years ago, and decreased ranges of motion.  

On August 24, 2022, thoracolumbar range of motion testing showed extension to 45 degrees, forward flexion to 30 degrees, and decreased bilateral lateral rotation that was worse on the right.

In August 2022, the Veteran denied any genitourinary symptoms, including no bedwetting or accidents.  In September 2022, the Veteran reported problems with the low back, as well as numbness and tingling extending down the right lower extremity into the tip of the fifth toe.  The Veteran denied genitourinary symptoms, including no bedwetting or urinary accidents.  

In October 2022, the Veteran reported neck and low back pain that he described as 10 out of 10.  The Veteran had pain, numbness, and tingling radiating down the lateral right leg down to the right heel.  Low back pain also radiated down to the left glute.  Sitting and walking exacerbated the symptoms and stretching relieved the symptoms.  On testing, the Veteran had an antalgic gait and tenderness to palpation.  Straight leg raising testing was positive on the right that produced back and leg pain.  The Veteran had normal muscle strength, tone, and size in the bilateral lower extremities.  Sensation was intact and symmetrical.  

In December 2022, the Veteran denied bowel or bladder changes in function.  The Veteran had atrophy to the right lateral thigh and glutes with positive Trendelenburg testing.  

During a January 2023 Board hearing, the Veteran clarified that he did experience flare-ups regarding his back.  For example, while the back hurt all the time if he sat for too long he would feel like his "leg's on fire" all the way down to the ankle and also had back spasms.  He could not sit for 15 minutes without having to get up.  During flare-ups the Veteran the Veteran would have to lie flat for an extended period, sometimes up to 2 days.  The flare-ups varied in severity, from simple increases in pain while sitting that would be relieved by standing up and bending over to the serious incapacitations discussed above.  That said, the Veteran did have difficulty bending over and also had issues lifting objects.  The Veteran believed that while he had pain in all movements that he was unable to flex the thoracolumbar spine to more than 30 or 40 degrees.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA back examination in April 2023.  Current symptoms included pain at rest rated at 7 out of 10, worsening to 9 to 10 out of 10 with activity.  The Veteran had muscle spasms in the back and sciatica in both legs.  He had difficulty holding urine for 5 years that was getting worse.  Most of the time he had perineal numbness and difficulty holding stool.  The Veteran had flare-ups of shooting pain down the legs and stabbing dull pain in the mid and low back.  The flare-ups occurred 2 to 3 times a week, lasted all day and required the Veteran to lie on the floor at night for a week.  The flare-ups were precipitated by bending, lifting, twisting, walking, standing, stumbling, sitting wrong, and driving.  The flare-ups were alleviated by rest, motrin / Tylenol, heat / ice, medication, and sleeping on a hard floor.  The severity level was 8 to 9 out of 10.  The functional impairment during flare-ups included very limited bending, lifting, twisting, walking, standing, stumbling, sitting wrong, and driving.  Thoracolumbar range of motion testing included forward flexion to 55 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 30 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation each to 20 degrees.  The Veteran had pain on all planes of motion.  Passive motion was the same as active motion.  The Veteran had evidence of pain in weight-bearing, nonweight-bearing, and active and passive motion.  There was no evidence of crepitus, but there was tenderness to palpation.  There was no further loss of motion with repetitive motion testing.  With repeated use over time and/or during flare-ups, the examiner estimated that forward flexion would be to 30 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right and left lateral flexion each to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation each to 10 degrees.  The Veteran had muscle spasm resulting in an abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour.  Right lower extremity muscle strength was universally 4 out of 5, while left lower extremity muscle strength was normal.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy and normal reflexes.  Sensation was decreased in the right and left upper anterior thigh, thigh / knee, and lower leg / ankle.  The Veteran had positive straight leg raising testing on the right and left.  The Veteran reported severe constant pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right and left lower extremity.  The Veteran had no ankylosis of the spine.  The Veteran had related neurologic abnormalities, including the sudden need to urinate and almost no control over urination, due to chronic cauda equina syndrome.  The Veteran also had bowel incontinence, including the limited ability to control bowel movements and streaking, due to chronic cauda equina syndrome.  Finally, the Veteran had numbness / paresthesia of the perineal area, due to chronic cauda equina syndrome.  The Veteran had intervertebral disc syndrome, but no bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months.  The Veteran regularly used a brace and cane for his back disability.  The examiner changed the diagnosis to intervertebral disc syndrome with bilateral sciatica, chronic cauda equina syndrome, and degenerative disc disease / degenerative joint disease.  The examiner also indicated that the service-connected low back disabilities caused the chronic cauda equina syndrome and the resulting loss of function.

An April 2023 VA peripheral nerves examination report noted worsening sciatica bilaterally.  The Veteran had undergone no surgery, but now had a chronic cauda equina syndrome that needed follow up.  Symptoms included severe constant pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness in the right and left lower extremities.  Right lower extremity muscle strength was 4 out of 5 for each joint and normal left lower extremity muscle strength.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy and had normal bilateral lower extremity reflexes.  Sensation was decreased in the bilateral upper anterior thigh, thigh / knee, and lower leg / ankle, as well as normal feet / toes.  The Veteran had no trophic changes.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran had moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the right and left sciatic nerve.  The lower extremity sciatica influenced the Veteran's ability to work due to limited standing, walking, and sitting.  

In April 2023, the Veteran denied any difficulty urinating.  He had back pain, but no weakness.  

During an April 2023 VA rectum and anus examination, the Veteran reported that small amounts of stool were passed involuntarily at times.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran had impairment of rectal sphincter control with leakage necessitating the wearing of a pad.  

An April 2023 urinary tract conditions examination report included a diagnosis of neurogenic bladder.  The Veteran reported that from 2017 he began having small amounts of urine leakage in his underwear and he was unaware when it was happening.  The symptoms started around the time of his chronic cauda equina symptoms.  The Veteran had a voiding dysfunction that caused urine leakage, but did not require the wearing of absorbent material, the use of an appliance, or result in increased urinary frequency.  

In May 2023, the Veteran requested that his scheduled VA examinations be rescheduled to a closer location because he was 8 hours from the scheduled location and extended driving exacerbated his low back disability and "renders him non-functional for two weeks."

A June 2023 VA hemorrhoid examination report included the Veteran's complaints of an inability to eat the day before having to drive due to rectal incontinence.  He was unable to maintain a job due to frequent emergency bowel movements.  The Veteran could not drive regularly due to rectal incontinence.  

In a June 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that symptoms of his low back disability could include low back pain, radiating pain, numbness around the anus, loss of bowel and bladder control, and loss of sexual function.  "This coincides with 2020 exams from orthopedic physicians and neurological addendums submitted by private physicians.  Please reference the Hemorrhoids exam [from June 2023] for corresponding relevance of condition."  

A June 2023 letter from a fellow service member and medical professional noted that the Veteran had complaints of low back pain that often limited some range of motion.

An August 2023 VA back examination report included the Veteran's report of worsening of the back and lower extremity symptoms.  Current symptoms included right radicular symptoms that were worse than on the left.  He had constant back pain (primarily low back, but also mid-back) and leg pain.  His back "goes out" in flare-ups that were incapacitating.  The Veteran had gone through physical therapy with included traction.  He had tried a steroid injection and took daily medication for the back pain.  The Veteran used a heating pad on occasion and wore a support belt.  He had paid for massage therapy and static stretching.  Flare-ups occurred 2 to 3 times a month and lasted for an entire day, involving such intense pain and weakness that he could not move and required help even to get dressed.  The Veteran also experienced numbness and burning pain in the inner thighs and pelvis at times.  Precipitating factors included random and could occur with even small or sudden movements.  Alleviating factors included a lower back support belt and heating pad with gentle stretching of the hamstrings and gluteal muscles.  The Veteran described the flare-ups as severe in nature.  The Veteran had functional loss manifested by an inability to get comfortable and having to change positions every few minutes.  He had stopped all exercising and sports involvement.  His only activity was walking the dog and the Veteran often paid others to help with chores and errands rather than doing them himself.  Thoracolumbar range of motion testing showed forward flexion to 55 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral flexion and rotation each to 15 degrees.  The Veteran had pain in all planes of motion.  Passive range of motion testing was not accomplished, as it was medically contraindicated.  With repeated use over time and during flare-ups, range of motion would be decreased to 50 degrees of forward flexion, 15 degrees of extension, and 10 degrees of right and left lateral flexion and rotation.  The Veteran had tenderness to palpation that did not result in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour.  Lower extremity muscle strength was normal, other than right hip flexion of 4 out of 5 and left ankle plantar flexion of 4 out of 5.  The Veteran had no muscle atrophy.  He had hypoactive reflexes in the bilateral knees and absent reflexes in the bilateral ankles.  The Veteran had decreased sensation in the right lower leg / ankle and foot / toes and the left thigh / knee, lower leg / ankle, and foot / toes.  Straight leg raising testing was positive bilaterally.  The Veteran had moderate constant pain in the right lower extremity, mild constant pain in the left lower extremity, severe intermittent pain in the bilateral lower extremities, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias in the bilateral lower extremities, and moderate numbness in the bilateral lower extremities.  The Veteran had no other symptoms of radiculopathy.  The Veteran had no ankylosis and no neurologic abnormalities (including bowel or bladder problems).  The Veteran had intervertebral disc syndrome with episodes of bed rest having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  He reported being "worthless" at home and was confined to a recliner or lying on the floor for hours each day due to pain at least 50 percent of the time.  The Veteran regularly used a brace and occasionally used a walking stick.  The disabilities affected the Veteran's ability to work in that he had to use a walking stick because he easily tripped when walking.  He could not tolerate prolonged driving or commuting.  The Veteran had to change position from sitting to standing and vice versa every 5 minutes to be comfortable.

A September 2023 VA examination report addendum indicated that the Veteran did have a diagnosis of intervertebral disc syndrome from 2020.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that because the Veteran failed to report to the VA examination scheduled in connection with a claim for increase the claim may be denied; however, as the Veteran did appear for multiple VA examinations during the appellate time period, the Board will evaluate the claims based on the evidence of record.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, spondylolisthesis and degenerative disc disease and intervertebral disc syndrome

Effective February 7, 2021, VA amended the rating criteria for disabilities of arthritis and the spine; however, DC 5237 was unchanged.

The General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine provides a 10 percent disability rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent disability rating is assigned for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent disability rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent disability rating is assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Notes appended to the rating formula for diseases and injuries of the spine specify that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees.  The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees.  Id., Note (2).  Provided, however, that, in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion generally recognized by VA.  Id., Note (3).  Further, the term "combined range of motion" refers to "the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation"; provided, however, that the aforementioned normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion, as recognized by VA, are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion, and each range of motion measurement is to be rounded to the nearest five degrees.  Id., Notes (2) and (4).  Note (5) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching.  Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Note (6) provides that disabilities of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments are to be rated separately, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which will be rated as a single disability.  Id.

These criteria are to be applied irrespective of whether there are symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the affected area of the spine, id, and they "are meant to encompass and take into account the presence of pain, stiffness, or aching, which are generally present when there is a disability of the spine."  68 Fed. Reg. 51,455 (August 27, 2003) (Supplementary Information).

Spine conditions rated under DC 5243, for intervertebral disc syndrome, may be rated alternatively based on incapacitating episodes.  The criteria provide for a 10 percent rating where intervertebral disc syndrome is manifested with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than two weeks during the past 12 months.  A 20 percent rating was warranted where incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least two weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 40 percent rating is warranted where incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 60 percent rating is warranted where incapacitating episodes have a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  "Incapacitating episodes" was defined in Note (1) as a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.  Note (2) also allowed the Veteran to be rated separately for musculoskeletal and neurological manifestations under appropriate DCs if it would result in a higher combined evaluation for the disability.

In general, evaluation of a service-connected disability involving a joint rated on limitation of motion requires adequate consideration of functional loss due to pain under 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 and functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 state that disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or inflammation in parts of the system, to perform normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination and endurance. Functional loss may be due to the absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures.  It may also be due to pain supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.  The factors of disability affecting joints are reduction of normal excursion of movements in different planes, weakened movement, excess fatigability, swelling and pain on movement.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.45.

After a review of the record and for reasons and bases expressed immediately below, prior to August 24, 2022, the Board finds that a rating greater than 20 percent is not warranted.  The current evaluation contemplates pain on motion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59.  In order to warrant a higher rating, there must be the functional equivalent of limitation of flexion to 30 degrees or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  Prior to August 24, 2022, the Veteran's limitation of motion does not warrant a rating greater than 20 percent because flexion is not limited to less than 30 degrees nor is there ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  Multiple VA examinations prior to August 24, 2022, failed to show limitation of motion to less than 30 degrees.  The other evidence of record prior to August 24, 2022, did not demonstrate pain on forward flexion that limited motion to 30 degrees or less.  

From August 24, 2022, both the private treatment record from that date and the April 2023 VA examination report documented limitation of forward flexion to 30 degrees.  The April 2023 examiner estimated that the Veteran's forward flexion would be limited to 30 degrees with repeated use over time.  The Board acknowledges that the August 2023 examiner estimated only that the forward flexion would be limited to 50 degrees, but this discrepancy with the April 2023 report reflects merely a difference in estimation by the examiner rather than objective evidentiary findings.  Indeed, the April 2023 and August 2023 examiners both found 55 degrees of forward flexion.  As the evidence does not suggest an improvement in the Veteran's low back disability between April 2023 and August 2023, the Board will afford the Veteran the benefit of the doubt that his overall back symptomatology more closely approximates the rating criteria for a 40 percent rating.  The Board acknowledges that the limited motion outlined in the August 24, 2022, treatment record perhaps did not have its onset on that date of treatment, but as there is no clear indication when the worsening range of forward flexion meeting the criteria for a 40 percent rating had its onset the Board concludes that August 24, 2022, is the most appropriate date for the increased rating.  A higher rating is not warranted under DC 5237 from August 24, 2022, because the Veteran does not have ankylosis of the spine.  

The Veteran is not entitled to a greater rating under any other DC.  The Veteran has intervertebral disc syndrome, but no evidence of incapacitating episodes requiring bed rest prescribed by a physician.  As such, a higher rating is not warranted under DC 5243.  

In addition, as noted above, separate ratings for neurological manifestations may be warranted under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a if supported by objective medical evidence.  General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (1).  In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran has separate ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy that will be evaluated below.  

As noted, Note 1 of the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine also provides for evaluating any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate DC.  In this case, the Veteran has reported bowel and bladder issues that the April 2023 VA examiner attributed to a chronic cauda equina syndrome that was a continuation of the Veteran's service-connected low back disability.  The Veteran reported ongoing problems with continency as to bladder and bowel functioning for the previous 5 years.  Such a representation is entirely at odds with the medical treatment records that have consistently included the Veteran's denial of bowel or bladder problems, to include in the same month as the April 2023 VA examination.  As such, the Board finds as a fact in this case that the inconsistency as to the findings of the April 2023 VA examination and the other VA examinations and the private and VA treatment records does not support a separate rating for incontinence of the bowel or bladder or for other neurologic abnormalities.

The Board notes that the Veteran's functional loss was considered, as the medical evidence shows that the Veteran has consistently complained of pain in the back.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45.  The evidence indicates that the Veteran has range of motion on testing that is consistent with the current rating assigned, even accounting for further limitation due to pain and/or following repetitive motion exercises.  The Board also finds it significant that the Veteran has shown no evidence of muscle atrophy during his multiple examinations and treatment visits.  Thus, despite the Veteran's reported problems associated with the low back, he clearly is able to use the back in close to a normal manner, to include duration of use, and, in fact, does so.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 (noting that, "A little used part of the musculoskeletal system may be expected to show evidence of disuse, either through atrophy, the condition of the skin, absence of normal callosity or the like.").  Therefore, the Board finds that a higher rating based on functional loss is not warranted.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the Court's recent holding in Ingram v. Collins, 23 Vet. App. 1798 (2025) that the Board is to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted in assessing musculoskeletal ratings as such effects are not contemplated therein and, therefore, taking medication may make a veteran appear less disabled than in reality.  In this case, the Veteran indicated that he used motrin and Tylenol during flare-ups.  These flare-ups occurred multiple times per month.  As the Veteran has declined to appear for further examinations, remand for an additional examination to consider the effect of the medication on the Veteran's level of functioning would serve no useful purpose.  As the current records do not discuss the effects of the Veteran's functioning with medication as opposed to without medication, the Board cannot see how a remand for a medical opinion without the Veteran's input would serve any purpose.  As such, the Board concludes that a decision is appropriate as to the low back issue.  

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against a rating greater than 20 percent prior to August 24, 2022, or greater than 40 percent from that date under DC 5237 for the Veteran's service-connected low back disability.  The Board has considered whether further staged ratings were appropriate in the present case, but concludes that the current ratings most closely reflect the severity of the low back disability during the relevant time periods.  

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve

Entitlement to a rating greater than 20 percent for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.  (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DCs 8620 and 8720.).  Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

Descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe" and "severe" are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  As with any regulatory interpretation where the terms are not defined in the regulation, we presume those terms carry their ordinary dictionary meaning.  See Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018).  The Board finds that these terms are unambiguous and, therefore, a plain dictionary meaning is an appropriate definition.  Cf. Kisor v. Wilkie, 139 S. Ct. 2400, 2415 (2019); see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.6 (noting, in general, the Board does not evaluate evidence by applying a mechanical formula, but rather conscientiously to the end that its decisions are equitable and just).  According to Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "mild" means gentle in nature or temperate.  "Moderate" means limited in scope or effect or average in amount, intensity, quality, or degree.  Webster's New World Dictionary (2nd ed. 1999), 1012.  The term "moderately severe" includes impairment that is considered more than "moderate" but not to the extent as to be considered "severe."  Webster's New World Dictionary (2nd ed. 1999), 1012.  "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree.  Although a medical examiner's use of descriptive terminology such as "mild" is an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, it is not dispositive of an issue.  The Board must evaluate all evidence in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds as a fact in this case that the Veteran's symptomatology does not more closely approximate moderately severe, incomplete paralysis.

The Veteran's right and left lower extremity radiculopathy is manifested primarily by pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and numbness, as well as intermittently decreased sensation and slightly decreased lower extremity muscle strength.  Objective testing consistently has shown no muscle atrophy.  While the April 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's right and left lower extremity radiculopathy most closely approximated moderately severe incomplete paralysis, the Board disagrees.  The Veteran has no more than slightly decreased muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, normal reflexes, and only one VA examination has found decreased lower extremity sensation.  Other VA examinations and the private and VA treatment records have found normal sensation.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's subjective reports of severe lower extremity symptomatology, but the near normal muscle strength demonstrates that despite the reported pain the Veteran is able to use his lower extremities in close to a normal manner and that he, in fact, does so.  The Board finds as a fact in this case that the Veteran's symptomatology more closely approximates moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve in both the right and left lower extremity for the entire appellate time period.  

The Board has considered all other potentially applicable DCs, but there is no evidence showing the Veteran has neurological impairment associated with any other peripheral nerves that have not already been service-connected.  As such, the Board concludes that all symptomatology for the lower extremities is fully contemplated in the currently assigned ratings.  Therefore, a separate or higher rating under a different DC is not warranted.

In conclusion, the Board finds as a fact in this case that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claims for a rating in excess of 20 percent for either the right or left lower extremity radiculopathy.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. J. Houbeck, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.