Citation Nr: A25030644
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-447084
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that sleep apnea began during active service or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASON AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1975 to February 1978.

For the issues of service connection for migraines and sleep apnea, these matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

For the issues of service connection for left and right knee disabilities, in July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of these issues most recently addressed in a November 2018 rating decision.  In September 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, for all the issues on appeal, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for left and right knee disabilities and migraines, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in initial service connection claims, the VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. Id. at 83.

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea. He contends he has had "nasal issues" since being hit in the face. See June 13, 2024 VA Form 10182.

In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of sleep apnea. The Board is bound by this favorable finding absent clear and unmistakable error.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records shows no diagnosis, complaints, or treatment for sleep apnea or sleep problems generally. In February 1976, he was treated for a facial injury that resulted from a fall while ice skating. X-rays were ordered. In April 1976, he complained of sinus pain and an occasional headache and tingling sensation on the side of his head. The X-rays were normal. He was diagnosed with sinusitis. His separation examination was normal.

Post-service treatment records show he was first diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in 1999 as shown in a July 2022 VA treatment record.

An August 2023 Memorandum indicates that the Veteran did not participate in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

After a review of the evidence of record the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep apnea as there is no evidence to show that the disability had its onset in or is related to active service. The first documented evidence of sleep apnea is two decades after the Veteran's discharge from active service.

Although the absence of documented treatment alone cannot serve as a basis for finding that lay evidence lacks credibility, Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006), the Board finds in this case that the lack of evidence is a factor for consideration coupled with the service treatment records and the fact that the Veteran did not file a service connection claim for sleep apnea until approximately 45 years post-service, is sufficient to rebut a finding of service incurrence. See Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231 (2012) 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination. However, VA does not have a duty to provide one here. Although VA treatment records reflect the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 1999, there is nothing to indicate incurrence in service or an association with service. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83 (finding that VA's duty to provide an examination is only triggered if the evidence of record "indicates" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event). 

While the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms of sleep apnea, he is not competent to provide an opinion linking the condition to his active service, as that requires medical expertise and knowledge that is outside the realm of common knowledge of a layperson.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in service or is otherwise related to his service. Therefore, the claim of service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability

The Veteran seeks service connection for his knee disabilities. Specifically, the Veteran contends that during service, he trained extensively for Airborne Jump School, which involved running on hard surfaces in combat boots with and without gear. He jumped many times at night, sometimes hitting trees and landing hard on the ground due to abnormal wind conditions. He also stated that he has been on pain medication for almost 20 years. See November 2018 Correspondence. See also July 2023 Supplemental Claim. 

In the alternative, the Veteran contends that his knee disabilities are secondary to his service connected bilateral pes cavus condition. See July 2023 VA 27-0820 Report of General Information.

The Veteran's service treatment records show complaint and treatment for left knee pain after running for one month. He was diagnosed with chondromalacia in August 1975.

Initially, the RO requested an examination for the left knee only.

The Veteran submitted to a VA examination for knee and lower leg in January 2019. The Veteran reported that he developed pain in both knees during active duty unrelated to a specific incident. He stated that his knees disabilities were due to his parachute jumps during service. The Veteran stated that the pain in the knees subsided after discharge, and he did not have symptoms until about 10 years ago, slightly more pronounced on the left than on the right. The examiner diagnosed osteoarthritis and opined that this disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his active duty service. In providing a rationale, the examiner acknowledged the August 1975 STR documenting left knee pain after running, and that he was assessed with chondromalacia in service. However, subsequent STRs and medical records until recently have been silent for a left knee condition. The current x-ray of the left knee demonstrates mild degenerative arthritis likely age-related. The examiner added that a "diagnosis of chondromalacia was commonly employed by many physicians at that time when there was no x-ray evidence of degenerative arthritis. With the development of MRIs, which can detect chondromalacia, individuals without radiological findings are now more likely to be diagnosed as having an arthralgia of the knee or patellofemoral pain syndrome." 

The Board finds this opinion inadequate because it was essentially based on lack of contemporaneous evidence and did not consider the Veteran's assertions of continuity of symptomatology. 

The RO then requested an examination of both knees.

The Veteran submitted to another VA examination for knee and lower leg in July 2023. The examiner noted diagnoses of left knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis and right knee strain. The Veteran reported onset in 2003, resulted from physical training as a paratrooper. The examiner only rendered an opinion on secondary connection. They opined that the bilateral knee disabilities were less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral pes cavus. The rationale provided was that "medical research performed in 2014, shows the opposite of the claim. Research shows that pes cavus actually protect the knees from the development of osteoarthritis. Therefore, no nexus has been established." (Cite omitted) No opinion was provided on aggravation. 

The Board finds this opinion inadequate. The July 2023 examiner failed to adequately address whether the Veteran's service connected bilateral pes cavus caused or aggravated the Veteran's bilateral knee's disabilities. The examiner's rationale was limited to the findings of one general article from 2014 without explaining the specific relationship with the Veteran's bilateral knee and foot disabilities. In fact, the study noted they investigated foot characteristics of people with medial compartment knee osteoarthritis. The Veteran's knee disabilities were diagnosed as left knee joint osteoarthritis with degenerative arthritis and right knee strain. Thus, it is unclear if this article cited even relates to the Veteran disabilities. In addition, the examiner did not provide an opinion on aggravation. 

Notably, in a March 2019 VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's bilateral foot condition, the examiner noted that the Veteran's MOS as a paratrooper and jumping while in the service, "over time can cause trauma and early arthritis." See March 2019 VA examination and medical opinion report for foot disabilities.

The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, remand is warranted. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

3. Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for migraines secondary to service-connected tinnitus.

Service treatment records show the Veteran complained of headaches and sinusitis in October 1976 and occasional headaches in April 1976.

A December 2022 primary care note shows the Veteran reported ringing in his ears and believes that is what causing his headache. He also reported having headaches for more than 20 years and they had worsened over the past two years. CAPRI records, received July 8, 2023, p.85.

A September 2023 VA examination report shows the Veteran reported that the headache condition "began a long time ago" and that "they have gotten especially worse since 2017." The examiner opined that the Veteran's headaches condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of service connected tinnitus. The rationale provided was that "...per medical records there is no current disease process to link his headache pain and tinnitus. Medical literature notes there is an association between tinnitus and headaches but there is no indication that tinnitus causes headaches. Furthermore, the [V]veteran has a history of hypertension, type II diabetes, and sleep apnea-all conditions which can lead to headache pain. It is most likely that the [V]eteran's sleep apnea is the predominant cause of his headaches and that his hypertension and type II diabetes conditions have exacerbated his symptoms." The Board finds this opinion inadequate because the causation rationale is insufficient. In addition, the examiner failed to provide an opinion on aggravation. 

The Board finds that the theory of direct service connection has been raised by the record. There is no opinion addressing this contention.

The failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, remand is warranted. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with an appropriate examination to determine the etiology of any currently diagnosed knee disability. The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be accomplished, and all clinical findings must be reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis. 

(a.) Identify any currently diagnosed knee disability. 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed knee disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to, active duty.

(c.) If arthritis is diagnosed, is it as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that this condition manifested within one year of separation from service (February 1978)?

"	The examiner must address the Veteran's service treatment records showing complaint and treatment for left knee pain and diagnosis of chondromalacia in August 1975. [See STR, received November 16, 2018, p.18]

"	The examiner must address the Veteran's lay statements that his knee disabilities were due to his parachute jumps in service and that he has been on medication for knees for almost 20 years. [See November 2018 Correspondence. See also July 2023 Supplemental Claim.]

"	The examiner must address the theory that the Veteran's paratrooper jumping while in the service caused arthritis

(d)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance or nearly equal in the Veteran's favor) that any current knee disability was caused by his service-connected bilateral pes cavus. 

(e)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance or nearly equal in the Veteran's favor) that any current knee disability was aggravated (any worsening) by his service-connected bilateral pes cavus.

Specifically, would the knee condition have been less severe but for the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the service connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the knee condition.

An adequate medical opinion may not be predicated solely on the absence of in-service or post-service treatment records. 

A complete rationale for all opinions is required.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any currently diagnosed headache condition. The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. All indicated tests and studies should be performed.

The examiner should offer the following opinions:

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed headache condition had its onset in service or is otherwise related to his service.

"	The examiner must address the Veteran's service treatment records showing complaints of headaches in October 1976 and April 1976. [STR - Medical, Receipt date November 26, 2018]

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance or nearly equal in the Veteran's favor) that any currently diagnosed headache disability was caused by his service-connected tinnitus. 

(c)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance or nearly equal in the Veteran's favor) that any current headaches disability was aggravated (any worsening) by his service-connected tinnitus.

Specifically, would the headache condition have been less severe but for the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the service connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the headache condition.

A medical opinion based solely on the absence of in-service or post-service treatment will be insufficient.

A complete rationale for all opinions is required.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Romero, E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.