Citation Nr: A25030894
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 231120-394213
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1979 to December 1985.

On November 8, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the November 7, 2023 rating decision denying service connection for prostate cancer.  On November 13, 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the November 7, 2023 rating decision.

In the November 20, 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 7, 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the November 7, 2023 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

Under the provisions of the AMA, the Board must remand any appeal that cannot be granted in full for correction of a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  VA's duty to assist requires it to ensure any examination report or opinion it obtains is adequate to make an informed decision on a claim.  

Here, the evidence establishes that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) in service.  The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the TERA.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.

Several VA TERA opinions were obtained in this case, however, the Board finds them to all be inadequate as none of the clinicians discussed the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, as required by the PACT Act.  As there is no adequate TERA opinion of record, remand is warranted to obtain a new opinion to ensure a fully informed decision on the Veteran's claim and compliance with VA's duty to assist.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion, preferably with a qualified clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran, regarding the nature and etiology of his prostate cancer.  Schedule another in-person examination only if the selected clinician deems it necessary to render the requested opinion.

After review of the claims file, and examination of the Veteran if deemed necessary, the clinician should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's prostate cancer began in or is otherwise caused by his active service, to include his conceded in-service exposures, including cleaning solvents, explosives, combustion byproducts, dust, exhaust fumes, lubricating oils (petroleum), C20-50, and hydrotreated neutral oil.  In this regard, the examiner is advised that the Veteran's conceded in-service exposures are considered a toxic exposure risk activity, and thus, in providing this etiology opinion, the VA examiner must consider and address the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure through all applicable military deployments, as well as the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

For the purposes of the opinion, the clinician should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence if the appeal returns.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the clinician may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The clinician may not dismiss the Veteran's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale. If any of the above issues cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elias, M

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.