Citation Nr: A25030335
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430848
DATE:  April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability other than posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied. 

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 50 percent for PTSD is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) prior to May 19, 2024, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a psychiatric disability other than PTSD, to include adjustment disorder, bipolar disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are not shown to more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas at any point during the pendency of the appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a psychiatric disability other than PTSD, to include adjustment disorder, bipolar disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for an initial rating greater than 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1, 2022, to February 2, 2023. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from November 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions rendered by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182) received in April 2024, the Veteran elected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence that was of record at the time of the rating decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. During the pendency of this appeal, in April 2024, the AOJ increased the rating for the Veteran's PTSD to 50 percent, effective February 3, 2023, which is the day following her discharge from active duty. See 38 C.F.R. §3.400(b)(2). 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period when new evidence was not allowed, to include VA treatment records, a VA contract PTSD examination report in May 2024, and a VA contract medical opinion in November 2024. As the Board is deciding the issues noted above, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. With this said, the AOJ did consider this new evidence in a November 2024 rating decision that recharacterized the Veteran's psychiatric disability as PTSD with alcohol use disorder and continued the 50 percent rating. 

I. Service Connection for a Psychiatric Disability Other than PTSD

The Veteran's December 2023 claim for service connection for psychiatric disabilities other than PTSD includes bipolar disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. The Veteran explained when she filed the claim that since her discharge, she "act[s] one way one minute then act[s] differently second later." She also said she was in constant fear of making a mistake. 

The Veteran's service treatment records show that she was treated for adjustment disorder and acute stress reaction in November 2022. They also show she was treated in January 2023 for anxiety and disappearance and death of family members. The January 2023 behavioral health treatment record notes that the Veteran had recently learned that her family members (mother, father, 3 brothers, and 1 sister) had been killed in a car accident. 

A March 2023 VA outpatient treatment record shows that the Veteran presented to the mental health clinic for mental health concerns regarding a traumatic event that occurred when she was in service involving the suicide of two roommates in December 2022. She reported nightmares, flashbacks, and paranoia related to the incident and said she had been unable to function in daily life. A May 2023 record shows that the Veteran was seen in the triage requesting a mental health appointment. She complained of anxiety and said she was unable to eat or sleep and was having bad dreams. 

In October 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA PTSD examination at which time she was diagnosed as having chronic PTSD. In an addendum opinion in November 2023, the examiner noted that the Veteran had been diagnosed in service as having adjustment disorder but went to note her only present diagnosis was PTSD. The examiner explained the Veteran's claimed mental condition was subsumed in the PTSD, chronic condition. 

VA treatment records from the period on review likewise do not show that the Veteran was diagnosed as having a psychiatric disability other than PTSD.

In short, the only evidence that the Veteran has a psychiatric disability other than PTSD, claimed as bipolar disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder, are the Veteran's statements. To the extent the Veteran believes that she has a separate disability, she is competent to report her psychiatric symptoms. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, she is not competent to provide a diagnosis based on those systems. The issue is medically complex and is therefore outside the competence of the Veteran as the record does not show that she has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the VA examinations and treatment records, which were rendered by medical professionals.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability other than PTSD at any point during the appeal period. The record shows that in assigning the Veteran a rating for her psychiatric symptoms, all her symptoms were attributed to her service-connected PTSD. As the evidence is persuasively against the claim of entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability other than PTSD, to include adjustment disorder, bipolar disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, and is not in approximate balance, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application and the claim must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

II. Initial Rating Greater than 50 Percent for PTSD

Rating Criteria

The general rating formula for mental disabilities is found under 38 C.F.R. 4.130. The Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9434. Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms.

The criteria for a 70 percent rating provide for: Occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The criteria for a 100 percent rating provide for: Total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

38 C.F.R. §4.130, Code 9411.

The use of the phrase "such symptoms as" followed by a list of examples provides guidance as to the severity of symptomatology contemplated for each rating. The use of such terminology permits consideration of items listed as well as other symptoms and contemplates the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

The Board acknowledges that fleeting or passive suicidal ideation does not preclude a 70 percent disability rating for suicidal ideation and that thought alone may be sufficient to support a 70 percent disability rating. The Board further acknowledges that a report of suicidal ideation does not automatically confer entitlement to a 70 percent disability rating. VA must engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). In Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017), the Court wrote the Board must consider the effects of each of a veteran's mental symptoms on his or her own social and occupational situation and undertake "a holistic analysis." 29 Vet. App. at 22. When evaluating the severity of a psychiatric disorder, a factfinder should focus on a symptom's effects to determine the level of impairment. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 426, 443 (2002).

Facts and Analysis

A March 2023 VA outpatient treatment record shows that the Veteran presented to the mental health clinic complaining of nightmares, flashbacks, and paranoia related to a traumatic incident in service, and she said she had been unable to function in daily life. 

A May 2023 record shows that the Veteran was seen in the triage requesting a mental health appointment. She complained of anxiety, depression, and paranoia, and said she was unable to eat or sleep and was having bad dreams.

The Veteran reported during a VA contract PTSD examination in October 2023 that she sleeps approximately two to three hours most days despite her body being tired. She said she has difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep and spends time on Tik Tok because she can't sleep. She also described intrusive memories of a stressor in service and said she engages in avoidance behavior and has trouble in her intimate relations with her boyfriend. She reported that she lives with her boyfriend, and her boyfriend's friend, wife, and children. She said she has no children of her own and has never married. She said she has a friend from high school and has recently connected with her aunt. She also said she has been working as a nanny since service and had no major problems on the job. On examination the Veteran had good grooming and hygiene, and adequate attention and concentration. Her speech was normal, and her thought content did not reveal psychosis/delusions. Her thought process was normal, her mood was euthymic (normal), and her affect was mood congruent. She had no hallucinations and did not appear to respond to internal stimuli. She denied thoughts of harming self or others, and her attitude was polite and cooperative. Rapport was noted to be easily established. Her noted symptoms consisted of depressed mood and chronic sleep impairment. The examiner assessed the Veteran as having occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. The examiner added that the Veteran noted tactile and visual hallucinations but said these do not appear to significantly interfere with social or occupational activities at this time. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 70 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. In this regard, the October 2023 examination report does not show that the Veteran had any of the criteria listed for a 70 percent rating to include suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittent illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression, affecting the ability to function independently, appropriate, and effectively, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Rather, her noted symptoms consisting of depressed mood and chronic sleep impairment are symptoms listed in the criteria for a 30 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. Regarding the examiner's report that the Veteran noted tactile and visual hallucinations, the examiner said they do not appear to significantly interfere with the Veteran's social or occupational activities at that time. Additionally, the examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms meet the criteria under Diagnostic Code 9411 for a 10 percent rating, that is, occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. 

The facts also show per the May 2023 examination report that the Veteran had been working as a nanny since her military discharge and she reported no major problems on the job. Socially, the Veteran said she lived with her boyfriend and with her boyfriend's friend and the friend's family. In addition, she reported having a friend from high school and had recently reconnected with an aunt. 

In consideration of the foregoing pertinent evidence, the Board finds that a rating greater than 50 percent for the Veteran's PTSD is not warranted. That is, the effects of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are not of the duration, frequency, and severity, that would warrant a 70 percent rating requiring occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. See Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). As the competent and probative evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is inapplicable, and an increased rating must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

TDIU

The Veteran asserted in written argument in December 2023 that she was unable to keep a job, and she deserved a 100 percent rating for her psychiatric disability. Evidence on file prior to this date shows that she was working as a nanny. See October 2023 VA contract PTSD examination report. 

The Veteran's December 2023 statement raises an implicit claim for entitlement to a TDIU. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (a TDIU claim is "part and parcel" of an underlying claim of entitlement to a higher rating when raised by the record). Accordingly, the Board finds that the record reasonably raises a claim that the Veteran's service-connected disability prevents her from working or maintaining employment. A review of the record shows that in a July 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was granted entitlement to a TDIU, effective May 19, 2024. However, that award of TDIU does not encompass the entire period on appeal in the claim currently before the Board. The Board has therefore characterized the issues on appeal to also include a claim for a TDIU for the period on appeal prior to May 19, 2024.

Notably, the Veteran does not currently meet the schedular requirements for a TDIU prior to May 19, 2024, as she does not have a combined rating of at least 70 percent, with one disability rated 40 percent or greater. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

Although a veteran fails to meet the disability rating threshold under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a), an extraschedular d TDIU may nevertheless be warranted where the veteran is unemployable due to service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b) (2019); see also Fanning v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 225 (1993). Should the Board discern a plausible basis for an extraschedular TDIU, it must refer the matter to the Director of Compensation Service for an initial decision before the Board may decide the issue. See Wages v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 233, 236 (2015).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

After completing any development deemed necessary, the AOJ should review in the first instance the issue of entitlement to a TDIU prior to May 19, 2024, to include extraschedular consideration. The threshold determination must be supported with a full statement as to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, employment history, educational and vocational attainment and all other factors having a bearing on the issue in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Shawkey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.