Citation Nr: A25030104
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240329-429419
DATE: April 1, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lower back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force from December 1975 to May 1976.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in its adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Lower Back Disability

Remand is necessary to correct a predecisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The Veteran contends that his low back disability was caused by a sports injury while in service. He contends he began to experience back pain while playing volleyball in 1976 and has experienced continual pain in his back since he was discharged from service. See November 2023 VA 21-526EZ; February 2024 VA Examination. 

Initially, the Board notes that the AOJ made the following favorable findings. First, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5. See February 2024 VA Examination. Second, the evidence shows a qualifying event or injury during service, specifically the service treatment records (STR) show a complaint of lower back pain. See STR - March 1976 Primary Care Clinic Note. The Board is bound by these favorable AOJ findings as they are not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). 

A new medical opinion is necessary to adjudicate the Veteran's lower back disability claim. 

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination. The examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5 and military service. Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. 

The February 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate for rating purposes because it did not answer the dispositive question in this case.  Although no disability of the spine was noted on the entrance examination report, the record shows that the Veteran was discharged from service based on a Medical Board finding of spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5 that existed prior to service.  Accordingly, the AOJ should have requested an opinion further addressing the question of a preexisting disability, including whether the Veteran's bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5 is congenital in nature and etiologically related to service.  Neither the Board nor the Veteran is competent to supplement the record with unsubstantiated medical conclusions. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed back disability of spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5. Arrange for the Veteran's claims file, including a copy of this Remand, to be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  If an examination is indicated, one must be provided to the Veteran. 

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, especially the February 2024 VA examination and opinion, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Determine whether the Veteran's spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5 is a congenital defect, a congenital disease, or a disorder not of congenital/developmental origin.

Note: a disease generally refers to a condition that is considered capable of improving or deteriorating, while a defect is generally not considered capable of improving or deteriorating.

(b) If the disability is determined to be a congenital defect, opine whether the disability was subject to a superimposed disease or injury during active service and resulted in additional disability.

(c) If the disability is determined to be a congenital or developmental disease, opine as to whether there is clear and unmistakable (undebatable) evidence that the disorder both (i) preexisted the Veteran's entry into active service, and (ii) did NOT undergo an increase in severity beyond the natural scope of the disability during the Veteran's active service.

(d) If the disability is not congenital or did not preexist service, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the bilateral pars interarticularis defects L5 manifested during, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include treatment for back pain in service.  Please address the Medical Board report.

In providing an opinion, the examiner should address the following:

"	The Veteran's contentions that his back pain began in service as a result of a sports injury and has continued to the current day. -See February 2024 VA Examination.

"	The Veteran's entrance examination which found the Veteran's spine was normal upon clinical evaluation - STR - June 1975 Report of Medical Examination.

"	The Veteran sought treatment for backpain after playing volleyball - STR - March 1976 Primary Care Clinic. 

"	Documentation of the Veteran's diagnosis of spondylolisthesis with bilateral pars interarticularis that led to a recommendation for discharge from service - STR - April 1976 Medical Board Report and April 1976 Report of Medical Examination. 

The Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptoms. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

A complete rationale with clear conclusions, citations to medical evidence, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two must be provided for all expressed opinions.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elsbach, E. R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elsbach, E. R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.