Citation Nr: A25030231
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434127
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, which is currently 30 percent disabling, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1980 to June 1984 and from January 1985 to March 1990.

The matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 higher-level review decision, following a December 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of an increased rating for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an increased rating for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder, which is currently 30 percent disabling, is remanded.

The Board finds that there was a pre-decisional error, and a remand is required. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran asserts that his other specified trauma and stressor related disorder entitles him to a higher rating evaluation than the 30 percent rating he currently receives. See April 2024 VA Form 10182.

VA shall make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate the claimant's claim; however, VA is not required to provide assistance to a claimant if no reasonable possibility exists that such assistance would aid in substantiating the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(a).

The Board observes the law specifically provides direction for adjudicating claims in instances where the Veteran fails to report for scheduled VA examinations. When entitlement or continued entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination, or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, paragraphs (b) or (c), as appropriate. Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant, death of an immediate family member, etc. For purposes of this section, the terms examination and reexamination include periods of hospital observation when required by VA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).

When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record. When the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a supplemental claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

The record reflects that the AOJ scheduled a VA examination for December 6, 2023, but that the Veteran did not report for the examination. Specifically, the record includes a VA Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation document that reads. "No Show." See December 2023 VA Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation. Thereafter, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the claim on December 28, 2023. 

It is unclear, however, whether the Veteran received proper notice to attend the examination. Although the record contains a November 2023 Exam Scheduling Request instructing the AOJ to schedule an examination, there is no indication that he received appropriate notice of the examination after the AOJ scheduled it. See November 2023 Exam Request. Although a letter was sent to the Veteran notifying him that a VA medical center would contact him with information regarding an upcoming examination, there is not documentation of such. Accordingly, the Board finds that there is good cause to reschedule the VA examination. On remand, the AOJ should provide the Veteran with proper notice of the scheduled examination. His failure to report to the scheduled examination, without good cause, will result in the claim being considered based on the rest of the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

Under the AMA framework, the Board may remand where there has been a duty to notify and assist error prior to issuance of the rating decision on appeal. While the Board regrets the additional delay, due to the VA's failure to notify and assist, the Veteran's appeal must be remanded.

The Board reminds the Veteran that the "duty to assist is not always a one-way street." A veteran is expected to cooperate in the efforts to adjudicate the claim, and his failure to do so would subject him to the risk of an adverse adjudication based on an incomplete and underdeveloped record. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). Rather, on remand, the Veteran should ensure that he reports for the rescheduled VA examination. If he fails to report for the scheduled examination, the appeal will be adjudicated based upon the governing law, which may include denial of the appeals pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected other specified trauma and stressor related disability. All scheduling requests and responses should be added to the claims file. The examiner must review the claims file and note the extent of his or her review in the claims file. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability.

Provide a full rationale to support all opinions, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature with application to the Veteran's medical history, as appropriate. 

 

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	McLaughlin, Paul J. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.