Citation Nr: A25030224
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230622-356192
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The proposed reduction of the Veteran's disability rating of bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent is dismissed.

Service connection for an eye disability is withdrawn.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a lung disability to include chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD) and lung adenocarcinoma is remanded.

Service connection for asthma is remanded.

Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for femoral radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for femoral radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right ankle disability is remanded.

A total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

Permanent incapacity for self-support is not established for the Veteran's adult child is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction of the Veteran's disability rating for bilateral hearing loss made in the May 22, 2023 rating decision was rendered moot by the May 24, 2023 rating decision that voided the effected rating reduction and replacing it with a proposed a rating reduction, and the proposed rating reduction made in the May 24, 2023 rating decision is unripe for adjudication.

2. On March 21, 2025, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Board received notification from the Veteran that a withdrawal of the claim for service connection for an eye disability is requested.

3. The Veteran's service-connected (bilateral) tinnitus is assigned a 10 percent rating, the maximum rating authorized under Diagnostic Code 6260; and the symptoms of the Veteran's tinnitus are not unique or unusual.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the proposed reduction of the Veteran's disability rating of bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

2. The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260; Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Marine Corps from September 1972 to October 1976, December 1977 to August 1980, and December 1980 to March 1983.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) made in February 2023, May 22, 2023, and May 24, 2023.  This appeal is being adjudicated under the modern appellate framework.  In the June 2023 notice of disagreement (NOD) which commenced this appeal, the Veteran opted into the Direct Review Docket.

As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Veteran has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. The proposed reduction of the Veteran's disability rating of bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent is dismissed.

The Veteran is attempting to challenge the reduction of the evaluation of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent.  Unfortunately, this matter must be dismissed due to lack of appellate justiciability.  

On May 22, 2023, the RO reduced the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent.  On May 24, 2023, the RO voided the effective rating reduction and replaced it with a proposed rating reduction.  The Veteran appealed in June 2023, and the rating reduction was effected in September 2023.  

The May 22, 2023 rating decision is moot, because it was voided by the May 24, 2023 rating decision; and, therefore, appellate justiciability cannot be established due to mootness.  Mills v. Green, 159 U.S. 651 (1895).  The May 24, 2023 rating decision is unripe, because a proposed rating reduction can only be implemented after additional development as well as a second rating decision implementing the rating reduction; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e); and, therefore, appellate justiciability cannot be established due to lack of ripeness.  Woodford v. Ngo, 548 U.S. 81 (2006).  Finally, appellate jurisdiction cannot be established over the September 2023 decision, because it is outside the record on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(1).  

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  In the present case, the justiciability of any of the rating decisions related to the reduction of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss from 20 percent to 10 percent cannot be established, and the issue must be dismissed.

The Board, however, is cognizant of the need to interpret the Veteran's NOD in as liberal a manner possible.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  To this end, the Board notes that implicit in the rating reduction in the May 22, 2023 rating decision is a denial of an increased rating claim for bilateral hearing loss that the May 24, 2023 rating decision did nothing to change or amend.  Thus while the Board does not have the ability to review the propriety of the rating reduction itself, the Board, in liberally interpreting the NOD, must consider whether or not to assign the Veteran an increased disability rating for bilateral hearing loss.  

2. Service connection for an eye disability is withdrawn.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative.  Id.  In the present case, the Veteran has withdrawn the claim for service connection for an eye disability and, hence, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the claim for service connection for an eye disability, and it is dismissed.

3. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent.  The Veteran is limited to a single disability rating for tinnitus, regardless whether the tinnitus is unilateral or bilateral.  Smith v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 63, 78 (2005).  Here, the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available for tinnitus.  38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.  As such, there is no adequate legal basis upon which to award a higher rating.  As a matter of law, a schedular rating for tinnitus in excess of 10 percent is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for a lung disability to include COPD and lung adenocarcinoma is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to a lung disability to include COPD and lung adenocarcinoma.  Unfortunately, this matter must be remanded.  

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in May 2023.  The examination indicated that the Veteran's COPD and lung carcinoma were due to the Veteran's history of smoking rather than toxic exposure to perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene.  The examiner's reasoning regarding the relationship between smoking and the lung carcinoma in particular was essentially that cigarettes are a known carcinogen.  While the examiner has clearly articulated the facts and data upon which the opinion relies, the examiner has failed to articulate the reliable principles and methods that were applied to the facts and data to come to a conclusion.  In other words, it is unclear from the opinion what it is about cigarettes that makes them more likely responsible for the Veteran's lung adenocarcinoma than toxic exposure to PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene.  

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide the Veteran with an examination it must provide the Veteran with an adequate one.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Adequate examinations are based on sufficient facts and data applied to reliable principles and methods.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  As discussed supra, the examination of record failed to record the latter.  As such, this constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist, and the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer of relief at this time.  As such, this matter must be remanded for a new VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

2. Service connection for asthma is remanded.

The Veteran's claim for service connection for asthma is inextricably intertwined with the Veteran's claim for service connection for a lung disability to include COPD and lung adenocarcinoma.  As such, this matter must be remanded as well in order to avoid piecemeal appellate litigation.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991).

3. Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for a left ankle disability.  Unfortunately, this matter must be remanded.

The Veteran contends that the claimed left ankle disability was due to an in-service left ankle injury.  The Veteran has been provided a number of examinations that reject this theory based on the lack of corroboration of the injury within the Veteran's service treatment records.  

While the Board lacks medical expertise and cannot make medical findings in the guise of legal ones; Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991); whether or not the Veteran's reports are credible are ultimately findings of credibility (rather than medical findings) which the Board as the finder of fact is empowered to make.  Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995).  An examination that disregards lay reports of an in-service incurrence, moreover, is inadequate unless the Board finds that such an event did not happen.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010).  Indeed, the mere lack of corroboration within the Veteran's service treatment records of a reported in-service incurrence alone is not sufficient to conclude that the reported in-service incurrence did not happen.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir., 2006).  

As noted supra once VA undertakes the effort to provide the Veteran with an examination it must provide the Veteran with an adequate one.  See Barr.  The examinations of record are not adequate for foregoing reasons.  This constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist, and the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer or relief at this time.  As such, this matter must be remanded for a new VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

4. A disability rating in excess of 20 percent for a back disability is remanded.

5. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

6. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for femoral radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

7. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

8. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for femoral radiculopathy of the right lower extremity is remanded.

9. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to increased disability ratings for a back disability, sciatic and femoral radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities, and bilateral hearing loss.  The Veteran last underwent VA examinations evaluating the severity of the claimed conditions in December 2022.  After the December 2022 VA examinations however, the Veteran alleged that his disabilities increased in severity in his January 2023 supplemental claim.  As noted supra once VA undertakes the effort to provide the Veteran with an examination it must provide the Veteran with an adequate one.  See Barr.  Examinations in disability ratings cases are inadequate when the Veteran has provided competent reports that the severity of the disability has increased since the most recent VA examination.  Snuffer v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 400 (1997); Caffrey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 377 (1994).  The failure to provide the Veteran new VA examinations constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist.  Unfortunately, the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer or relief at this time.  As such, this matter must be remanded for a new VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

10. A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a right ankle disability is remanded.

The Veteran's increased rating claim for a right ankle disability is inextricably intertwined with the Veteran's claim for service connection for a left ankle disability; and it must be remanded as well in order to avoid piecemeal appellate litigation.  See Harris.

11. TDIU is remanded.

The issue of TDIU has been raised by the record; Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009)l; and the issue of TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the above issues, and must be remanded as well in order to avoid piecemeal appellate litigation.  See Harris.

12. Permanent incapacity for self-support is not established for the Veteran's adult child is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran's adult child was disabled before the age of 18.  The Veteran has provided competent reports based on the Veteran's understanding of his child's mental disabilities.  Nevertheless, the Veteran is opining on a matter of medical complexity, and thus it must be referred to a medical expert to provide an opinion on when, if ever, the Veteran's child became incapable of self-support.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a lung disability (to include lung adenocarcinoma)?  Why or why not?

(b.) What is the medical significance, if any, of both the Veteran's history of smoking and history of exposure to PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene to the Veteran's diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma?  

(c.) To the extent that the Veteran's exposure to PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene is a greater contributing factor to the Veteran's lung adenocarcinoma, or vice versa, then please articulate the medical principles and methods that were utilized in order to form this conclusion. 

2. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of his left ankle disability. The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.  The examiner should also assess the severity of the Veteran's right ankle disability. 

3. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to determine the severity of the Veteran's back disability.

4. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to determine the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities.

5. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to determine the severity of the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss.

6. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Comment on the Veteran's ability to function in an occupational environment.

(b.) Document any reported education and work experience.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(c.) Describe the functional impairment caused solely by the service-connected disabilities.  Age and non-service-connected disabilities should be neither considered nor mentioned.

7. Arrange to provide the Veteran's child with a VA examination in order to determine, to the extent medically feasible, when if ever the Veteran's child became incapable of self-support to include before the age of 18.  Offer a rationale for any opinion offered.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	David R. Seaton, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.