Citation Nr: A25030377
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240325-426555
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder, to include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Navy from February 1987 to July 1996.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In March 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such decision by filing a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the rating decision in June 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Thus, the Board cannot consider evidence submitted subsequent to such rating decision. Id. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, she may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

A veteran is entitled to VA disability compensation if there is a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Generally, to establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In this regard, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Further, service connection may not be awarded on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

1. Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied. is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that he currently has a gastrointestinal disorder as a result of military service, gastroesophageal reflux disease. A review of the STR's and the post service treatment records is silent for symptoms related to GERD, and no diagnosis or treatment for GERD is present in the record. The Veteran contends that the GERD is related to his weight gain since service discharge, which he relates to lack of motivation for exercise because of his service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2022. This consisted of a record review without an in person or telehealth examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran has not sought out medical attention for GERD in the past and has no current diagnosis of any esophageal condition, but she did note the Veteran's symptoms of episodic epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and substernal chest pain. She noted that the Veteran does not carry a current diagnosis of GERD and without a current diagnosis, the examiner did not attempt to establish a nexus or plausible secondary relationship opinion. No other opinions or rationale were provided.

In a February 2022 statement in support of claim, the Veteran outlined his current symptoms, which he attributes to GERD, and the various functional impairments derived from those symptoms. In addition to the direct symptoms of his possible GERD, the Veteran detailed dietary and sleep changes related to those symptoms.

The VA has a duty to assist veterans in developing their claims for benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. The duty to assist including providing a medical examination when necessary to decide a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4). When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Board finds that the February 2020 VA examination is inadequate to decide this claim. The Board notes that the pertinent medical evidence documented the presence of chronic epigastric issues which may be productive of some functional impairment. A decision from the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that in certain circumstances, pain may be considered a disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). The Court determined that pain may be considered a disability where there is also functional impairment. The Board finds that the evidence that the Veteran reportedly has chronic epigastric pain issues for which he takes continuous OTC medication may be sufficient to warrant a disability for VA purposes. A determination must be made as to whether the epigastric pain found on examination is linked to his active-duty service. Updating records, based on the Veteran's statement that was not considered, is part of that necessary determination that constitutes the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Additionally, the VA examination is inadequate because it relies, in part, on a lack of medical evidence. Lack of evidence cannot be treated as substantive negative evidence. In other words, reliance on the lack of medical evidence, especially without consideration of lay statements, is an inadequate rationale. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (the Court) has held that the mere absence of evidence does not equate to unfavorable evidence. See Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc) (cautioning that negative evidence, meaning actual evidence weighing against a party, must not be equated with the absence of substantive evidence); see also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination must consider lay evidence of in-service incurrence or continuity of symptomatology since service). The examiner failed to consider the Veteran's reports of chronic pyrosis from service to the present date.

Based on the inadequacies of the VA examination, resulting in a pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board must remand this matter for an addendum VA opinion that addresses all the evidence of record.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. In remanding this matter, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions. Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

2. Obtain updated VA and/or private treatment records to the extent possible. If such records are unavailable, the Veteran's claims file must be clearly documented to that effect and the Veteran notified in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (e).

3. Once the above has been completed to the extent possible, obtain an addendum VA opinion regarding the nature of the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder from a medical professional with appropriate expertise. The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. Only schedule a VA examination if the requested opinion cannot be provided without one.

2. Based on a review of the record, and a new examination if necessary, the examiner is to address the following:

3.Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder manifested in, or is otherwise attributable to, active service? The examiner is to assume a current gastrointestinal disorder, as the Board has found that the Veteran's pain complaints have led to functional impairment under Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

4. The evidentiary standard "at least as likely as not" is defined as the "likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher." Conversely, "less likely than not" is defined as the "likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal.

5. In rendering this opinion, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history. Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or rely solely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.

6.  A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions presented. If the medical professional cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. In so doing, the medical professional shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Seibert, Andrew L. II

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.