Citation Nr: A25030501
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240812-463603
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for endocarditis is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for lipoma is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic motor tic disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At his Board hearing on December 5, 2024, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Veteran withdrew his appeal with respect to the issues of service connection for shortness of breath, endocarditis, lipoma, and skin cancer. 

2. The Veteran is not currently diagnosed with peripheral arterial disease. 

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a back condition began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of the issue for entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath have been met. 38 U.S.C.  § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for withdrawal of the issue for entitlement to service connection for endocarditis have been met. 38 U.S.C.  § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. 1. The criteria for withdrawal of the issue for entitlement to service connection for lipoma have been met. 38 U.S.C.  § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. 1. The criteria for withdrawal of the issue for entitlement to service connection for skin cancer have been met. 38 U.S.C.  § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

5. The criteria for service connection for peripheral arterial disease are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for a back condition are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1965 through September 1967.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 and June 2024 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted two separate VA Forms 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) with regard to the February 2024 and June 2024 rating decisions and selected the Hearing docket. The February 2024 rating decision denied service connection for chronic motor tic disorder and peripheral arterial disease. The June 2024 rating decision denied service connection for a back condition, endocarditis, lipoma, and sleep apnea.

Additionally, the Veteran indicated on his August 2024 VA Form 10182 that he was appealing the issues of shortness of breath and skin cancer. The March 2024 rating decision denied service connection for shortness of breath and skin cancer. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran intended to also appeal the March 2024 rating decision.  

In December 2024, a virtual Board hearing was held before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ), and a transcript of the hearing is of record.

Given the Veteran's docket selection, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302, 20.801.  For the issues of chronic motor tic disorder and peripheral arterial disease, the relevant rating decision was issued February 2024. For the issues of a back condition, endocarditis, lipoma, and sleep apnea, the relevant rating decision was issued June 2024. For the issues of shortness of breath and skin cancer, the relevant rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, was issued October 2023. 

At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran's representative indicated that the Veteran wished to appeal the issue of entitlement to service connection for venous statis dermatis (leg rashes) that was denied in an August 2024 rating decision. However, the Board has not received a timely written appeal of this issue, and it is, therefore, not properly before the Board for adjudication.  

With regard to the matters denied herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for chronic motor tic disorder and obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Withdrawal of Claims

1. Entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath.

2. Entitlement to service connection for endocarditis.

3. Entitlement to service connection for lipoma.

4. Entitlement to service connection for skin cancer.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or an authorized representative. Id. 

At the December 2024 Board hearing, prior to the promulgation of a decision, the Veteran requested to withdraw the issues of entitlement to service connection for shortness of breath, endocarditis, lipoma, and skin cancer. In this regard, the Board finds that such withdrawal was explicit, unambiguous, and done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action. Acree v. O'Rourke, 891 F.3d 1009 (Fed. Cir. 2018), DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 57 (2011). Therefore, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration with regard to such issue. Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal of such issues, and they are dismissed.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from an injury or disease contracted in the line of duty, or for aggravation of a pre-existing injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, in the active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Board is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

5. Entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease. 

The Veteran contends his peripheral arterial disease is related to service due to exposure to Agent Orange off the coast of Vietnam. See September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. 

The AOJ conceded that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), to include asbestos exposure due to his duties as a Storekeeper and herbicide exposure based on service in the Republic of Vietnam's inland waterways and one or more of the approved Republic of Vietnam bays or harbors. See March 2024 Rating Decision. 

In a November 2023 VA examination, the examiner explained that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. The examiner noted that the Veteran had poor sensation in his toes and persisted over time and got worse during cold weather, however, the examiner concluded that there was no objective medical evidence to support a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. As such, the examiner opined that peripheral arterial disease was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERAs, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

At the December 2024 Board hearing the Veteran testified that he was diagnosed with early stages of peripheral arterial disease in 2016 or 2018. Further, the Veteran indicated that he was not sure if his peripheral arterial disease condition had developed or not, however he had records that showed a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records do not show evidence of a current diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease disability and the Veteran has not provided additional treatment records confirming that any such diagnosis had been made. As there is no indication of a current diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease disability, the first element of service connection is not met.

In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim and service connection cannot be granted. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1333 (1997) (holding that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that he was diagnosed with peripheral arterial disease, however the record lacks necessary medical evidence to confirm a diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease. Since the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran had a peripheral arterial disease disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim, entitlement to service connection for peripheral arterial disease is denied. 

The Board notes that this decision does not leave the Veteran without recourse. The Veteran is free to file a new claim for entitlement to service connection for peripheral artery disease in the future.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a back condition. 

The Veteran seeks service connection for a back condition. See March 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

The Veteran's service treatment records do not show treatment for any injury or related disease during service, nor do the Veteran's post-service treatment records indicate that the Veteran sought treatment for back pain shortly after service.  

At the December 2024 hearing, the Veteran testified that he was not treated for his back while in service, however he received treatment for his back post-service for the past 24 years. The record does not contain any other medical evidence suggesting that the Veteran has a back condition.

Based on this, the Board is unable to grant this claim, as the record does not contain sufficient evidence to show that the Veteran currently suffers from a back condition related to service. The Board takes note of the Veteran's testimony that he had experienced back pain for many years. However, there is no supporting evidence in the record showing that the Veteran has a current back disability. Accordingly, this claim must be denied. 

In denying this claim for entitlement to service connection for a back condition, the Board notes that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination prior to the initial adjudication of this claim. VA must provide a medical examination if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service, and the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2) (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold to trigger the need for an examination is low. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

However, the only evidence of a back condition is the Veteran's recent testimony before the Board. Further, the only evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service is the Veteran's testimony before the Board that he often loaded ammunition weighing about 25 to 50 pounds as part of his duties during service. This testimony was not available to the AOJ at the time of the decision on appeal. Therefore, the AOJ's failure to provide a VA examination does not constitute a pre-decisional duty to assist error and the Board cannot remand this matter on this basis. 

The Board also notes that this decision does not leave the Veteran without recourse. The Veteran is free to file a new claim for entitlement to service connection for a back condition in the future.

REASONS FOR REMAND

VA's duty to assist a veteran in substantiating a claim includes obtaining a medical opinion when necessary and ensuring that it is adequate to decide the claim.?See 38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007).?An examination report is inadequate if it provides an incomplete analysis. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?120 (2007); see also Miller v. West, 11?Vet. App.?345 (1998). In this regard, the Board takes note that VA has a responsibility to consider all potential theories of entitlement that are raised by the evidence in a service connection claim. See Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

7. Entitlement to service connection for chronic motor tic disorder.

The Veteran contends his chronic motor tic disorder is related to service due to exposure to Agent Orange off the coast of Vietnam. See September 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic motor tic disorder. See February 2024 Rating Decision. Additionally, the AOJ conceded that the conceded the Veteran's exposure to both asbestos and herbicides. See March 2024 Rating Decision.

In a November 2023 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic motor tic disorder. The examiner explained that chronic tic disorder did not qualify as a disability on a presumptive basis nor was it caused by the Veteran's exposure to asbestos during service. However, the examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's condition was otherwise related to his exposure to herbicide agents, specifically Agent Orange. Therefore, the November 2023 VA opinion is inadequate. A remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Board notes that at the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran raised a new theory of entitlement to service connection for chronic motor tic disorder due to medication for his service-connected hypertension disability.

As the Board is remanding this matter to obtain an addendum VA medical opinion, on remand the examiner may address the Veteran's subsequently raised theory of entitlement for chronic motor tic disorder. 

8. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

The Veteran seeks service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. See March 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with a disability as indicated in the March 2024 VA examination. See June 2024 Rating Decision. Additionally, the AOJ conceded that the conceded the Veteran's exposure to both asbestos and herbicides. See March 2024 Rating Decision.

In a March 2024 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner opined that obstructive sleep apnea was not related to the Veteran's exposure to asbestos during service.  However, the examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's condition was otherwise related to his exposure to herbicide agents, specifically Agent Orange. Therefore, the March 2024 VA opinion is inadequate. A remand is necessary for an addendum opinion to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Board notes that at the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran raised a new theory of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea due to medication for his service-connected hypertension disability. 

As the Board is remanding this matter to obtain an addendum VA medical opinion, on remand the examiner may address the Veteran's subsequently raised theory of entitlement for obstructive sleep apnea. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this remand to an appropriate VA examiner so as to obtain an addendum opinion that considers the Veteran's exposure to herbicides in the Republic of Vietnam. 

In rendering an addendum opinion, the VA examiner should address the following: 

(a)	Whether the Veteran's chronic motor tic disorder was 

caused by exposure to herbicide agents, including Agent Orange, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

(b)	Whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was 

caused by exposure to herbicide agents, including Agent Orange, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

A detailed rationale for the medical opinion must be provided. If the requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why.

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Ruberto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.