Citation Nr: A25030758
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-462004
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is dismissed.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The August 5, 2024, VA Form 10182, notice of disagreement (NOD), was received more than one year from the date of mailing of the March 2023, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which is the only AOJ decision addressing entitlement to service connection for hearing loss.

2. The Veteran has not requested an extension of time nor presented good cause for his untimely VA Form 10182/NOD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for dismissal of the appeal of entitlement to service connection for hearing loss have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500, 20.202, 20.301.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2006 to December 2013. 

This matter come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for tinnitus, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Dismissal

VA regulations under the AMA require that a completed VA Form 10182 be received within one year from the date that the AOJ mailed the notice of the decision being appealed. The date of the mailing of the letter of notification of the decision is to be presumed to be the same as the date of that letter for purposes of determining whether an appeal has been timely filed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b).

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is dismissed.  

A March 2023 rating decision denied the claim of entitlement to service connection for hearing loss. The Veteran was notified of this decision on March 13, 2023. On August 5, 2024, the Board received VA Form 10182, wherein the Veteran indicated that he sought Board review of this matter, which was most recently addressed in the March 2023 rating decision. See VA Form 10182.

The Board concludes that due to a claims processing rules defect, the issues of entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is dismissed. Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2021).

Here, in the August 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran identified hearing loss; however, the VA Form 10182 was received more than one year from the date of the mailing of the letter of notification of the only AOJ decision of record, March 13, 2023. See Notification Letter (March 2023). Therefore, the August 2024 VA Form 10182 is untimely to appeal the March 2023 rating decision.

VA notified the Veteran in a letter instructing him on how to submit a review request of his denied hearing loss claim on the proper form, detailing his review request options. See Request for Application AMA Review letter (June 2023). The letter informed the Veteran that VA will take no further action until receipt of a completed proper form. Id. The Veteran did not submit a review request on the proper form, and did not further communicate with VA regarding the matter. 

The Board finds that the Veteran has not requested nor presented a good cause exception to the filing of a timely VA Form 10182/NOD. 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(c).

Next, the Board finds that the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 20.104(c) are not applicable. The regulation provides that notice and the opportunity to present evidence and argument, including the opportunity for a hearing, must be provided to all parties when the Board raises a question as to a "potential" jurisdictional defect. However, § 20.104(c) pertains to "jurisdictional authority" and not to "claims processing rules" defects. Nevertheless, even if § 20.104(c) was to apply, there is no question as to a "potential" jurisdictional defect, rather an actual and evident defect on the face of the record. See Soyini v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 540, 546 (1991) (strict adherence to requirements of law is not warranted when adherence would result in unnecessarily imposing additional burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the veteran).

Lastly, the Board recognizes that recent caselaw has drawn a distinction between jurisdiction and the legal and regulatory requirements necessary to begin an appeal and receive appellate review ("claims processing rules"). See, e.g., Hall, 34 Vet. App. 329. To the extent that this recent caselaw calls into question whether this matter is properly dismissed, the Board finds that VA regulations and the laws from which they are derived clearly state that the Board may not review applications for appeal unless they meet the legal criteria. 38 U.S.C. § 7108 (An application for review on appeal shall not be entertained unless it is in conformity with this chapter). See also, 38 U.S.C. 7105 (a)-(b) (Appellate review shall be initiated by the filing of a notice of disagreement in the form prescribed by the Secretary. A notice of disagreement shall be filed within one year from the date of the mailing of the notice of the decision). Those criteria require that a NOD identify the decision with which the claimant disagrees and be submitted within one year from the date of mailing. 

Because the latest AOJ decision addressing the claim for service connection for hearing loss dates to March 2023, and no earlier appeals, whether via a supplemental claim (VA 20-0995) or higher-level review request (VA 20-0996), were received within one year from the date of the notification letter (March 13, 2023) informing the Veteran of the denial of his claim for entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, this August 2024 VA Form 10182 cannot meet the legal and regulatory criteria for review of this claim by the Board.

Therefore, the application for appeal as to this issue is not in conformity with the legal requirements for an application for appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 7108.

Accordingly, the Board the appeal seeking service connection for hearing loss is dismissed.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the Appeal Modernization Act, the Board shall remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Tinnitus

The Veteran contends that he developed tinnitus as a result of acoustic trauma he sustained in service related to his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) as helicopter/tiltrotor aircraft maintenance. Specifically, he contends that he was exposed to jet engines and aircrafts daily during service. See February 2024 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. 

Remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal. 

The March 2024 rating decision on appeal favorably found that (1) the Veteran is diagnosed with tinnitus and (2) his MOS has a high probability of hazardous noise exposure. Therefore, the remaining element to establish service connection for tinnitus rests on whether a nexus can be established between the Veteran's tinnitus and in-service hazardous noise exposure. 

In this regard, a February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not related to military noise exposure. As a rationale, the examiner cited to the Institute of Medicine (IOM) study, indicating that as the interval between a noise exposure and the onset of tinnitus lengthens, the possibility that tinnitus will be triggered by other factors increases. 

In light of the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court), the Board finds that remand is necessary. See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243 (2019). This Court decision highlighted the contradictory findings regarding delayed onset hearing loss in the IOM report. Specifically, the VA medical opinion noted that the IOM report concluded, in part, that based on the anatomical and physiological data available on the recovery process following noise exposure, it was unlikely that delayed effects occurred. However, the IOM report also indicates that "[t]here is not sufficient evidence from longitudinal studies in laboratory animals or humans to determine whether permanent noise-induced hearing loss can develop much later in one's lifetime, long after the cessation of that noise exposure" and that "definitive studies to address this issue have not been performed." Any future opinion predicated on the IOM report's findings regarding delayed onset hearing loss must address these inconsistencies. As the February 2024 VA examiner relied on this IOM study without addressing these inconsistencies, the Board finds the opinion inadequate and a remand for an addendum opinion is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Return the claims file to the audiologist who provided the February 2024 addendum opinion, if possible. If that audiologist is not available, provide the claims file to another audiologist. The claims file and this remand shall be made available to the examiner and review of the file must be noted in the requested report. After reviewing the claims file the audiologist must respond to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that tinnitus had its onset in, or is related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, including noise exposure, including on a delayed onset theory of causation? 

The audiologist must specifically address the Veteran's contention that he was exposed to acoustic trauma (jet engines and aircrafts) in relation to his MOS of helicopter/tiltrotor aircraft maintenance. 

Note that hazardous in-service noise exposure based on the Veteran's MOS is conceded. 

In formulating a medical opinion, if relying to any extent upon the IOM study noted above, the examiner must (a) identify the medical text's qualifying or contradictory aspects; and (b) explain why the examiner found the contradictory aspects or conclusions in the IOM study to be less persuasive in this Veteran's case as to the question of whether delayed onset tinnitus is as likely as not etiologically related to in-service noise exposure.

All findings and conclusions must be supported with a complete rationale and set forth in a legible report, which shall reflect the examiner's consideration and analysis of both the medical and lay evidence of record. If it is not possible to provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the reason that is so must be explained, indicating whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided or whether the inability to provide an opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

SHAUN S. SPERANZA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bobb, Jessica R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.