Citation Nr: A25030003
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240216-418413
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating for service-connected generalized anxiety disorder of 70 percent, but no higher, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire period on appeal, the evidence of record reflects the Veteran's mental health disability manifested at worst as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating for generalized anxiety disorder of 70 percent, but no higher, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7,4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 1967 to July 1971.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

This case returns to the Board after the Court of Veterans' Appeals (Court) issued an October 2024 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) remanding in part the April 2024 Board decision that denied entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for generalized anxiety disorder. The Court returned the claim to the Board to address the explicitly raised arguments by the Veteran's representative regarding the September 2023 private medical report and the inadequacy of the May 2023 VA examination of record. As will be discussed below, the Board has considered the evidence of record and will proceed with a decision on the merits. To this end, the Board wishes to make it clear that it is aware of the Court's instructions in Fletcher v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 394 (1991), to the effect that a remand by the Court is not "merely for the purposes of rewriting the opinion so that it will superficially comply with the 'reasons or bases' requirement of 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (d)(1). A remand is meant to entail a critical examination of the justification for the decision." The Board's analysis has been undertaken with Fletcher in mind.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In determining the propriety of the rating assigned after a grant of service connection, the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection must be evaluated and staged ratings must be considered. Fenderson v. Brown, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-127 (1999). Staged ratings are appropriate when the evidence establishes that the claimed disability manifested symptoms that would warrant different ratings for distinct time periods during the course of the appeal. Id. 

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected generalized anxiety disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected generalized anxiety disorder is more severe than his current disability rating reflects. This appeal stems from a December 2023 rating decision subsequent to an inferred claim for an increased rating made by the RO in response to the Board's August 2019 request for development for the Veteran's claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU). The Veteran's generalized anxiety disability is currently rated as 50 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9400.  

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, to include general anxiety disorder, a 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory such as, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id. 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id. A 100 percent evaluation is assignable where there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

When rating psychiatric impairment, consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency is to assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). When evaluating the level of disability arising from a mental disorder, the rating agency is to consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b).

The symptoms listed in the rating criteria for psychiatric disorders are not intended to constitute exhaustive lists, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 443 (2002). The Board will consider whether the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, and, if so, the equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. 

Consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). Furthermore, when evaluating the level of disability arising from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b).

The symptoms associated with the psychiatric rating criteria are not intended to constitute exhaustive lists but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 443 (2002). The Board will consider whether the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, and, if so, the equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. A veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Use of the term "such as" in the general rating formula for mental disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 indicates that the symptoms after that phrase do not constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436. It is not required to find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms recited for particular ratings. Id. The use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of the symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on his/her social and work situation. Id.

VA treatment records available for review during the applicable evidence review period show that the Veteran has been receiving treatment for his anxiety for many years. The Veteran has symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The Veteran is prescribed sertraline for anxiety. VA treatment records generally show that the Veteran has generally tolerated sertraline well to manage his anxiety, and appears to have normal mood, organized speech with no sign of elation or grandiosity, pressured speech, irritability, moodiness, helplessness, hopelessness or depression, during mental health treatment notes. 

In September 2019, the Veteran underwent an examination for his anxiety disability. The examiner noted the Veteran does not have any currently diagnosed mental health disorder. The examiner noted that the Veteran has symptoms of anxiety, and he has been prescribed sertraline. The examiner noted the Veteran was appropriately dressed and well-groomed with appropriate eye contact during the interview. The Veteran had coherent, and gold directed thought process. The examiner noted the Veteran ruminated about perceived injustices done to him after returning home from Vietnam. However, there was no evidence of obvious hallucinations, delusions, obsessions, or compulsions. The Veteran had a euthymic mood and appropriate affect. The Veteran had intact attention and concentration, but gross lapses in short and long-term memory. The examiner noted that the Veteran continues to take sertraline and sees a psychiatrist monthly, but stated the Veteran has not engaged in any type of behavioral health treatment since 2011. 

A May 2023 lay statement from the Veteran reported his anger issues. He reports that he is easy to anger and loses his temper daily and being enraged when hearing about current events. The Veteran reported keeping his distance from people to avoid conflicts. He endorsed getting angry at work and losing his temper when he got into disagreements with co-workers and was told to attend trainings by his supervisor. Additionally, the Veteran reported experiencing memory problems. He reported forgetting events like his daughter's birthday and having to rely on calendars to remind him of events. The Veteran also mentioned that when he volunteered with the Red Cross, he showed up on the wrong day to pick up blood for the center he was supposed to deliver to. The Veteran reported having trouble remembering prayers from scripture that he repeats daily, so he has to read them rather than rely on his memory. The Veteran also reported to having panic attacks that last up to 10 minutes in duration at least once a week, if not more depending on how much stress he is under. To get relief from the panic attack, the Veteran reports going into his basement with his therapy dog and playing video games. He also reports dressing in women's clothing to get relief. The Veteran does not socialize with friends, and he doesn't visit with family unless there is a special occasion.

A May 2023 VA examination report noted the Veteran had a current diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder. Occupational and social impairment was noted as occasional decrease in work efficiency with intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The examiner noted the Veteran's anxiety disability manifests symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss and disturbances of motivation and mood. The Veteran reported to being worried all the time with difficulty with irritability. The Veteran reported to having good relationships with family but has periods of depressed mood and decline in motivation and mood due to his increased anxiety. The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideations, denied hallucinations, and did not endorse delusional thoughts or beliefs. The examiner noted short-term memory had declined but long-term memory remains intact.

In September 2023, the Veteran's private psychologist provided an opinion regarding his current claim for an increased rating for his generalized anxiety disorder. The private psychologist opined that the Veteran's symptoms of anxiety results in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  In support of this opinion, the examiner reviewed the Veteran's claim file and conducted an interview of the Veteran. Additionally, the examiner considered the Veteran's lay statements and VA medical examinations of record. In so finding, the private psychologist noted the September 2019 examiner's opinion that the Veteran did not have a mental health diagnosis is inconsistent with the medical evidence of record. Additionally, the private psychologist noted prior examiners have underassessed the severity of the Veteran's anxiety disability.  The private psychologist notes that the Veteran has a significant degree of impairment with cognition, getting around, self-care, getting along, life activities and participation. Particularly, the private psychologist notes that the Veteran has difficulty with remembering and concentration, low energy, interest and motivation. The Veteran has difficulty with sustained self-care, he has to be reminded by his wife to take care of his personal hygiene.  The Veteran prefers to stay by himself and has difficulty getting along with other people. Additionally, the private psychologist noted the Veteran has had a history of suicide attempt. In a November 2006 VA examination, The Veteran recalled an attempt to overdose on Tylenol fifteen years prior, but at the time of the November examination, the Veteran did not have any current suicide ideations or intent. Additionally, the private psychologist noted the Veteran reported historical suicide ideation and significant anxiety in a July 2018 suicide prevention risk assessment. 

After careful review of the record, the Board finds that a rating of 70 percent for service-connected general anxiety is warranted for the entire appeal period. The objective medical evidence of record supports the Veteran's assertions of his worsened symptoms for the appeal period which are consistent with a 70 percent rating, and importantly, no objective medical evidence of record contradicts that the Veteran's general anxiety symptoms more approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Instead, the record reflects the Veteran's anxiety manifests as anxiety, depressed mood, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The Board also notes that the September 2019 and May 2023 VA examinations of record relied on inaccurate factual bases to form their opinions (specifically, the September 2019 VA examination report opined the Veteran did not have a mental health disability and the May 2023 VA examination report failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements concerning his current symptoms). As such, the Board finds that these opinions offer limited probative weight as to the severity of the Veteran's symptoms. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304 (the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its being factually accurate, fully articulated, and having a sound reasoning for the conclusion). However, the Veteran's lay statements of record in concurrence with his medical treatment records and September 2023 VA medical examination report are afforded great probative weight as they thoroughly and accurately depict the manifestation of the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disability as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

Additionally, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record does not support a finding that the Veteran's anxiety is productive of symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating. The Veteran was not shown to have gross impairment in thought process or communication. The Veteran has not endorsed symptoms of persistent delusions or hallucinations. The Veteran has not demonstrated grossly inappropriate behavior or persistent danger of hurting himself or others. He has not shown an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene). The Veteran is regularly oriented to time or place. Lastly, the Veteran has not experienced memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Although his symptoms caused difficulty with both occupational and social functioning, he was not totally socially and occupationally impaired, and a 100 percent rating is not warranted at any time during the appeal period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms of his anxiety, but not to identify a specific level of disability. The medical findings in this case directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated, and the objective medical evidence is accorded greater weight than the subjective complaints of increased symptomatology.

Accordingly, the claim of entitlement to a rating for service-connected generalized anxiety disorder of 70 percent, but no higher is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

 

Neely M. Peden

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. King, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.