Citation Nr: A25030274
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240405-431369
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service with the U.S. Marine Corps from July 1995 to July 1999, with additional service with the Marine Corps Reserve and with the Army from August 1999 to July 2016.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision, which denied service connection for hemorrhoids.  In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, and requested review of an October 2022 rating decision.  In April 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 - Notice of Disagreement to the March 2024 HLR rating decision, and elected Direct Review of his claim on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids is remanded.

Unfortunately, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and remand is necessary to cure this defect prior to adjudicating the claim on appeal. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.).

The AOJ determined that the Veteran had participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), as documented within an April 2023 TERA memorandum.  See 38 U.S.C. ยง 1168 (b).  The Veteran was afforded a TERA examination in May 2023, in which the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's diagnosed hemorrhoids were less likely than not related to his participation in a TERA.  The examiner cited to medical literature to support their opinion, reasoning that "[t]he development of symptomatic hemorrhoids has been associated with advancing age, diarrhea, pregnancy, pelvic tumors, prolonged sitting, straining, chronic constipation, and patients on anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy, although it is unclear if the association is causal" (emphasis added).  The Board finds the May 2023 TERA medical opinion inadequate for decisional purposes because the opinion is based on citation to speculative medical literature.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382 (2010).  A medical opinion that cannot be provided without resort to speculation is not adequate unless it is predicated on a lack of knowledge among the medical community at large and not the insufficient knowledge of the specific examiner.  Jones, 23 Vet. App. 382.  It must be clear that the examiner has considered all procurable and assembled data, by obtaining all tests and records that might reasonably illuminate the medical analysis. Id.  Therefore, remand for a new VA medical opinion is required to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist error prior to appellate adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should refer the case to an appropriate VA examiner(s) for an addendum opinion to address the etiology of diagnosed hemorrhoids. The electronic claims file must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. The examiner must note such review in the examination report.  An in-person examination is not necessary unless the examiner determines otherwise.

The VA examiner is asked to provide the following medical opinion:

Determine whether the Veteran's diagnosed hemorrhoids are  at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to conceded participation in a TERA or otherwise related to service.

NOTE: The examiner is cautioned from rendering a negative opinion solely on the basis that the condition is not a presumptive condition under the PACT Act. 

The examiner must provide a complete explanation for their opinion, based on their clinical experience, medical expertise, established medical principles and should cite to evidence within the claims file. In so doing, the examiner should consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history of hemorrhoids i.e., they started in 2013-2014 and were medically evaluated beginning in 2016-2017.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If the above requested opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and specifically explain whether there is any potentially available information that, if obtained, would allow for a non-speculative opinion to be provided.

				

 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. R. Woodarek

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.