Citation Nr: A25030164
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240619-450335
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Effective January 29, 2024, entitlement to restoration of a 10 percent evaluation for dermatitis is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive weight of the evidence weighs in favor of a finding that the Veteran's dermatitis did not have an actual overall improvement or that the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work improved. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for restoration of the 10 percent evaluation for dermatitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105 (e), 4.2, 4.10, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1992 to October 1999.  He was honorably discharged. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which reduced the Veteran's 10 percent dermatitis evaluation to 0 percent. In June 2024, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) requesting the direct review docket with review by a Veterans Law Judge.  Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The denial of due process may include issuing a Board decision prior to the expiration of the one-year period for a claimant to request a docket change. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). In this case, the one-year period to request a docket change expires on May 7, 2025.  As the Board is granting the full benefit sought the Veteran's due process rights are not affected by proceeding to a decision prior to May 7, 2025. 

Entitlement to restoration of a 10 percent evaluation for dermatitis is granted. 

Congress provided that a Veteran's disability rating shall not be reduced unless there is an improvement in the disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §3.344. In any rating-reduction case, the determination must be based on an improvement in the disability has actually occurred and that the improvement actually reflects an improvement in a Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 350 (2000).

Where a disability rating has been in effect less than 5 years, a rating reduction is warranted where reexamination of the disability discloses improvement of the disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (c). Further, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (a), even if material improvement is clearly reflected in the record, VA is to consider whether the evidence makes it reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. The relevant period to calculate the time a rating has been in effect is from the effective date of the establishment of the former rating to the effective date of the reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (c).

To effectuate a rating reduction, VA must ascertain: (1) whether, based upon a review of the entire recorded history of the condition, the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability; (2) whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations; and (3) whether any improvement in the disability actually reflects an improvement in the veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1993). 

Rating agencies will handle cases affected by change of medical findings or diagnosis, so as to produce the greatest degree of stability of disability evaluations consistent with the laws and VA regulations governing disability compensation and pension. When a rating is affected by a change of medical findings or diagnosis, it is essential that the entire record of examinations and the medical-industrial history be reviewed to ascertain whether the recent examination was full and complete, including all special examinations indicated as a result of general examinations in the absence of, or without taking full advantage of, laboratory facilities and the cooperation of specialists in related lines. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (a). 

Examinations less than full and complete than those on which payments were authorized or continued will not be used as a basis of reduction. Id. Moreover, though material improvement in the physical condition is clearly reflected, the rating agency will consider whether the evidence makes it reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. Id. If, after affording due consideration to all the evidence developed, doubt remains, then the rating agency will continue the rating in effect. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (b).

It is the responsibility of the rating specialist to interpret the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of the disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. These provisions impose a clear requirement that rating reductions be based on the entire history of the Veteran's disability. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993).

The rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the condition, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in use of descriptive terms. 38 C.F.R. § 4.13. A claim as to whether a rating reduction was proper must be resolved in the Veteran's favor unless VA concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 413.

Even when a rating reduction may have been supported by the evidence on file at the time of the reduction, the Board must consider pertinent post-reduction evidence favorable to restoring the rating. See Dofflemeyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-82 (1992).

Turning to the disability ratings themselves, disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

At the time of the Veteran's increased rating claim, under diagnostic code 7806, a noncompensable disability rating is warranted when less than 5 percent of the entire body or less than 5 percent of the exposed areas is affected, and no more than topical therapy required during the past 12-month period.

A 10 percent disability rating is warranted when at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body, or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas are affected, or intermittent systemic therapy such as corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs are required for a total duration of less than six weeks during the past 12-month period.

A 30 percent disability rating is warranted when 20 to 40 percent of the entire body is affected; 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas are affected; or intermittent systemic therapy such as corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs are required for a total duration of six weeks or more, but not constantly, during the past 12-month period.

A 60 percent disability rating is warranted when more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas are affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy such as corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive drugs are required during the past 12-month period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118. 

Neither the January 2024 VA dermatitis examiner nor the May 2024 rating decision considered or evaluated whether the Veteran's condition actually improved or how the condition affected his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. It is the responsibility of the rating specialist to interpret the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of the disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. These provisions impose a clear requirement that rating reductions be based on the entire history of the Veteran's disability. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993).

In this case, the Veteran has had three VA skin examinations (July 2019, March 2020, and January 2024). The July 2019 VA dermatitis examiner noted that the Veteran's dermatitis was on his scalp, left arm and left calf in the form of two-millimeter red raised papules which affected less than five percent of the Veteran's total body area and less than five percent of his exposed area. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressant medications (topical triamcinolone) in the last 12 months was constant to near constant. 

The March 2020 VA dermatitis physician examiner noted the Veteran stated that the rash with red itchy spots has been on and off on different parts of his body since 1995. In service he was given Benadryl which was later changed to topical triamcinolone. The examiner noted that the Veteran's dermatitis affected greater than five percent but less than 20 percent of his total body area and exposed area. The rash was described as erythematous papules on the Veteran's neck, face, arms, legs, hands, and feet. The March 2020 examiner also noted that the Veteran's use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressant medications (topical triamcinolone) in the last 12 months had been constant to near constant. 

The January 2024 examiner noted that the Veteran stated that his dermatitis began after he returned from Somalia manifesting as small bumps/lesions on his arms and overtime spread to entire body which caused itching and pain. The examiner noted that the dermatitis at the time of the examination was a red rash on the Veteran's chest which affected less than 5 percent of the Veteran's total body area and none of his exposed area. 

The Veteran further stated that he used the topical medicine, triamcinolone, two to three times daily. The January 2024 examiner's conclusion that the Veteran used the topical medicine for six weeks or more, but not constantly, is therefore inconsistent with what the Veteran advised the examiner and inconsistent with what examiners reported in the July 2019 and March 2020 VA examinations. Additionally, the VA medical records reflected the Veteran used the topical medicine for years and regularly refilled the prescription. See, VA treatment records for June 2018, November 2019, September 2019, March 2020, April 2022, April 2023, and the June 2024 prescription which noted the ointment prescription was for twice a day as needed. All three VA medical examiners listed the Veteran's dermatitis medication as a corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive medication. 

The record reflected that the Veteran's rash condition waxed and waned but did not reflect actual improvement. Additionally, the evidence does not make it reasonably certain that any improvement would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. The Veteran stated that the dermatitis condition was worse, itchy and painful. Lay assertions may serve to support a claim for service connection by establishing the occurrence of observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability that are subject to lay observation. 38 U.S.C. § 1153 (a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (addressing lay evidence as potentially competent to support presence of disability even where not corroborated by contemporaneous medical evidence). In this case, the Veteran is competent to report that he has a rash, how the rash was more or less severe at varying times, and the locations and frequency of the rash. The record contains no evidence to doubt the competency or credibility of the Veteran. 

The rating decisions from July 2019, March 2020 and January 2024 all base the Veteran's rating on the percentage of the Veteran's body that was covered with the rash. The applicable diagnostic code for dermatitis assigns a percentage evaluation on either the percent of the body covered by the dermatitis or the frequency of use of systemic therapy which includes corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive medication. Both the July 2019 and March 2020 VA examinations noted the Veteran used a topical corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive medication in the last 12 months on a constant to near constant basis. 

The Board notes that a topical corticosteroid treatment could meet the definition of systemic therapy if administered on a large enough scale such that it affected the body as a whole. None of the examiners described the topical use of the triamcinolone as a systemic therapy which appears consistent with the reported amounts of the Veteran's body that was affected by the dermatitis. The Veteran has also not contended that he required systemic therapy for his condition.  The Veteran noted during his March 2020 examination that when he was active-duty Benadryl was initially prescribed but was later changed to the topical triamcinolone.  

The evidence of record reflected that the Veteran has never met the criteria for a 30 percent evaluation which requires 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or exposed body be affected by dermatitis. The three previous examinations noted that different body parts were affected by the dermatitis and the evidence reflected that the dermitis waxed and waned. The Board finds the Veteran's overall dermatitis disability more closely approximates the 10 percent evaluation which is warranted when the dermatis is greater than the 5 percent measurement but less than the 20 percent measurement. 

The persuasive weight of the evidence weighs in favor of a finding that the   Veteran's dermatitis did not reflect actual improvement. Additionally, the evidence in the record does not make it reasonably certain that any improvement would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. 

The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  The approximate balance of the evidence weighs in favor of finding that a reduction of the Veteran's dermatitis evaluation was not warranted based on the diagnostic code 7806 criteria, and that an evaluation of 10 percent more closely approximates the Veteran's overall dermatitis condition. As such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is applicable in the instant appeal, and his claim must be granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

Therefore, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that entitlement to restoration of a 10 percent evaluation for dermatitis is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Polk

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.