Citation Nr: A25030552
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240301-421789
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED 

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar strain with disc disease is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND 

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1975 to March 1977. 

This matter comes before the Board on a January 2024 rating decision. In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for lumbar strain with disc disease, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar strain with disc disease is remanded. 

After a review of the record, the Board determines a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.9

The Veteran's medical treatment records document the Veteran suffered cervical and lumbar herniated discs after an "on the job injury" which was being treated through "workman's compensation." See CAPRI records dated May 2003 through February 2012. Workman's compensation records, however, are not currently associated with the evidentiary record before the Board. As such, remand is necessary to attempt to obtain records such records.  

Furthermore, there are two relevant medical opinions of record - a private opinion dated August 2023, and a VA opinion dated September 2023. The Veteran's medical treatment records contain evidence to suggest the Veteran incurred a post-service back injury while on the job which was subject to a claim for worker's compensation. However, neither opinion of record discusses the medical treatment notes regarding an on-the-job back injury in relation to the Veteran's claim for service connection for lumbar strain with disc disease. 

Additionally, the September 2023 VA examiner concluded the Veteran's current lumbar strain with disc disease was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the back pain he experienced during service. The VA examiner's rationale relied on a lack of documentation of complaints of or treatment for back pain during service. In A January 2024 VA addendum opinion, the September 2023 VA examiner clarified that he saw the February 1972 service treatment note for back pain, but the VA examiner again denied nexus due to a lack of treatment records or other evidence of in-service back pain. 

The negative etiological opinion based solely upon the lack of evidence of complaints or treatment for symptoms in the Veteran's service treatment records is inadequate here. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?23 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the Veteran's report of in-service injury and instead relied entirely on the absence of evidence in the service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).?As such, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. With any necessary assistance from the Veteran, attempt to obtain the Veteran's workman's compensation records. 

All steps taken to obtain the workman's compensation records must be documented within the Veteran's claims file. If the workman's compensation records are unavailable, a formal finding must be made and associated with the Veteran's claims file. 

2. After any additional records are associated with the Veteran's claims file, schedule the Veteran for an examination with a qualified medical examiner to provide an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lumbar strain with disc disease.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

(a.) After reviewing the record and examining the Veteran, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbar strain with disc disease was incurred in, caused by, or is otherwise related to his time in service. 

In providing this opinion the examiner should take a detailed history from the Veteran as to the nature and progression of his disability.  Additionally, the examiner should address the medical significance, if any, of the back injury referenced in the Veteran's medical treatment records dated May 2003 through February 2012.

The examiner should note the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.?The examiner shall not solely rely on the absence of evidence of treatment in the Veteran's service medical records or other post-service records to discount the Veteran's lay statements unless there is a sound medical basis for doing so. 

A full and complete rationale for all opinions must be provided, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles should be considered. 

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mills, D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.