Citation Nr: A25030877
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230503-343820
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), as secondary to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, as secondary to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery, and as secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1983 to August 1986.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2021 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision and March 2023 higher level review by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), that determined that the Veteran did not incur additional disability or permanent aggravation of his right spermatic cord tension due to denervation surgery, GERD, and hypertension disabilities under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 due to care provided by the VA.  The December 2021 rating decision noted favorable findings that the Veteran has diagnoses of refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension, GERD, and hypertension.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings unless they are rebutted by clear and unmistakable error.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

Procedural History

In June 2022, the Veteran requested higher level review (HLR) of all claims.  During a July 2022 HLR conference, the Veteran raised the issue of service connection for right spermatic cord tension, to include as secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma.  In a July 2022 rating decision, the AOJ identified duty to assist errors in the development of the Veteran's claims, specifically, that it had failed to obtain VA examinations and opinions for all claims.  In July 2022, the Veteran filed a new claim for service connection for GERD and hypertension as secondary to pituitary microadenoma.  Following additional development of the claims, the AOJ issued the March 2023 HLR rating decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received for all claims, denied compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for all claims, and denied service connection for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension, GERD, and hypertension on direct and secondary bases, specifically, as secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma.  Additionally, compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for GERD and hypertension were denied on the basis that compensation for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery was found not to be warranted.  The March 2023 rating decision noted favorable findings that the Veteran has diagnoses of residuals of denervation of the right spermatic cord tension, GERD, and hypertension, and the claimed primary disability of pituitary microadenoma is service connected.  Additionally, the AOJ determined that it had received new and relevant evidence for each claim in support of the Veteran's July 2022 claim.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings as they are not rebutted by clear and unmistakable error.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

In May 2023, the Veteran initiated this appeal to the Board with the filing of a Decision Review Request (VA Form 10182), requesting direct review by a Veterans Law Judge on the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision.  Specifically, the VA Form 10182 identifies the following claims: (1) Compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation; (2) Service connection for GERD as secondary to "nerve condition medication"; and (3) Service connection for hypertension as secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma, and "much higher, more often due to constant pain secondary to nerve damage[.]"  Regarding the second issue identified for appeal, given that the Veteran has asserted that his GERD resulted from medication taken for post-surgery right testicular pain, and that his hypertension was aggravated by post-surgery right testicular pain, the Board construes the phrases "nerve condition medication" and "much higher, more often due to constant pain secondary to nerve damage" as indicating secondary to nerve damage arising from the right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.

Accordingly, the issues are characterized as: (1) Entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery; (2) Entitlement to service connection for GERD, as secondary to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery; and (3) Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, as secondary to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1151 for refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery, and as secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma, as shown in the title section above.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009) (holding that the scope of a claim is determined by the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim).

Only the aforementioned issues identified in the May 2023 VA Form 10182 are placed in appellate status before the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  As the Veteran did not specify other claims adjudicated in the March 2023 rating decision on his VA Form 10182, those issues are not on appeal.  In May 2023 correspondence, the Board acknowledged the appeal and informed the Veteran and his representative that the appeal had been placed on the Board's direct review docket.

Given that additional evidence was developed for the claims after the December 2021 rating decision, the Board finds that the March 2023 rating decision conducted a supplemental claim review rather than an HLR review.  Therefore, the Board may consider evidence of record at the time of the March 31, 2023 rating decision, 38 U.S.C. § 7113(a), but not after.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Surgery at Non-VA Hospital and Surgeon's VA Status

Generally, 38 U.S.C. § 1151 provides for compensation for qualifying additional disability caused by hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination furnished a veteran; and, the proximate cause of the disability was the result of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of VA in furnishing hospital care, medical or surgical treatment, or examination; or was the result of an event not reasonably foreseeable.  Where the medical treatment was performed by a non-VA provider, VA must determine if the veteran was referred to the non-VA provider for care and whether VA's referral proximately resulted in an unforeseeable-disability-causing event.  Ollis v. Shulkin, 857 F.3d 1338, 1343-46 (Fed. Cir. 2017).

Here, the record reflects that the Veteran's October 2018 right spermatic cord denervation surgery was performed at Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital, a non-VA facility; however, there does not appear to be any documentation reflecting a formal referral as required under VA regulations, or development to clarify whether VA made a referral.  Furthermore, it is not clear from the record whether the surgeon and other clinician(s) who performed or participated in the procedure and associated care were VA employees or employees of a non-VA hospital.  Although the AOJ sought to clarify the surgeon's employment status at the time of the surgery through the VA Medical Disability Examination Office, the office merely replied that it was "unable to confirm that information."  Unfortunately, the record on appeal does not reflect that the AOJ made any further attempt to clarify the surgeon's VA or non-VA employment.

The AOJ's failure to properly develop the record in this regard is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Accordingly, remand is required for appropriate corrective action.

VA Medical Opinions

When VA undertakes to provide a medical opinion, it must ensure that the opinion is adequate.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311-12 (2007).  Here, the Board finds deficiencies in the VA medical opinions.

In the November 2021 VA medical opinion addressing the Section 1151 claim regarding refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation, the VA examiner concluded that because right spermatic cord nerve damage was not diagnosed during the November 2021 VA examination, there is no additional disability arising from the surgery.  However, the opinion does not discuss the Veteran's post-surgery treatment records reflecting ongoing severe right testicle pain after surgery.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1366-68 (2018) (pain alone, even without an underlying pathology or diagnosis, can constitute a disability under VA law where such pain results in functional impairment).

The November 2021 VA opinion addressing whether Veteran's hypertension was aggravated by increased pain associated with spermatic cord denervation surgery concludes that "pain is known to increase blood pressure [but] does not result [in] sustained elevation of blood pressure which characterizes hypertension," yet the examiner did not consider essentially constant, severe right testicle pain noted in the treatment records.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its being factually accurate, fully articulated, and having a sound reasoning for the conclusion).  Furthermore, the November 2021 VA opinion addressing whether the Veteran's GERD is secondary to pain medication for post-surgery pain concludes that "all medications prescribed by a provider [are] fully discussed, including ... efficacy, side effects, and adverse reaction[s] to [the] full understanding of the patient."  However, the opinion does not address the March 2019 VA consent for long-term opioid use for pain, which identifies nausea and vomiting among the known side effects, but not heartburn, acid reflux, or GERD.  Id.

The August 2022 VA opinion addressing whether the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to service-connected pituitary microadenoma merely declares that the disorders are not medically related because "medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship."  Requiring that a post-surgery disability be specifically identified in medical literature applies a higher evidentiary standard than VA's standard of proof of "at least as likely as not" required for a favorable nexus opinion.  See Hodges v. Sec'y of Dep't of Health and Human Servs., 9 F.3d 958, 965 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (Newman, J. dissenting).  Furthermore, the opinion addresses causation but not aggravation.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (holding that a medical opinion that focuses solely on direct causation is insufficient to address the question of aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b)).

Lastly, in the March 2023 VA opinion addressing the Section 1151 claim regarding refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation, the VA examiner concluded that "[t]his procedure is successful in the majority of patients to resolve or reduce the pain, but it is not successful in 12 percent of patients not due to surgical error or fault of the surgeon."  However, the opinion does not explain how the aforementioned statistic is relevant to this Veteran's circumstances.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Although the opinion states that informed consent "typically includes, risk of infection, blood loss, pain, scaring, the possibility that the surgery will not resolve the condition and more serious complications including death," the opinion does not discuss the October 2018 informed consent for the denervation surgery signed by the Veteran.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, supra.

Failing to obtain an adequate medical opinion and relying on an inadequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be addressed on remand by obtaining a new VA opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311-12.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Determine whether the Veteran's right spermatic cord denervation surgery performed at Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital in October 2018 was done pursuant to a formal referral from VA under applicable VA regulation(s).  Obtain and associate with the Veteran's electronic claims file all VA referral documentation, e.g. VA Form 10-7080.   All efforts to obtain such records and replies thereto shall be associated with the electronic claims file.

2. Contact the appropriate VA office(s) to determine: (i) whether the physician who performed the Veteran's right spermatic cord denervation surgery at Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital in October 2018 and other clinician(s) who performed or participated in the procedure and associated care as reflected in the Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital were VA employees or non-VA employees at the time of the referral and surgery, and if any clinician was not a VA employee, determine the nature of his or her professional medical relationship with VA during this period.

3. Obtain VA medical opinions from an appropriately qualified examiner as to the Veteran's 38 U.S.C. § 1151 claim regarding refractory groin strain and right spermatic cord tension denervation surgery.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a complete review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Clearly identify all additional disabilities resulting from the October 2018 right spermatic cord denervation surgery, subsequent Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital and/or VA care and treatment, present at any time from the commencement of the claim period in May 2021.  *Pain alone, even without an underlying pathology or diagnosis, can constitute a disability under VA law where such pain results in functional impairment that affects earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

"	Specifically address whether the currently diagnosed refractory groin strain, right spermatic cord torsion, and associated right ilioinguinal nerve paralysis, and associated pain represent initial injury or an aggravation of an existing disease, arising from the surgery and/or subsequent care and treatment by Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital or VA. 

 *In doing so consider the Veteran's statements of record, the August 2021 and August 2022 VA Male Reproductive Organ Conditions DBQs, and the August 2022 and February 2023 VA Peripheral Nerve Conditions DBQs.  If not possible to identify whether an additional disability is the result of any particular procedure, then please so state.

(b) For all additional disabilities resulting from the October 2018 right spermatic cord denervation surgery, provide opinions as follows:

(i) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's additional disability, was due to an event not reasonably foreseeable?  If so, please explain the unforeseen event.  If not, please explain why not. A "not reasonably foreseeable" event is one that would not be reasonably anticipated or expected by a health care provider who utilized the degree of care a prudent or competent person so engaged would exercise.

(i) Regarding referral of the Veteran by VA to non-VA facility Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital, state whether there was any indication of carelessness, negligence, lack of proper skill, error in judgment, or similar instance of fault on the part of the VA, to include on the part of the referring VA provider (e.g., if it was his or her decision that the Veteran undergo  surgery, was it negligence, etc.?).

(ii) Was the additional disability a reasonably foreseeable consequence at the time of the referral by VA to Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital?

(iii) If the additional disability was caused by an event not reasonably foreseeable, did the referral by VA to Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital cause the additional disability?

*The rationale must include discussion of VA's referral to Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital, the Barnes-Jewish West County Hospital October 2018 Consent and Authorization, Consent to Surgery or Other Procedure specifying "Denervation Spermatic Cord - Right," and the October 4, 2018 Op Notes (see VBMS folder with document type "Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility" with receipt date 09/06/2021, pages 25-27, 116, and 122-223).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

4. Obtain VA medical opinions from an appropriately qualified examiner as to the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed GERD.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. 

After a complete review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's GERD was as likely as not caused by medication prescribed for pain associated with the October 2018 right spermatic cord denervation surgery and residuals thereof; and

(b) Whether the Veteran's GERD is as likely as not aggravated (any incremental increase in disability regardless of permanence) by right spermatic cord denervation surgery and residuals thereof. 

*The examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's GERD and his service-connected right spermatic cord denervation surgery and residuals thereof, including medication(s) taken for pain.  

*Specifically address the March 2019 VA consent for long-term opioid use for pain that is included with VA treatment records.

The examiner must provide separate rationales for both secondary causation and aggravation.

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

5. Obtain VA medical opinions from an appropriately qualified examiner as to the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed hypertension.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. 

After a complete review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's hypertension was as likely as not caused by his service connected pituitary microadenoma; and

(b) Whether the Veteran's hypertension is as likely as not aggravated (any incremental increase in disability regardless of permanence) by his service connected pituitary microadenoma.

*The examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's hypertension and his service connected pituitary microadenoma.

*Specifically address constant, severe post-surgery right testicle pain noted in the treatment records.

The examiner must provide separate rationales for both secondary causation and aggravation.

(c) If the answer to (a) and (b) above is negative, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the diagnosed hypertension onset during service, manifested within one year after service separation, or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Farrell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.