Citation Nr: A25030701
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231227-403307
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

An initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for migraine headaches is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits.

A rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis is denied.

A rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis is denied.

As of September 14, 2021, a separate noncompensable rating for right leg shin splints is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits.

As of September 14, 2021, a separate noncompensable rating for left leg shin splints is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing payment of monetary benefits.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left foot Morton's neuroma, degenerative arthritis, and calcaneal spur is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot degenerative arthritis and calcaneal spur is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar disorder to include lower lumbar facet arthropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disorder to include degenerative disc disease is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, her currently diagnosed GERD is proximately due to her service-connected bilateral knee disability.

2. Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, her migraine headaches most nearly approximated very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, which results in the assignment of the maximum schedular rating of 50 percent, and such disability does not result in symptomatology that is not contemplated by the rating criteria.

3. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's right knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis resulted in flexion limited to, at most, 115 degrees and normal extension, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, but did not result in ankylosis, or the functional equivalent thereof, dislocation or removal of semilunar cartilage, recurrent subluxation, lateral instability, or patellar instability, impairment of the tibia and fibula other than shin splints, or genu recurvatum.

4. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's left knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis resulted in flexion limited to, at most, 115 degrees and normal extension, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, but did not result in ankylosis, or the functional equivalent thereof, dislocation or removal of semilunar cartilage, recurrent subluxation, lateral instability, or patellar instability, impairment of the tibia and fibula other than shin splints, or genu recurvatum.

5. As of September 14, 2021, the Veteran's right leg shin splints required treatment for less than 12 months. 

6. As of September 14, 2021, the Veteran's left leg shin splints required treatment for less than 12 months. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for GERD, as secondary to service-connected bilateral knee disability, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for migraine headaches have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5010-5260.

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee retropatellar pain syndrome and osteoarthritis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5010-5260.

5. As of September 14, 2021, the criteria for a separate noncompensable rating for right leg shin splints have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5262.

6. As of September 14, 2021, the criteria for a separate noncompensable rating for left leg shin splints have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5262.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2001 to July 2003. The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, a lumbar disorder, a cervical spine disorder, and GERD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Service connection may not be established on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The Veteran contends that her GERD is caused or aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability. Specifically, she contends that based upon medical advice she has taken NSAIDs for over 20 years to treat her bilateral knee disability and that regular NSAID use has produced GERD. 

In this regard, the Veteran's STRs are negative for any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis for GERD. However, the Veteran's post-service treatment records indicate that she has been prescribed Pantoprazole for her GERD since 2019. 

During a December 2022 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with GERD; however, the examiner opined that the evidence of record was insufficient evidence to support that the Veteran's GERD was caused by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability. The veteran's medical records support past medical history of GERD dating to 2019. The examiner considered the Veteran's prolonged NSAID use from her bilateral knee disability but cited studies showing NSAIDs did not induce reflux in normal subjects. Accordingly, the examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability. However, the examiner also noted that studies show that while NSAIDs did not induce reflux in normal subjects, for some subjects their reflux increased. Furthermore, the examiner further stated that NSAIDs can worsen existing symptoms of GERD but such use does not contribute to the pathophysiological changes that occur to develop GERD. 

Upon review, the Board affords great probative weight to the December 2022 VA examiner's opinion as such considered all pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's statements and his relevant medical history and offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion ... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). Although such opinion found that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not caused by her NSAID use, such opinion identified studies that show that NSAID use increases reflux in some subjects and that NSAIDs can worsen existing symptoms of GERD. Thus, resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's GERD was aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability to include treatment for such with NSAIDs. Thus, service connection for such disorder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id.

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a Veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. It is possible for a Veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches

For the entire appeal period stemming from September 14, 2021, the date of service connection, the Veteran's migraine headaches are evaluated as 30 percent disabling pursuant to DC 8100. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). 02886-00000228

Under such DC, a 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The rating criteria do not define "prostrating;" nor has the Court. Cf. Fenderson, supra (in which the Court quotes DC 8100 verbatim but does not specifically address the matter of what is a prostrating attack). By way of reference, the Board notes that, according to Webster's New World Dictionary of American English, Third College Edition (1986), p.1080, "prostration" is defined as "utter physical exhaustion or helplessness." A very similar definition is found in Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1367 (28th Ed. 1994), in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Also, the term "productive of severe economic adaptability" has not been clearly defined by regulations.

The Court has, however, explained that "productive of" for purposes of DC 8100 can either mean producing, or capable of producing. See Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445 (2004). Thus, migraine headaches need not actually produce severe economic inadaptability to warrant a 50 percent rating under DC 8100. Id. at 445-46. Similarly, "economic inadaptability" does not equate to unemployability, as such would undermine the purpose of regulations pertaining to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability. Id. at 446; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The Board notes, however, that the migraine headaches must be, at a minimum, capable of producing severe economic inadaptability in order to meet the 50 percent criteria.

The Veteran's private and VA treatment records reflects ongoing complaints and treatment for headaches throughout the appeal period. Specifically, that she has been diagnosed with chronic headaches and prescribed sumatriptan succinate to treat such. 

The Veteran submitted a September 2022 statement from her employer, J.W., who reported that since the Veteran began working for him, she frequently sequesters herself in an office with the lights off and door shut due to a migraine headache. J.W. reported that the Veteran has also missed approximately 10 days of work entirely and parts of approximately 14 days of work due to her migraine headaches. 

Upon VA examination in December 2022, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches including migraine variants. The Veteran reported that her headaches are immobilizing with extreme sensitivity to light, sound, and movement. The Veteran reported taking sumatriptan with Excedrin and rizatriptan with ibuprofen for her headaches. Such medications alleviate her headache pain for 4 to 8 hours so that she can function. The Veteran reports such headaches occur several times per month in clusters of 4 to 5 days. She reported missing 10 to 14 days of work entirely in the previous year and a half and additional 10 to 14 partial days. When she gets a headache, she takes her medication and goes into a dark quiet room until the medication works. The Veteran reports that the headaches are so painful and debilitating that she cannot work or operate on any level until the pain subsides. The Veteran also reported that she does not plan for the future due to the frequency of her headaches.  

The examiner noted that the Veteran currently is prescribed rizatriptan benzoate to use with ibuprofen. The examiner also noted that the Veteran's headache pain is constant, pulsating, or throbbing pain on both sides of the head that worsens with physical activity, and that the Veteran experiences sensitivity to light and sound. The examiner assessed that the Veteran's headaches last more than 2 days. The examiner opined that the Veteran has characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain once every month, but that such were not very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The examiner found that the Veteran's headache condition impacts her ability to work as such will adversely affect job attendance, attention, and concentration during migraine events. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that her migraine headaches more nearly approximate very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability throughout the appeal period, thus warranting a 50 percent rating. In this regard, while the December 2022 VA examiner found that such disability did not result in such manifestations, the Veteran and her employer reported that she experienced headaches multiple times monthly that required retreating to a quiet and dark room, that she has missed approximately one day per month of work entirely and part of another day due to her headaches. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches persist for 4 to 5 days and were only sometimes relieved by medications to include sumatriptan and rizatriptan with ibuprofen. In this regard, while the record indicates the Veteran was employed, DC 8100 does not require that she be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating and the evidence shows that her headaches interfere in such pursuits due to the need to take medication and go into a dark room until the pain subsides even when at work. Pierce, supra. Thus, an initial 50 percent rating for the Veteran's headaches is warranted for the entire appeal period.

As a final matter, the Board notes that 50 percent is the maximum schedular rating under DC 8100 and there are no alternative DCs under which the Veteran's headache disability may be analogously rated. See e.g., Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015). Moreover, based on the Veteran's descriptions of her headaches and the assessments by medical professionals as delineated above, the Board finds that such disability does not result in symptomatology that is not contemplated by the rating criteria and, thus, referral for extra-schedular consideration is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.321; Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111, 115 (2008); Long v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 167 (2020).

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee retropatellar pain syndrome, shin splints, and osteoarthritis

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee retropatellar pain syndrome, shin splints, and osteoarthritis

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. Functional loss may be due to the absence or deformity of structures or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior in undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. In Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system." Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." Id., quoting 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

With respect to joints, in particular, the factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes. Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint, even in the absence of arthritis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011). In this regard, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that "[t]he joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint." Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is applicable to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities involving actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints or periarticular regions, regardless of whether the Diagnostic Code under which the disability is evaluated is predicated on range of motion measurements. Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).

The Veteran has asserted that her bilateral knee disability is more severe than what is reflected in her rating. The appeal period before the Board begins on September 14, 2021, the date VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim for an increased rating, plus the one-year look-back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). For the entire appeal period stemming from September 14, 2021, the Veteran's right, and left knee retropatellar pain syndrome, shin splints, and osteoarthritis have been rated as 10 percent disabling based on limitation of flexion pursuant to DC 5010-5260.

Hyphenated DCs are used when a rating under one DC requires use of an additional DC to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. In the selection of code numbers, injuries will generally be represented by the number assigned to the residual condition on the basis of which the rating is determined. With diseases, preference is to be given to the number assigned to the disease itself; if the rating is determined on the basis of residual conditions, the number appropriate to the residual condition will be added, preceded by a hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. In the instant case, the hyphenated DCs reflect that the Veteran's service-connected disability includes right and left knee osteoarthritis, and such has been rated based on limitation of flexion.

DC 5010 pertains to post-traumatic arthritis and is rated as limitation of motion, dislocation, or other specified instability under the affected joint rather than degenerative arthritis. If there are 2 or more joints affected, each rating shall be combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. 

Normal range of knee motion is 140 degrees of flexion and zero degrees of extension. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II. DC 5260 provides for a zero percent rating where flexion of the leg is only limited to 60 degrees. For a 10 percent rating, flexion must be limited to 45 degrees. For a 20 percent rating is warranted where flexion is limited to 30 degrees. A 30 percent rating may be assigned where flexion is limited to 15 degrees. DC 5261 provides for a zero percent rating where extension of the leg is limited to five degrees. A 10 percent rating requires extension limited to 10 degrees. A 20 percent rating is warranted where extension is limited to 15 degrees. A 30 percent rating may be assigned where the evidence shows extension limited to 20 degrees. For a 40 percent rating, extension must be limited to 30 degrees. Finally, where extension is limited to 45 degrees a 50 percent rating may be assigned.

VA's General Counsel has stated that separate ratings under DC 5260 (limitation of flexion of the leg) and DC 5261 (limitation of extension of the leg) may be assigned for disability of the same joint. VAOPGCPREC 9-04 (September 17, 2004), published at 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 (2004).

DC 5257 provides ratings for patellar instability and recurrent subluxation or lateral instability. For the former, a 10 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker. A 20 percent rating is provided for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker. A 30 percent rating is assigned for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker.

With regard to recurrent subluxation or lateral instability under DC 5257, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistance device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 20 percent rating is assigned for one of the following: (a) sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation, or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.

Note (1) provides that for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon. Note (2) states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration).

Ratings are also available pursuant to DCs 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, and 5263 when there is evidence of ankylosis, dislocated semilunar cartilage, removal of semilunar cartilage, impairment of the tibia and fibula, and genu recurvatum, respectively.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's VA treatment records confirm her bilateral knee pain to include a referral for bilateral knee braces in September 2021 and a diagnosis of right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome with degenerative arthritis. Imaging from September 2021 shows fairly typical knees for her age with very little if any arthritis. A November 2022 record indicates that the Veteran's knees limit her from performing exercises such as squats, lunges, and difficulty ambulating stairs. At such time her knees range of motion was within normal limits, but the records do not document the severity of her bilateral knee disability in terms of degrees. Additionally, her strength was assessed as a 4 on a scale of 5 in knee flexion and extension. 

Upon VA examination in December 2022, the examiner noted diagnoses of bilateral osteoarthritis, retropatellar pain syndrome and shin splints that is a progression of the previous diagnosis. The Veteran reported increased pain in both knees on a daily basis, struggling to walk up or down stairs, a feeling like her knees will dislocate sideways, and popping. The Veteran reported flare-ups that occur a few times a week precipitated by walking up or down stairs and downhill walking. She treats her knees with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, topical medication, and knee braces, but such is not always effective. 

Upon physical examination, the examiner noted right knee and left knee flexion limited to 120 degrees and normal extension with pain in active motion. The examiner indicated there was no additional loss of range of motion with repetitive use testing. Although such examination did not take place during a flare-up nor after repeated use over time, the examiner estimated that the pain and fatigability would further decrease the Veteran's right and left knee flexion to 115 degrees during a flare-up and after repeated use over time. The examiner noted bilateral objective evidence of crepitus, no atrophy, no ankylosis, no recurrent subluxation, no lateral instability, an incomplete or partial ligament tear, recurrent patellar instability that requires a brace, no genu recurvatum, no meniscus disorders, and no surgeries. However, the examiner did note bilateral shin splints that required treatment for less than 12 consecutive months and the occasional use of braces bilaterally.

Based on these findings, the medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's right knee flexion was limited to, at most, 115 degrees, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups. Thus, the Board finds a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted under DC 5260. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a

Likewise, the medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's left knee flexion was limited to, at most, 115 degrees, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups. Thus, the Board finds a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted under DC 5260. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

And in in view of the Veteran's report that the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication and topical medication utilized are not always effective, the ameliorative effects of such medication does not appear to obscure any loss of function beyond that of which has been observed and reported. Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798. 

In addition, as the evidence of record does not demonstrate ankylosis, patellar instability, or lateral instability or recurrent subluxation, dislocated or removal of semilunar cartilage, or genu recurvatum at any time during the pendency of the appeal, Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5257, 5258, 5259, 5262, and 5263 are not for application.

Notably, such DC 5257 does not require objective medical evidence of lateral instability for a rating to be assigned. English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347 (2018). However, while the Veteran is competent to describe feelings of instability, she is not competent as a lay person to diagnose patellar instability, lateral instability, or recurrent subluxation as such requires the administration and interpretation of specialized testing of the ligaments and patella, respectively. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). As discussed above, the December 2022 examiner determined that despite the Veteran's subjective reports of feeling like her knees were going to dislocate, she did not have instability, subluxation, or dislocation on physical examination. Thus, a separate rating under DC 5257 is not warranted.

However, the Board further notes that, at the December 2022, VA examination, the examiner found that the Veteran had shin splints related to her bilateral knee disability, which required treatment for less than 12 months that manifested as pain on weight-bearing in her bilateral lower anterior legs. In this regard, DC 5262, provides for a noncompensable rating for shin splints with such manifestations. since the Veteran's bilateral shin splints did not require 12 months or more of treatment, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted. Therefore, the Board finds that, as of September 14, 2021, but no earlier, a separate noncompensable rating for bilateral shin splints is warranted pursuant to DC 5262.

Other Considerations

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that her migraine headache and bilateral knee disabilities are more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned disability ratings. In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe her symptomatology, she is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of her symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert, supra. Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with specialized expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged her reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than her own reports regarding the severity of her disabilities.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's migraine headaches and bilateral knee disabilities; however, the Board finds that her symptomatology has been stable throughout the period on appeal. Thus, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted. Furthermore, neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claims adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching such determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine, which has resulted in the partial awards noted above. However, to the extent the Board has denied her claim for a higher rating, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for increased ratings for her migraine headaches and bilateral knee disabilities. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable, and her increased rating claims must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

5. Entitlement to service connection for left foot Morton's neuroma, degenerative arthritis, and calcaneal spur.

6. Entitlement to service connection for right foot degenerative arthritis and calcaneal spur.

The Veteran contends that her left and right foot disorders are caused or aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability. The Veteran also suggests that her weight gain may be related to the pain from her service-connected bilateral knee disability making effective exercise impossible. 

In this regard, the Veteran's post service treatment records include June 2022 imaging that shows minimal age appropriate degenerative change and small calcaneal spur formations in both feet and a September 2022 diagnosis for left foot neuroma of the second interspace that included a referral for custom orthotics. Additionally, such records indicate that the Veteran's gait was normal January 2021, February 2021, March 2021, April 2021, September 2021, November 2021, March 2022, July 2022, and November 2022. However, the Veteran did receive gait training during physical therapy in November 2022 that may indicate some issues with her gait. 

Upon VA examination in December 2022, a VA examiner noted the Veteran's left foot diagnosis for Morton's neuroma, degenerative arthritis, and calcaneal spur and right foot diagnosis for degenerative arthritis and calcaneal spur. The Veteran reported pain in her feet every day that presents as shooting pain and a general overall numbness of her whole foot and sometimes individual toes. The Veteran tries to stay off her feet, takes over-the-counter medication, topical pain medications, and uses cold and heat for treatment. The examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral foot disorder is less likely than not due to her bilateral knee disability. Specifically, the examiner observed that a lower extremity and/or knee disorder can contribute to an acquired degenerative foot condition if the lower extremity and/or knee disorder causes altered gait biomechanics which could, in turn, place undue stress of the feet. The clinician noted that the Veteran's gait is documented as normal throughout the duration of her electronic medical record by various providers; however, the examiner did not consider gait training as a part of physical therapy in November 2022. Thus, the examiner opined that there is insufficient evidence to support a nexus can the claimed condition is considered less likely than not to be proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability. 

However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability aggravated the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders, whether the Veteran's gait was affected by her bilateral knee disability as evidence by the gait training in physical therapy in November 2022, or whether the Veteran's weight gain was caused or aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability, which in turn caused or aggravated her bilateral foot disorder. The Board finds that the failure to obtain such opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Furthermore, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion addressing such matters. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar disorder.

The Veteran contends that her lumbar disorder to include lower lumbar facet arthropathy is caused or aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability. In this regard, the Veteran's post service treatment records include complaints of back pain dating to 2011 with a December 2012 record indicating the Veteran has had chronic low back pain for 6 years. Such records also include September 2021 imaging that indicates mild posterior offset at L5/S1, facet arthropathy at the same level, and mild degenerative loss of disc height at L4/L5. A March 2022 entry indicates that the Veteran has neck and low back pain since a September 2021 motor vehicle accident. Additionally, August 2022 imaging shows mild lumbar facet arthropathy. 

In November 2022, the Veteran reported that her back pain had increased in the past year and that she would be limited walking around a theme park due to her back pain. She also reported more pain when she moved from a standing job to a more sedentary job that coincided with weight gain. Additionally, such records indicate that the Veteran has been prescribed medication for muscle spasms, but that her gait was normal January 2021, February 2021, March 2021, April 2021, September 2021, November 2021, March 2022, July 2022, and November 2022. However, the Veteran did receive gait training during physical therapy in November 2022 that may indicate some issues with her gait. 

Upon VA examination in November 2022, a VA examiner noted the Veteran's lower lumbar facet arthropathy; however, the examiner did not address the other diagnoses found in September 2021 imaging. At such examination the Veteran reported daily back pain with muscle spasms that she attributes to her lumbar spine disorder. She also states her service-connected bilateral knee disability aggravates her daily back pain. Specifically, such prevents her from engaging in activity thereby increasing her weight, which further exacerbates her back pain. The Veteran takes prescribed medication for muscle spasms and pain. The examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbar disorder is less likely than not due to her bilateral knee disability. Specifically, the examiner observed that a lower extremity disorder can contribute to an acquired lumbar spine disorder if the lower extremity causes altered gait biomechanics which could, in turn, place undue stress of the spine noting that the Veteran's gait is documented as normal throughout the duration of her electronic medical record by various providers without addressing the gait training the Veteran received in November 2022. 

Nonetheless, the examiner opined that there is insufficient evidence to support a nexus between her lumbar disorder and her service-connected bilateral knee disability. The examiner further concluded that her lumbar disorder is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability. However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability aggravated the Veteran's lumbar disorder, or whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee caused or aggravated her weight gain which thereby aggravated her lumbar disorder. Moreover, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's reported low back pain dating to as early as 2006 or the gait training in November 2022. Thus, the Board finds that the failure to address such matters is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, a remand is warranted to obtain addendum opinions addressing such matters.

8. Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disorder to include degenerative disc disease is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her neck disorder to include degenerative disc disease is caused or aggravated by her service-connected bilateral knee disability. In this regard, the Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis for a lumbar disorder. However, her post service treatment records include a March 2021 complaints of neck pain related to moving boxes. Such records also include September 2021 imaging that indicates reversal of normal cervical lordosis which can be due to muscle spasm. Thoracic dextro curvature versus artifact of position. Imaging was otherwise essentially normal for age showing a cervical spine with very little if any disc degeneration or facet arthritis and patent neural foramina. A March 2022 entry indicates that the Veteran has neck and low back pain since a September 2021 motor vehicle accident. Additionally, June 2022 imaging shows mild C5/C6 disc degeneration, posterior annular fissure without critical canal or neural foraminal stenosis, and mild chronic loss of cervical lordosis. In November 2022, the Veteran reported that she experiences neck pain that feels like a shock up her neck and into her arms. 

Upon VA examination in December 2022, a VA examiner noted a diagnosis of cervical degenerative disc disease; however, the examiner did not acknowledge the September 2021 imaging. At such examination the Veteran reported daily neck pain with muscle spasms that she attributes to her cervical spine disorder. She also states her service-connected bilateral knee disability aggravates her daily neck pain. Specifically, such prevents her from engaging in activity thereby increasing her weight, which further exacerbates her neck pain. The Veteran takes prescribed medication for muscle spasms and pain. The examiner opined that the Veteran's cervical spine disorder is less likely than not due to her bilateral knee disability. Specifically, the examiner observed the onset of neck and upper back pain following moving boxes in March 2021 and a motor vehicle accident in September 2021. Further, the examiner opined that it is unlikely for a lower extremity disorder to contribute to cervical spine disorder without significant gait impairment. The examiner noted that the Veteran's gait is documented as normal throughout the duration of her electronic medical record by various providers, but again did not address the November 2022 record indicating the Veteran received gait training in physical therapy. 

Nonetheless, the examiner opined that there is insufficient evidence to support a nexus between her cervical spine disorder and her service-connected bilateral knee disability. As such her lumbar disorder is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability. 

However, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability aggravated the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, the possibility of an altered gait as evidenced by the November 2022 physical therapy record, or whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee caused or aggravated her weight gain which thereby aggravated her cervical spine disorder. Moreover, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's reported neck pain dating to as early as 2012 or the September 2021 imaging. The Board finds that the failure to address such matters is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Thus, a remand is warranted to obtain addendum opinions addressing such matters.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the record, to include a copy of the Remand, to an appropriate examiner to obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot disorders. Following a review of the record, the examiner should address the following inquiry:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left foot Morton's neuroma, degenerative arthritis, and calcaneal spur and right foot degenerative arthritis, and calcaneal spur were aggravated by her bilateral knee disability?

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the November 2022 physical therapy note indicating the Veteran received gait training related to her bilateral knee disability.

(B) If the answer to the above is negative, is it at least as likely as not that (1) the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability caused or aggravated by her obesity and, if so, (2) whether such resulting obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating her bilateral foot disorders and (3) whether her bilateral foot disorders would not have occurred or worsened but for the obesity caused by such service-connected disabilities?

2. Forward the record, to include a copy of the Remand, to an appropriate examiner to obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar disorder to include mild posterior offset at L5/S1, facet arthropathy at the same level, and mild degenerative loss of disc height at L4/L5. Following a review of the record, the examiner should address the following inquiry:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lumbar disorder to include mild posterior offset at L5/S1, facet arthropathy at the same level, and mild degenerative loss of disc height at L4/L5 were aggravated by her bilateral knee disability?

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the following: 

"	December 2012 record indicating the Veteran had been experiencing back pain for 6 years,

"	 September 2021 imaging showing mild posterior offset at L5/S1, facet arthropathy at the same level, and mild degenerative loss of disc height at L4/L5,  

"	August 2022 imaging showing lumbar facet arthropathy, and 

"	November 2022 physical therapy note indicating the Veteran received gait training related to her bilateral knee disability. 

(B) If the answer to the above question is negative, is it at least as likely as not that (1) the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability caused or aggravated by her obesity and, if so, (2) whether such resulting obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating her lumbar spine disorders and (3) whether her lumbar spine disorders would not have occurred or worsened but for the obesity caused by such service-connected disabilities?

3. Forward the record, to include a copy of the Remand, to an appropriate examiner to obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine disorders. Following a review of the record, the examiner should address the following inquiry:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not that cervical spine disorder was aggravated by her bilateral knee disability?

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the November 2022 physical therapy note indicating the Veteran received gait training related to her bilateral knee disability.

(B) If the answer to the above question is negative, is it at least as likely as not that (1) the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disability caused or aggravated by her obesity and, if so, (2) whether such resulting obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating her cervical spine disorder and (3) whether her cervical spine disorders would not have occurred or worsened but for the obesity caused by such service-connected disabilities?

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

		 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pettit, Andrew M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.