Citation Nr: A25030019
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448018
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a post hysterectomy disorder as secondary to service connected polycystic ovarian syndrome is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's polycystic ovarian syndrome did not require continuous treatment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.116, Diagnostic Code 7615.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from June 2008 to July 2015.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 and October 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 and October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that evidence was submitted outside the evidentiary window. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a post hysterectomy disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the Veteran's representative submitted a September 2024 Motion to Advance the Claim on the Docket (AOD) based on financial hardship. Appeals must be considered in docket number order but may be advanced if sufficient cause is shown. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c). Sufficient cause includes advanced age (defined as 75 years or more), serious illness, severe financial hardship, or administrative error resulting in a significant delay. In an October 2024 Ruling on Motion, the Board denied the Motion. In accordance with this ruling, the appeal will remain in its current docket number order.

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the June 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Increased Rating Criteria

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. It is permissible to switch diagnostic codes to reflect more accurately a claimant's current symptoms. See Read v. Shinseki, 651 F. 3d 1296, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2011).

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

The veteran is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by his senses. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a).

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claim.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome is denied.

The Veteran generally contends that her polycystic ovarian syndrome is worse than currently rated. See June 2024 VA Form 10182. Specific argument in support of this appeal has not been submitted. 

The Veteran's polycystic ovarian syndrome is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.116, Diagnostic Code 7615 for disease, injury, or adhesions of the ovary.

The General Rating Formula for Disease, Injury, or Adhesion of the Female Reproductive Organs (Diagnostic Codes 7610 through 7615) provides that a noncompensable rating is warranted for symptoms that do not require continuous treatment. A 10 percent rating is warranted for symptoms that require continuous treatment. A 30 percent rating is warranted for symptoms that are not controlled by continuous treatment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.116.

Turning to the evidence, a November 2022 VA gynecological conditions examiner diagnosed the Veteran with polycystic ovarian syndrome and recurrent candidiasis of the vulva and vagina and noted the following symptomology: irregular menstruation and chronic yeast infection. The examiner noted that the conditions of the Veteran's vagina and vulva or clitoris did not require continuous treatment. 

In a December 2022 addendum examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran required continuous treatment for conditions of the ovaries and that her current treatment included Diflucan and Insulin.

A March 2023 VA gynecological conditions examiner did not provide a diagnosis but noted that the Veteran's symptomology consisted of constant pain, severe pain, irregular menstruation, heavy periods, and uterine fibroids. It was noted that the Veteran did not require treatment for her symptoms.

A May 2023 VA gynecological conditions examiner diagnosed the Veteran with polycystic ovarian syndrome, fibroids and status post hysterectomy. The Veteran reported having a hysterectomy in April 2023 and having no complications. The Veteran's symptomology consisted of mild intermittent pain. The examiner noted that the Veteran does not currently require treatment for her symptoms. The examiner reported that the Veteran's conditions impact her ability to work as she was missing two to three days a month from work due to severe pain before the surgery and was out of work for six weeks recovering after the surgery. 

A September 2023 VA gynecological conditions examiner diagnosed the Veteran with polycystic ovarian syndrome and status post hysterectomy. The Veteran reported feeling better after having her hysterectomy. No current symptoms were noted and there was no required treatment for symptoms.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome is not warranted. The record reflects that the Veteran's symptoms included constant pain, severe pain, irregular menstruation, heavy periods, and uterine fibroids. However, the record does not reveal that the Veteran's polycystic ovarian syndrome symptoms were treated as the March 2023, May 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners found that no treatment was required for symptoms. Therefore, a rating in excess of 10 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.116, Diagnostic Code 7615.

In making its determination in this case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that her polycystic ovarian syndrome symptoms are more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding her observable symptomatology, she is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of her symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). Rather, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged her reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability considering the rating criteria to be more persuasive than the Veteran's reports regarding the severity of her condition.

The Board has addressed whether a staged rating under Hart v. Mansfield, supra is warranted and confirms that the Veteran's symptomatology has been consistent throughout the appeal period.  Further, the Veteran and her representative has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to such claim. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

Additionally, the Board has considered whether an inferred claim for a total disability based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) has been raised pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The Veteran has reported that she was currently employed in a March 2023 VA treatment note. Moreover, the Veteran has not alleged, and the record does not show, that she is unable to obtain and maintain gainful employment due to her polycystic ovarian syndrome. As such, the Board finds that a claim for a TDIU is not raised in connection with the instant appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, supra.

Therefore, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for polycystic ovarian syndrome is not warranted. The appeal is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for a post hysterectomy disorder as secondary to service connected polycystic ovarian syndrome is denied. 

The Veteran contends that her hysterectomy is the result of her service connected polycystic ovarian syndrome. See March 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ); June 2024 VA Form 10182. 

A May 2023 VA gynecological conditions examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner noted that both polycystic ovarian syndrome and fibroids are treated to manage abnormal uterine bleeding, dysmenorrhea, pelvic and abdominal pain especially around menstrual cycles. The examiner noted that a study that suggest a positive association between the two diseases in African American women but mentions that more studies are necessary to further confirm or deny this finding. The examiner reasoned that the claimed polycystic ovarian syndrome condition remains status post hysterectomy. Furthermore, the provider noted that there were challenged to find sufficient evidence to connect hysterectomy as a treatment for polycystic ovarian syndrome and that they were unable to determine that fibroids cause polycystic ovarian syndrome and vice versa based on clinical practice guidelines and literature review. The examiner noted that a hysterectomy is a treatment option for fibroids in woman whose dysmenorrhea (menstrual pain) and/or abnormal uterine bleeding has not responded to less invasive treatments such as intrauterine device (IUD), contraceptives, etc, who no longer desire pregnancy and is a mainstay definitive therapy for fibroids, also known as uterine leiomyoma, interchangeably. Therefore, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition of polycystic ovarian syndrome

The Board finds this opinion to be incomplete for adjudicative purposes. The examiner states that polycystic ovarian syndrome and fibroids have similar symptoms and states that a study suggests a positive association between the two diseases but mentions that more studies are necessary to further confirm or deny this finding. The opinion failed to address secondary aggravation by the Veteran's service-connected polycystic ovarian syndrome. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (holding that medical opinion that only addresses whether a service-connected disability caused a nonservice-connected disability does not address whether the service-connected disability aggravated a nonservice-connected disability). It is also a medical examiner's responsibility to provide a well-supported opinion so that the Board may carry out its duty to weigh the evidence of record. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App.  295, 304 (2008) (concluding that medical opinion is not entitled to any weight "if it contains only data and conclusions"). Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain an adequate etiology opinion. The failure to provide an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran an appropriate VA examination to ascertain the nature and etiology of her claimed post-hysterectomy disorder.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  Any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner must review the claims file and note that review in the examination report.

The examiner must provide an opinion regarding the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's post-hysterectomy disorder was aggravated by her service-connected polycystic ovarian syndrome?

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record.  Medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Adeyemi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.