Citation Nr: A25030059
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 240111-436003
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to burial/interment in a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) national cemetery is granted.  

FINDING OF FACT

The service member was on active duty in the United States Army for eleven months, twenty-nine days, and was discharged on account of a mental health disorder which onset during service.    

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for burial/interment in a national cemetery have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 2402, 5303A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.6, 38.620.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The service member was on active duty in the United States Army from March 21, 2007, to March 19, 2008, for a total period of eleven months and twenty-nine days.  The appellant is the father of the service member.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 letter decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) [agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)].

This claim has been processed pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Here, the appellant selected the direct review docket, meaning that the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a), 302(a).  If additional evidence was submitted after the rating decision on appeal, the Board may not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The appellant has come before the VA asking that his daughter be approved for burial at the Bay Pines VA National Cemetery.  The record indicates that the service member died in February 2023, and her family has requested that she be interred at the Bay Pine VA National Cemetery.  It was reported that the service member was on active duty served in the United States Army, including her initial training, from March 21, 2007, to March 19, 2008.  This was slightly less than one year of service.  She was subsequently discharged from service before completing her enlistment contract.  There is no indication that the service member appealed her discharge from service.  Moreover, between 2008 and 2023, the service member did not apply for VA benefits, nor did she request that service connection be granted for any condition she may have experienced while she was on active duty.  The AOJ has denied the appellant's claim noting that the service member appellant did not serve the minimum time period required for the awarding of benefits.  The appellant has appealed to the Board.  

Any person classified as a "veteran" is eligible for burial in a national cemetery.  38 U.S.C. § 2402(a); 38 C.F.R. § 38.620(a).  The term "veteran" means any person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 101(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(d).  The individual must serve for a period of twenty-four months of active-duty service pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.12a(a)(1)(i).  "Active military, naval, or air service" includes active duty, and "any period of [active duty for training (ACDUTRA)] during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and any period of [inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA)] during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident occurring during such training."  38 U.S.C. § 101(24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a).

Eligibility for burial in a national cemetery is also available to any member of a Reserve component of the Armed Forces, and any member of the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard, whose death occurs while such member is hospitalized or undergoing treatment at the expense of the United States for an injury or disease contracted or incurred under honorable conditions while performing ACDUTRA, INACDUTRA, or undergoing such hospitalization or treatment.  38 U.S.C. § 2402(b); 38 C.F.R. § 38.620(b).

Only official service department records can establish if and when an individual was serving on active duty, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA.  Cahall v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 232, 236 (1994); Duro v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 530, 531 (1992).  The question is whether the appellant meets the minimum active service requirements to be eligible for burial benefits.  To repeat, 38 C.F.R. § 3.12a (a) defines the "minimum period of active duty" as the shorter of either: (i) twenty-four months of continuous active duty, or (ii) the full period for which a person was called or ordered to active duty.

Here, the Veteran was discharged from service for a personality disorder as indicated on her DD-214, but the fact remains that she was found to be psychiatrically normal at enlistment, and only once in service did she begin to experience mental health problems.  As such, the Veteran would have been entitled to the presumption of soundness and even if it were found that her mental health disorder existed prior to service, it would be unlikely VA could establish by clear and unmistakable evidence that the condition was not aggravated by service.

VA regulations provide that one of the exceptions to the two years of service is when a person is discharged or released from active duty for a disability adjudged service connected without presumptive provisions of law, or who at time of discharge had such a service-connected disability, shown by official service records, which in medical judgment would have justified a discharge for disability.  Here she was discharged for a mental health disability, which a reasonable adjudicator would conclude onset in service, regardless of how the discharge was coded by the service department. As such, the Board concludes that the Veteran's discharge fits within the exception to the two year service rule, and she is found to be eligible for burial in a VA cemetery. 

Accordingly, the claim is granted. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Patrick J. Costello

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.