Citation Nr: A25030710
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-467886
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his major depressive disorder is proximately due to his service-connected generalized headaches and tinnitus, and his alcohol use disorder is proximately due  to his major depressive disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1996 to December 1999.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in September 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In August 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  Nonetheless, as discussed herein, the Board finds that, based on the evidence available for review, service connection for major depressive disorder is warranted.

The Board observes that, in his August 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also attempted to appeal the denial of service connection for a skin disorder; however, such claim was most recently denied in a June 2023 rating decision. Thus, as the Veteran did not file a request for an extension of time to submit his notice of disagreement based on good cause in a timely manner, and his notice of disagreement was received more than one year after the issuance of the June 2023 rating decision, it is untimely. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104, 20.201, 20.202, 20.203. Further, the AOJ has not waived the requirement to timely file a notice of disagreement, and the Board declines to do so. Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 332 (2022); Ferko v. McDonough 37 Vet. App. 262 (en banc); Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37, 45 (2009). Thus, such matter is not properly before the Board and will not be addressed herein. 

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder, claimed as secondary to service-connected generalized headaches and/or tinnitus.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran does not contend, and the evidence does not suggest, that his major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is directly related to his military service.  See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (2008) (claims which have no support in the record need not be considered by the Board as the Board is not obligated to consider "all possible" substantive theories of recovery.  Where a fully developed record is presented to the Board with no evidentiary support for a particular theory of recovery, there is no reason for the Board to address or consider such a theory).  Rather, he claims that such disorder is caused or aggravated by his service-connected generalized headaches and/or tinnitus.  Rather, he alleges that such disabilities cause him pain and difficulty with exercising, sleeping, memory, completing household chores, and physical activity and, as a result of their functional impact, he was depressed, unmotivated, withdrawn, overwhelmed, anxious, and irritable. 

In this regard, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc).  Further, service connection may not be awarded on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

VA law and regulations preclude an award of service connection for a disability that originated due to substance abuse, as this is deemed to constitute willful misconduct on the part of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (m), 3.301(d); VAOPGCPREC 2-97, 62 Fed. Reg. 15,565 (1997); VAOPGCPREC 7-99, 64 Fed. Reg. 52,375 (1999). There is a limited exception to this doctrine when there is "clear medical evidence" establishing that a claimed condition involving alcohol or drug abuse was acquired secondary to a service-connected disability, itself not due to willful misconduct. Allen v. Principi, 237 F.3d 1368, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2001); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

In the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder as reflected by a July 2023 VA examination report.  The Board is bound by such favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Further, May 2022 and September 2022 VA examinations also demonstrate diagnoses of major depressive disorder and unspecified alcohol related disorder, and the Veteran is service-connected for generalized headaches and tinnitus.  Therefore, the remaining inquiry is whether his current major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder is caused or aggravated by such service-connected disabilities. 

In this regard, in May 2022, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's major depressive disorder and unspecified alcohol related disorder is less likely than not proximately due to or a result of his service-connected generalized headaches. In support thereof, he indicated that the Veteran did not have a consistent history of mental health reporting per a review of the evidence, and he reported that he had no mental health concerns while in service and never sought out or participated in any consistent mental health services in the past.  Here, the examiner stated that a November 2021 VA headaches examination report reflected the Veteran's migraine/non-migraine headache pain occurred once every month and, while discussing current mental health concerns at the time of his VA mental disorders examination, he did not report that headaches/migraines impacted his mental health in any way. 

Similarly, in September 2022, another VA examiner opined that the Veteran's major depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder was less likely than not proximately due to or a result of his service-connected generalized headaches.  In support thereof, he indicated that the Veteran reported that (1) infrequent headaches had exacerbated his mental health symptoms in the past, (2) his mental health problems began approximately 5-6 years previously, and (3) he had no knowledge of any precipitating factors, to include headaches.  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran denied seeking assistance for mental health issues in the past, and he denied currently participating in psychotherapy or taking prescription psychotropic medications.  He concluded that, beyond lay statements, there did not appear to be any clear nexus between the Veteran's currently diagnosed major depressive disorder and his service-connected generalized headaches. 

Conversely, in June 2023, A.E., FNP, opined that it is was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's major depressive disorder was secondary to his service-connected generalized headaches and tinnitus.  In support thereof, she reported that the Veteran only began to experience symptoms associated with his major depressive disorder after his diagnoses of generalized headaches and tinnitus.  Additionally, the examiner cited to medical literature which reflected that up to 50 percent of male veterans in the Veterans Health Administration suffered with chronic pain; due to the intense experiences associated with deployment and combat, veterans were at high risk of developing a mental illness; and mental illness was associated with poorer mental health qualify of life.  

A.E. further cited to medical literature which reflected that, for veterans who experience pain, the effects could extent to every aspect of their life; pain could interfere with participation in daily activities and was associated with higher levels of emotional distress; pain and mental illness were commonly comorbid for veterans; research suggested that pain was strongly associated with depressive disorders; mental health quality of life and pain were also associated with physical health quality of life; and chronic pain, depression, anxiety, and somatic amplification co-occurred frequently, and people who suffered from chronic pain were more likely to have psychological disorders than those who did not.  Thus, she determined that, after taking the aforementioned evidence into consideration, the Veteran's major depressive disorder was secondary to his service-connected generalized headaches and tinnitus. 

However, in July 2023, another VA examiner opined that the Veteran's major depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected generalized headaches or tinnitus.  In support thereof, she indicated that it was likely the Veteran consumed alcohol in efforts to decrease his mood symptoms and, while headaches were noted to exacerbate depressive symptoms, the headaches were not evidenced as the sole etiology of the depressive disorder.  The examiner noted that she agreed with the two previous VA examiners, and found that there did not appear to be a causal relationship between the Veteran's headaches, tinnitus, and major depressive disorder. 

As the May 2022, September 2022, and July 2023 VA examiners and A.E. are all medical professionals with the appropriate expertise to address the etiology of an acquired psychiatric disorder, considered all relevant facts and applicable medical literature, and provided a rationale for the conclusions reached, their opinions are entitled to equal probative weight.  Therefore, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his major depressive disorder is proximately due to his service-connected generalized headaches and tinnitus.  Furthermore, in light of the July 2023 VA examiner's determination that it was likely he consumed alcohol in efforts to decrease his mood symptoms, the Board also finds that his alcohol use disorder is proximately due  to his major depressive disorder. Thus, service connection for such disorders is warranted.  38 U.S.C. §?5107; 38 C.F.R. §?3.102. 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Koria B. Stanton, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.