Citation Nr: A25030905
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 230104-310793
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.  

Special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the entire period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran's total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is not predicated on a single disability; he does not have a service-connected disability rated as total with additional service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent more, nor is it shown that the Veteran is permanently housebound by reason of his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD has not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) has not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), 5101, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.350.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran has active service from July 1986 to March 1995. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2022 and June 2022 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

The March 2022 rating decision is a Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision, issued in response to a February 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, which requested review of a February 2022 decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which granted service connection for PTSD, rated 70 percent, effective August 9, 2021.  In the March 2022 HLR decision, the AOJ continued the initial 70 percent rating assigned for PTSD and denied an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for PTSD.

The June 2022 rating decision is a supplemental claim decision issued in response to a February 2022 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, which requested readjudication of a January 2022 rating decision that had granted entitlement to TDIU, effective April 29, 2020, to June 1, 2021.  In the June 2022 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received and reinstated the award of TDIU from June 1, 2021, determining essentially that the Veteran was entitled to TDIU from April 29, 2020. 

In the January 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and requested review of the March 2022 and June 2022 rating decisions.  Specifically, he requested review of the initial rating assigned for his PTSD and did not appeal the effective date assigned for his award of service connection for PTSD.  He also requested review of the June 2022 rating decision to the extent that the award of TDIU was not made based on his service-connected PTSD alone, such that he would be entitled to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), effective August 9, 2021.  See January 2023 Appellate Brief.  For these reasons, the Board has characterized the issues on appeal as indicated above.

Based on the Veteran's election of the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2022 AOJ decision for the PTSD claim, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, and the June 2022 AOJ rating decision for the SMC claim.  38?C.F.R. §?20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the February 2022 rating decision for the PTSD claim and the June 2022 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38?C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD

The Veteran contends that his symptoms associated with his service-connected PTSD are more akin to a 100 percent rating.  See January 2023 Appellate Brief.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See U.S.C. §1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.1.  When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38?C.F.R. §?4.7. 

In evaluating a disability's severity, it is essential to consider its history.  38?C.F.R. §?4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?55, 58 (1994).  That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  See Fenderson v. West, 12?Vet. App.?119, 126 (1999).  This practice is known as staged ratings.  Id. 

For the entire period on appeal beginning August 9, 2021, the Veteran's PTSD has been rated at 70 percent, under DC 9411, which rates PTSD under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.? See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.? 

Importantly, evaluations under § 4.130 are symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement?to?a given disability?rating?under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki,?713 F.3d 112, 116-17?(Fed. Cir. 2013).  Severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the?rating.  Id. at 117. The Board notes, however, that the list of symptoms under the?rating?criteria are meant?to?be examples of symptoms that would warrant the?rating?and are not meant?to?be exhaustive.  The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms?to?award a specific?rating.?38 C.F.R. § 4.21; Mauerhan v. Principi,?16?Vet. App.?436, 442-43?(2002).  If the evidence shows the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the?rating?criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent?to?what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular?rating, the appropriate equivalent?rating?will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.  The Board notes also that the presence of suicidal ideation alone conceivably might cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, consistent with a 70 percent rating.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017). 

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the Veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th?776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

As mentioned above, the Veteran's PTSD is assigned an initial disability rating of 70 percent.  The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms have caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms have not caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and result in a level of impairment that most closely approximates the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. 

Turning to the relevant evidence, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2022.  The examiner described the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as that of reduced reliability and productivity.  The examiner noted the following symptoms associated with the Veteran's PTSD: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked instability with periods of violence; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  

At the time of the February 2022 examination, the Veteran had been married to his wife for 22 years.  He described weekly communication with his parents and siblings along with maintaining contact with several friends from his time in service.  Further, the Veteran stated he spent most of his time alone in a backroom in the home he shared with his wife.  At the time of the exam, the Veteran had not been working for approximately two and a half years and described having trouble getting along with coworkers prior to becoming unemployed 

The February 2022 VA examiner described the Veteran as oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  The Veteran denied suicidal ideation.  Id.  

VA treatment records from June to August 2021 described the Veteran experiencing PTSD related nightmares approximately 8-9 times per week.  The Veteran participated in group therapy sessions for his PTSD related nightmares.  The Veteran was described as having good participation and being alert and oriented.  In addition, in a followup appointment in December 2021, the Veteran reported he was not experiencing anxiety or depression. The Veteran also denied suicidal or homicidal ideation in a January 2021 psychotherapy session. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements and argument by his attorney that his PTSD was worse during this period.  See January 2023 Appellate Brief.  However, the competent medical evidence of record shows that the Veteran's symptoms during this period more approximated occupational and social impairment with that of reduced reliability and productivity.  

While the Veteran did experience symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating such as the intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating.  As noted above, the Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 70 percent rating.  For example, VA treatment records indicate the Veteran experienced PTSD related nightmares; however, he also reported he was not experiencing anxiety or depression.  Further, while the Veteran was granted a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to his service-connected lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, the Veteran was not totally socially impaired.  In fact, during the February 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported spending a considerable time alone.  However, the Veteran also reported being married for twenty-two years and communicating regularly with family members and friends.  

In the January 2023 Appellate Brief, the Veteran's attorney contended a 100 percent rating was warranted for the Veteran's PTSD based upon a narrative that was prepared by a private examiner, Dr. M.L., and submitted to VA in July 2021.  In this narrative, Dr. M.L. stated the Veteran "suffer[ed] from severe anxiety and depression where he [could] barely function on a daily basis."  However, Dr. M.L. provided no basis for this finding and conceded in the narrative that he had not received evidence showing the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD.  Instead, it is observed that this narrative was prepared for the purpose of providing the Veteran with a PTSD diagnosis based on Dr. M.L.'s review of a lay statement from the Veteran's spouse and an awareness that the Veteran was receiving psychotherapy and suffered from nightmares.  As it does not appear that Dr. M.L. reviewed the Veteran's treatment records nor is it indicated that he performed an examination of the Veteran, it is difficult for the Board to assess how Dr. M.L. arrived at the conclusion that the Veteran barely functioned on a daily basis as a result of his PTSD, particularly when this finding is not supported by the VA treatment records or February 2022 VA examination report, as discussed above.

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 100 percent rating.  The criteria for a 100 percent rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

2. Entitlement to SMC

As discussed at the outset, in the June 2022 rating decision, the Veteran was awarded entitlement to TDIU, effective April 29, 2020, based on a combination of service-connected disabilities.  In the January 2023 Appellate Brief, the Veteran contended that from August 9, 2021 (the effective date of his service connection award for PTSD), he should be found entitled to TDIU based on his PTSD alone, such that he would be entitled to SMC(s).

A veteran is presumed to be seeking the maximum benefit allowed by law or regulation, and such a claim remains in controversy, even if partially granted, where less than the maximum benefit available is awarded.  AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).  Moreover, VA has a duty to fully and sympathetically develop a veteran's claim to its optimum, which includes determining all potential claims raised by the evidence and applying all relevant laws and regulations.  Moody v. Principi, 360 F.3d 1306, 1310 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Relevant to this appeal, a claim for increased disability compensation may include the "inferred issue" of entitlement to SMC even where the veteran has not expressly placed entitlement to SMC at issue.  Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991).

SMC is payable if a veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as total and has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).  A "single service-connected disability rated as total" under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is not limited to cases where a 100 percent rating has been assigned via the application of one or more diagnostic codes in the rating schedule; rather, entitlement to TDIU may serve as the "total" rating for the purposes of special monthly compensation at the (s) rate if the TDIU is predicated upon a single disability.  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2009).  

In other words, a TDIU rating based on a single disability, but not multiple disabilities, is permitted to satisfy the statutory requirement of a total rating under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  Id.  However, a TDIU rating based on multiple service-connected disabilities does not satisfy the criteria for one total disability in considering entitlement to housebound benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  See Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 290-91.  A "TDIU rating that is based on multiple disabilities cannot satisfy the section 1114 (s) requirements of 'a service-connected disability' because that requirement must be met by a single disability."  Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 249-50 (2010).

Thus, the question for the Board, and the contention of the Veteran, is whether TDIU can be predicated on the Veteran's service-connected PTSD alone.

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Id. 

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) [d]isabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id.  Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity).  Id.

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training.  See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014).  It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  The ultimate question is whether they are capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).  

In this case, as of the date of the decision on appeal, the Veteran is service-connected for PTSD rated at 70 percent, effective August 9, 2021; lumbar degenerative joint disease and degenerative disc disease rated at 40 percent, effective December 3, 2018; left patella osteochondral lesion of the femoral trochlea rated at 20 percent, effective January 30, 2020; left and right ankle degenerative arthritis rated at 20 percent and 10 percent, respectively, effective February 24, 2021, right and left lower extremity radiculopathy both rated at 20 percent, effective January 30, 2020; tinnitus rated at 10 percent, effective December 15, 2020; pseudofolliculitis barbae rated at 0 percent, effective May 19, 2017; and right ear healing loss rated at 0 percent, effective February 15, 2020.  

The Veteran was granted entitlement to TDIU effective April 29, 2020, based on his service-connected lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and left patella osteochondral lesion of the femoral trochlea.  See January 2022 Rating Decision.  Entitlement to TDIU has continued to be predicated on these disabilities.  See June 2022 Rating Decision.  

As discussed above, it is now contended that the Veteran should be awarded entitlement to TDIU based on his PTSD alone.  The Veteran's PTSD is rated at 70 percent.  Accordingly, as the Veteran has one service-connected disability rated at 60 percent, the Board may consider the claim for a TDIU based on PTSD on a schedular basis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that a TDIU based on the Veteran's service-connected PTSD alone is not warranted.

The Veteran reported graduating from high school prior to joining the military. After being discharged from service, the Veteran was employed in the food service industry and boat manufacturing until April 2020.

In a VA examination conducted in July 2017 for a prior claim related to the Veteran's mental health, he reported working initially as a machine operator for 10 years after service.  He had angry spells and would "flip carts" when he became angry at other employees but stated he was otherwise a "good worker."  He then moved and worked at Hammock Resources for about one year.  During that time, the Veteran found the job "stressful" because his fellow employees were immature and not willing to work.  He left that job on his own and then went to work making boats for Grady-White Boats.  The Veteran indicated this was his favorite job and he worked there for five years until the company began layoffs.  He was among the last wave of employees to be let go.  After that the Veteran went to work for his then-current job in food service at Vidant Hospital.  He endorsed some difficulty getting along with others in this job, stating that he also "flipped carts" when he became mad at other employees, but he denied any problems getting along with his supervisor and noted that he worked "best" when he was by himself.  

The Board notes parenthetically that in the Veteran's November 2020 VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, he reported working for Vidant Hospital from July 2010 to May 2018 and for Grady White Boats from May 2018 to April 2020, which was his last place of employment prior to when he stopped working.  A November 2020 VA Form 21-4192 from Grady White Boats also confirms the Veteran was employed there from May 2018 to April 2020.  Thus, it appears that the Veteran returned to Grady-White Boats after being let go initially during layoffs.  A reason was not provided for the Veteran's termination of employment in the November 2020 VA Form 21-4192.

During the February 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had not worked over the last two and a half years.  He stated that towards the end of his work, he had to work alone because he was no longer able to get along with people.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's functional impairments impacted his occupational and employment activities in the following ways: "1) [e]motional instability, including depressed mood, flattened affect, anxiety with panic attacks more than once a week, and hypervigilance, impact his day to day reliability and his ability to trust co-workers and supervisors, 2) [h]is difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, including impaired impulse control, impacts his ability to connect with co-workers, supervisors and the public in a reasonable and professional manner, 3) [h]is difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work and work-like settings impair his ability to sustain employment in a workplace environment, 4) [h]is chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living hinder his ability to follow directions, receive instructions and to make decisions on the job." 

It was further noted that the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation was impacted by the mental effects of his PTSD which resulted in difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, emotional instability, panic attacks, depressed mood, flattened affect, hypervigilance, sleep disturbances and impairment, and his inability to trust coworkers and supervisors.  As mentioned above, the February 2022 VA examiner categorized the Veteran's occupational and social impairment as with reduced reliability and productivity. 

Given the forgoing, it is not shown that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD alone precludes the ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with the Veteran's education, skills, training, and work history.  While the Veteran reportedly worked better by himself when he was employed and displayed anger during prior periods of employment, overall, the evidence shows the Veteran has maintained relationships with family and friends, to include other prior service members, along with being married for over 22 years.  The Veteran's VA treatment records indicate he has participated in group sessions for his PTSD related nightmares and service-connected arthritis.  The Veteran was consistently described as pleasant, cooperative, and receptive.  See June 2021 VA treatment record.  Additionally, the Veteran was gainfully employed after being discharged and remained employed until April 2020.  Furthermore, as mentioned above, TDIU was granted based on the Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  In September and December 2020 VA examinations, the examiners provided that the Veteran's service-connected lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy would negatively impact the Veteran's ability to function in an occupation requiring lifting, walking, standing, squatting, bending, crawling, ascending and descending stairs or sitting for prolonged periods of time, all which were required of the Veteran's previous occupations.  Thus, the evidence of record shows it is the Veteran's service-connected lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy that prevent him from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment.  Accordingly, a TDIU based on the Veteran's service-connected PTSD alone is not warranted. 

The Board acknowledges the argument of the Veteran's attorney, specifically that the Veteran's PTSD prevents him from substantially gainful employment.  See January 2023 Appellate Brief.  The attorney highlights that during the February 2022 VA examination, it was indicated that the Veteran's PTSD would impact his day to day reliability, ability to trust co-workers and supervisors, impact his ability to connect with co-workers, supervisors, and the public, impair his ability to sustain employment in a workplace environment, and hinder his ability to follow directions, receive instructions and make decisions on the job.  However, as noted above, while the Veteran's PTSD limits and affects his ability to function in an occupational environment, the record does not sufficiently establish that the Veteran's PTSD alone renders him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.  Notably, the February 2022 VA examiner also found ultimately that the level of occupational and social impairment from the Veteran's PTSD was with reduced reliability and productivity; total occupational impairment was not suggested or indicated in the clinical findings.  Moreover, the record reflects that it is the Veteran's service-connected lumbar degenerative disc and joint disease and bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy that prevents him from obtaining substantially gainful employment.  While the Veteran's mental health symptoms would certainly contribute to that inability when considered with the symptoms and impairments from his other service-connected disabilities, it is not shown either that his mental health symptoms alone would render him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation. 

In conclusion, the weight of the evidence establishes that while the Veteran did have limitations as a result of his service-connected PTSD, the service-connected PTSD alone did not prevent him from securing or following a substantial gainful occupation.  In fact, the record also shows that despite the Veteran's limitations from his service-connected PTSD, he has been able to maintain effective relationships with family and friends and engage appropriately in group settings. 

While the Board does not wish to minimize the nature and extent of the Veteran's limitation due to his service-connected PTSD, the weight of the evidence does not support a finding that his service-connected PTSD alone is sufficient to produce unemployability.  Therefore, a TDIU rating based on the Veteran's service-connected PTSD alone is not warranted.

Finally, the claims file does not show that the Veteran is permanently housebound by reason of a service-connected disability or his disabilities.  Under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), the requirement of "permanently housebound" will be considered to have been met when the veteran is substantially confined to such veteran's house (ward or clinical areas, if institutionalized) or immediate premises due to a service-connected disability or disabilities which it is reasonably certain will remain throughout such veteran's lifetime.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(2).  Not only has this not been shown in the claims file, but also the Veteran has not contended that he is permanently housebound as a result of any of his service-connected disabilities.  As discussed above, the Veteran's pursuit of a higher rating in the form of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) was predicated on a belief that he should be awarded a TDIU rating based on his service-connected PTSD alone.  As this has not been established, entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is denied.

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brown, D. L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.