Citation Nr: A25030329
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 210810-178050
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

The request to revise an April 28, 2005, rating decision that implemented the April 14, 2005, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) decision that granted secondary service connection for aggravation of the Veteran's major depressive disorder, on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, is dismissed as a matter of law. 

Entitlement to an extraschedular total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU), prior to August 31, 2020, is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In the April 28, 2005, rating decision, the AOJ implemented the grant of service connection based on aggravation, as found by the Board, and the AOJ did not make the finding of aggravation in the April 2005 rating decision, which forms the basis of the Veteran's CUE claim in that rating decision. 

2. Prior to August 31, 2020, the Veteran's service-connected low back disability and major depressive disorder aggravated by the low back disability did not render her unable to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. As the April 2005 rating decision implemented the Board's April 2005 decision of aggravation of a psychiatric disability by service-connected low back disability, there remains no case or controversy as to the CUE claim in the April 2005 rating decision on the basis of erroneous finding of aggravation. 38 U.S.C. § 7105.

2.  The criteria for a TDIU on extraschedular basis are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty for training (ADT) in the National Guard/United States Army Reserve from May 1980 to October 1980. 

This matter comes before the Board on appeal from Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO)'s Higher Level Review (HLR) decision issued in March 2021.

For the CUE claim, a rating decision was issued under the legacy system in July 2018 and September 2018 and the Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement. In October 2020, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a statement of the case (SOC). In November 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and opted into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), from the October 2020 SOC. In March 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the October 2020 SOC. 

For the TDIU claim, a rating decision was issued under the legacy system in June 1997 and in July 1997, the Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement. The records reflects that the AOJ issued an SOC in November 1997 and an SSOC in February 1999, March 2004, May 2004, and September 2004. In April 2005, the Board remanded the claim of TDIU. Subsequently, the AOJ issued an SSOC in May 2005, February 2007, March 2007, and October 2011. In July 2012, the Board remanded the issue of TDIU for extraschedular consideration. Meanwhile, the AOJ denied the claim of TDIU in a November 2013 rating decision for failure to submit a completed VA Form 21-8940. In December 2013, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940. In November 2014, the Veteran submitted a notice of disagreement to the November 2013 rating decision. In February 2018, the AOJ issued an SOC, which is followed by a March 2018 VA Form 9. In May 2019, the Board remanded the issue for extraschedular consideration because the July 2012 remand directive were not substantially complied with as required by Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998). 

In December 2020, the AOJ obtained an advisory opinion for TDIU under extraschedular consideration from the executive director of the Compensation Service. In December 2020, the AOJ issued a supplemental SOC (SSOC). In January 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, and opted into the modernized review system, also known as the AMA, from the December 2020 SSOC. In March 2021, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2020 SSOC. 

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2020 SSOC (for the CUE claim) and December 2020 SSOC (for the TDIU claim). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued those SSOCs, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. The request to revise an April 28, 2005, rating decision that implemented the April 14, 2005, the Board decision that granted secondary service connection for aggravation of the Veteran's major depressive disorder, on the basis of CUE pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, is dismissed as a matter of law. 

The Veteran, through her representative, contends that the April 28, 2005, rating decision contains CUE because the evidence extant at that time showed that the Veteran did begin to suffer from depression following her injury to her back in service and did not show that it had existed prior to her entry into service. See July 2018 appellant's brief. In a November 2020 appellant's brief, she maintains that the AOJ made CUE in deciding that her depression predated her military service. See also, August 2021 appellant's brief. 

A review of the claims file indicates that the AOJ implemented the Board's grant of service connection for major depressive disorder secondary to service-connected low back disability in an April 14, 2005, decision. In that decision, the Board found that the evidence is at least as equally balanced as to whether "[t]he service-connected low back disability has made chronically worse the appellant's major depressive disorder" and, while resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, granted secondary service connection for aggravation of the appellant's major depressive disorder. 

In the April 28, 2005, rating decision, the AOJ implemented the grant of service connection based on aggravation, as found by the Board. Therefore, the AOJ did not make the finding of aggravation in the April 2005 rating decision, which forms the basis of the Veteran's CUE claim in that rating decision. 

Accordingly, the AOJ could not have made CUE for the finding that it did not make. Under 38 U.S.C. § 7105, the Board may dismiss any appeal that fails to allege a specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. Therefore, the Veteran's CUE claim in the April 14, 2005, rating decision that implemented the grant of service connection for a psychiatric disorder on the basis of aggravation by her service-connected low back disorder is hereby dismissed. 

2. Entitlement to an extraschedular TDIU, prior to August 31, 2020, is denied. 

Initially, the Veteran claimed that she was entitled to a total disability rating when she filed a claim of increased rating for her low back disability in March 1997. The AOJ accepted this as a claim for individual unemployability in a June 1997 rating decision and denied the claim in that decision. This claim of TDIU was first remanded by the Board in April 2005. Most recently, the Board remanded the claim of TDIU for extraschedular consideration in July 2012 and May 2019. 

In April 2005, the Board granted service connection for a psychiatric disability as secondary to low back disability and remanded the issue of TDIU as intertwined with the rating assignment of the psychiatric disability. 

The July 2012 remand noted that the Veteran was seeking TDIU based on her low back disability. The Board referenced the records from a 1997 VA outpatient clinic in Columbus, Ohio that reflected she was limited in her activities due to her chronic low back pain and contained a physician's opinion that even sedentary jobs would be difficulty for the Veteran. The Board also mentioned Dr. W.'s opinion in an August 2004 progress note that the Veteran "is unable to work even sedentary jobs due to her chronic low back pain." The progress notes documented that the Veteran had a home health aide twice a week to assist with her personal care and housekeeping. The Board finds that those records indicated unemployability due to low back disability and remanded the issue for referral to the Director of Compensation and Pension Service. 

In the May 2019 remand, the Board noted that despite the July 2012 remand, the AOJ denied the claim of TDIU without referring the matter to the Director of Compensation and Pension Service on the basis that the Veteran did not submit a VA Form 21-8940 in a November 2013 rating decision. The Board remanded the TDIU issue for extraschedular referral again in May 2019. 

In December 2020, the AOJ obtained an advisory opinion on the matter of extraschedular TDIU prior to August 31, 2020, from the Executive Director of Compensation Service. In the opinion, the Director noted that the Veteran has impairment due to back that affects physical and sedentary activity and has difficulty in work environment and in social setting due to her depression. Moreover, she noted that the Veteran was last employed with USPS in 1990. But the director ultimately concluded that the evidence does not show that the service-connected condition prohibits the Veteran from obtaining or maintaining gainful employment. The Director based her opinion on a general observation that "[i]f the Veteran was allowed accommodations, specifically a sit to stand desk and a work from home position to allow the Veteran a non-public position, gainful employment would have been possible." 

It is the established policy of VA that all Veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. A finding of total disability is appropriate when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340 (a)(1), 4.15.

TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of either (1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is a sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

The central inquiry is, whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability. Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). The issue is not whether the Veteran can find employment generally, but whether the Veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

Where a Veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities but fails to meet the schedular standards set forth in § 4.16(a), TDIU the claim should be submitted to the Director of Compensation Service, for extraschedular consideration. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b). The Board is precluded from assigning a TDIU rating on an extraschedular basis in the first instance. Instead, the Board must refer any claim that meets the criteria for referral for consideration of entitlement to TDIU on an extraschedular basis to the Director of Compensation Service. Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001). The AOJ obtained an advisory opinion from the Director of Compensation Service on this matter in December 2020 as noted above. The Board proceeds to consider the issue substantively in this decision. 

The term "unemployability," as used in VA regulations governing total disability ratings, is synonymous with an inability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation. See VAOPGCPREC 75-91 (Dec. 17, 1991). The issue is whether the Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities preclude her from engaging in substantially gainful employment (i.e., work which is more than marginal, that permits the individual to earn a "living wage"). See Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991).

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019), the Court defined the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in § 4.16(b) to include two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The non-economic component includes consideration of: a veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether a veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether a veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.

In determining whether the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU, neither her non service-connected disabilities nor her age may be considered. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993). The Court has held that the central inquiry in determining whether a Veteran is entitled to a TDIU is whether service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability. Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524 (1993).

Here, prior to August 31, 2020, the Veteran was in receipt of service connection for residuals of back injury with strain, 40 percent from March 13, 1997, and major depressive disorder associated with residuals of low back strain, 20 percent, effective December 7, 1998, with a combined disability rating of 50 percent, effective December 7, 1998. 

As for her education and work history, the Veteran had 3 years of high school, with no further education or training. See December 2014 VA Form 21-8940. She worked at the Post Office, first as a clerk, and moved to maintenance work with restrictions for about 10 years until 1990. Id. She reported that she had tried to obtain employment in 1999 since she left the Post Office. Id. She stated that she left work because she could not maintain the work schedule due to the back disability and that she was also pregnant then and the pregnancy exacerbated her back. January 1998 RO Hearing Transcript. She also stated that the employment in 1999 did not work because it required constant standing and she could not sit for long periods of time either. Id. She testified that she was not able to complete a school course "Basics in computers" either. Id. 

In August 1998, Social Security Administration (SSA) determined that the Veteran was "disabled" for SSA purpose since October 1996. The Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) found that (1) she had not engaged in substantial gainful activity since June 1989; (2) prior to October 1996, the Veteran was able to perform the basic exertional requirements of light work for SSA purpose, but could not have expected to lift more than 10 pounds occasionally and five pounds frequently and must have been permitted to alternate periods of sitting and standing as necessary, with limited use of her upper extremities for overhead reaching; (3) since October 1996, her depression and somatoform disorder have adversely affected the Veteran's ability to perform basic work activity; and (4) since October 1996, the Veteran has been unable to perform even sedentary work due to the combined effective of her chronic lumbar pain, fibromyalgia, depression, and somatoform disorder.  

A review of the evidence of record reflects the following. 

An April 1997 VA Statement of Patient's Treatment from Columbus, Ohio, reflects a diagnosis of chronic low back pain. She was treated at the VA outpatient clinic, consistently with physical therapy, medications, and home program. She was limited in her activities due to the back pain, and the treating physician opined that it would be difficult due ot her limited endurance for sitting. The statement noted that she would be re-evaluated in 2 months. 

An April 1997 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of chronic lumbar strain with radicular features, possible L5 or S1 sensory radiculitis. She was found not able to perform heel walking or toe walking or squat. The forward flexion was limited to 35 degrees. She was not able to cooperate with the muscle testing. 

A January 1998 RO hearing reflects the Veteran's report of suffering from a constant ache, stiffness, and sharp pains in her back, as well as tingling and numbness in her legs down to her feet. She stated that she needed help to get out of bed, put on her socks and shoes, and complete housework. She said that she could stand 5 to 15 minutes without a rest, that she was unable to walk three blocks, that she could lift ten pounds, and that she could not sit for long periods of time. 

A June 2000 VA examination reflects an impression of complaints of low back pain with variable examination. Further diagnosis was not provided because the Veteran failed to report to MRI and EMG. The Veteran reported that she fell due to her back pain, but the examiner noted that the emergency room reports indicating the laceration to the head was caused by an attack while she was drunk. The Veteran reported use of a cane to ambulate. The observed forward flexion was to 50 degrees before the description of pain. 

In July 2001, the Veteran reported a flareup lasting for three days. In August 2001, she complained of increased low back pain, especially in the left upper buttock area. 

At a November 2004 Board hearing, the Veteran reported increased symptoms and decreased mobility in the back. She stated that she was unable to walk at times due to pain and that her VA doctor had told her that she was totally disabled and unable to work due to her back. She reported that she would have episodes where the back pain was so bad that she had to stay in bed two to three times per month. The Veteran indicated that her physician had prescribed bed rest because she frequently fell due to the back pain. 

A February 2009 VA examination reflects the Veteran's report of having flareups three to five times a week lasting from a day to a couple of days. She stated the pain was an aching kind of pain with throbbing and sharp shooting pain frequently, which radiated down the right hip to her right leg. She reported that she could not get out of bed during a flareup. She had been using a cane for more than 15 years, and for the past few years, she had been using a wheelchair walker due to her foot problems. She also had a chair lift for stairs in her house for the past 2 years. The pain was aggravated by prolonged sitting, laying, and walking, and it was alleviated by pain medications. He reported having urine leakage problem for which she used absorbent material. She claimed that she had to take approximately 8-9 days in a month a complete bedrest, which usually was prescribed by a VA doctor, Dr. W. She had not been hospitalized for the back disability. The examiner noted that the MRI showed mild degenerative disc disease and the EMG/nerve conduction velocity studies did not show any evidence of radiculopathy. The examiner opined that the lumbosacral spine degenerative disk disease was at least as likely as not related to her service-connected low back injury. 

The July 2012 Board decision denied an evaluation in excess of 40 percent for her low back disability on both schedular and extraschedular basis. This July 2012 Board decision has been affirmed by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in a July 2014 memorandum decision, in which the Court found that the Board adequately determined the credibility of her statement that she was prescribed bed rest by her VA physician. Specifically, the Court affirmed the Board's credibility determination that although the Veteran "is competent to report on things told to her by her physician, ... the lack of documentation in the records of any mandated bed rest weighs against the [Veteran]'s credibility." July 2014 Memorandum Decision, at 2. Moreover, in denying the extraschedular rating, the Court found adequate the Board's determination that the symptomology of the Veteran's back disability, to include decreased motion, flareups, and pain, when compared with the symptoms contemplated by the Rating Schedule, the criteria of 40 percent disability rating describe her disability level and symptomatology throughout the pendency of her claim. Id., at 4. No additional, objective evidence substantiating her report of physician prescribed bedrests has been associated with the claims file. 

A June 2016 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain and degenerative arthritis of the spine. The Veteran reported that she got pain with all activities of daily living. She did not report having flareups. The examiner stated that her chronic lumbar spine might limit her from lifting over 25 pounds or bending/twisting repetitively, but it would not limit sedentary activities. The examiner further observed that the Veteran had numerous non service-connected conditions which further limited her work capacity in the light through heavy demand categories, including chronic foot pain status post multiple surgeries, fibromyalgia, obesity, severe degenerative joint disease of the knees, for which total knee replacement had been recommended. 

A September 1, 2020, VA examination reflects the Veteran's report of current symptoms of spasms and aches running into the hips. She also complained about her knees and feet. She had pain with driving, and her pain woke her up many times while asleep. The current treatment consisted of ibuprofen, tizanidine, duloxetine. She reported having weekly, severe flareups that lasted for a couple of days to 5 days. She stated she could not walk or get out of the bed during a flareup. She also reported her inability to apply lotions to or wash her legs and feet, and inability to bend over. She needed help in those activities. She reported regular use of cane, walker, and electric scooter. She stated that she was not able to do her work at the Post Office due to her back pain and the back would lock causing her to fall down. The examiner provided an individual unemployment statement, which found that the Veteran was able to perform sedentary work. 

As for her psychiatric disability, a May 2001 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate, without psychotic features, and rule out somatoform pain disorder. The examiner noted that she had symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from the childhood abuse, but did not meet the full criteria for PTSD. The examiner observed that she seemed very uncomfortable and had to readjust her sitting position multiple times during the interview. Thought process was intact, organized, and pertinent. She admitted having intermittent suicidal ideation but denied having any intention or plan. She denied having any symptoms of panic disorder or mania. The examiner noted that her insight and judgment were somewhat impaired by her severe emotional distress over her financial, legal, family, and physical conditions. The examiner observed that she was able to maintain attention and fair concentration through the one-hour interview. She was able to perform simple calculations and could recall all three items after five minutes. She was noted to be extremely concerned about overall physical health and has a marked tendency to convert psychological problems into physical complaints. The examiner noted that she had a difficult time dealing with authority figures and may feel that people were not providing her with adequate sensitive care. She reported being extremely afraid of close personal relationships and was seen by family and friends as paranoid. The examiner observed that the Veteran was extremely anxious and appeared reacting to multiple stressors. The GAF score was estimated to be 50 at the time of the interview. The examiner stated that when symptoms were less fulminant, she probably functioned at a GAF of 60 (such scores were used by clinicians at the time). 

In an April 2005 decision, the Board found that the service-connected low back disability had made chronically worse the Veteran's major depressive disorder and granted service connection for major depressive disorder as secondary to her low back disability on the basis of aggravation. 

In an April 2005 rating decision, the AOJ implemented the grant and assigned a 20 percent rating for major depressive disorder based on the determination that the disability had a 50 percent level of impairment prior to aggravation. 

At a September 2007 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she had to depend on her family and a home health aide to help with household chores or activities of daily living. She reported being socially isolated. She also reported that one thing that she enjoyed was going to the grocery store because she was able to ride a motorized shopping cart. Her daily activity consisted of sitting around and watching TV and eating. She reported gaining 130 pounds in the last 4 years. The examiner noted that she had chronic low back pain, pain in both ankles and feet, tendinitis, pes planus, and obesity. Her medication consisted of amitriptyline, acetaminophen/oxycodone, and indomethacin. The Veteran reported that she was not followed for any mental health issues. She reported that her son helped her with some activities of daily living and a home health aide came once a week to her home to help with cleaning and with her activities of daily living. She reported having support from her sisters as well. She denied any suicidal ideation, plan or intent. She also denied any history of panic attacks or anxiety problems. There was no history of impulse control problems. She had chronic sleep difficulties due to pain and difficult time enjoying pleasurable activities. The diagnosis rendered was depressive disorder secondary to medical condition. The examiner noted chronic back pain, foot, pain, and ankle pain in the diagnoses. The GAF was assessed to be 60.  

An April 2010 VA examination documents a history of three surgeries on her right foot and one surgery on her left foot to correct a problem that was causing her pain. She reported intense chronic pain of 10 out of 10 due to back and foot pain. No outpatient treatment or hospitalization was noted for her psychiatric disability. She stated that she was primarily limited by her physical pain and felt depressed and irritable due to her limitations accompanied by chronic anhedonia. She reported having little sleep due to pain. She expressed her concern for her neighborhood because it was dangerous and she often heard gunshots. She denied suicidal thoughts. She stated that her sisters and two sons came over to help her with household tasks. She reported having little motivation to leave her house, except for going to the store once per week. She felt close with her family members even though she would lose temper with them. She reported enjoying fishing and liked to go fishing a few times per year. She reported watching TV mostly during her days at home. She was noted to have ability to maintain minimum personal hygiene. She had problems with household chores in a moderate degree; toileting in a slight degree; shopping in a moderate degree; bathing in a moderate degree; dressing/undressing, engaging in sports/exercise, traveling, driving in a slight degree; and other recreational activities in a moderate degree, due to back and foot pain. She reported some difficulty with remembering appointments and retaining newly learned information. She stated that she was unemployable due to physical disability and that she would like to return to work if she was physically capable. The diagnosis was adjustment disorder with mixed depression and anxiety and GAF was 60. The examiner found that there was no total occupational and social impairment due to mental disorder signs and symptoms, that her mental disorder signs and symptoms did not result in deficiencies in judgment, thinking, family relations, work, mood or school. The examiner determined that there was reduced reliability and productivity due to mental disorder symptoms. 

An October 2017 VA examination reflects a diagnosis of PTSD (with none of the stressors evaluated at the examination related to her military service) and major depression. The examiner noted that restrictions in functioning due to pain contribute to the Veteran's depressed mood and when in pain, she had a reduced motivation to engage in physical tasks. Also, it was noted that the symptoms that comprise each disorder were similar and overlap significantly. She reported that she was seeing a psychiatrist at VA and prescribed with Topamax and amitriptyline for her depression. The symptoms noted were depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to her psychiatric disability. 

The Board notes that the Veteran underwent a VA examination for her back disability and PTSD in September 2020. They are not considered for the current claim of TDIU prior to August 31, 2020. Moreover, the information concerning GAF score has been reviewed as above; however, the GAF scores are not considered in evaluating the Veteran's disability picture below. See Golden v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 221 (2018). 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's inability to secure and maintain gainful employment is a result of multiple disabilities, not just her service-connected back disability and psychiatric disorder aggravated by her back disability and that her psychiatric disorder aggravated by her back disability alone does not prevent her from securing and maintaining gainful employment for the following reasons. 

First, the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's low back disability resulted in chronic back pain and severe limitation of motion, as found in the July 2012 Board decision. On this point, a June 2016 VA examiner opined that her chronic lumbar spine disability might cause limitation in lifting or repetitive bending/twisting, but it would not limit sedentary activities. See June 2016 VA medical opinion. The June 2016 examiner further observed that the Veteran had numerous non service-connected conditions which further limited her work capacity in the light through heavy demand categories, including chronic foot pain status post multiple surgeries, fibromyalgia, obesity, severe degenerative joint disease of the knees. The Board also finds that this observation by the June 2016 examiner is consistent with the facts found in the evidence; the Veteran's non service-connected disabilities in feet and knees as well as obesity appear to impact her mobility more than her back disability. 

Second, although it is difficult to ascertain the impact of the aggravated, service-connected portion of her psychiatric disability, it is ascertainable by the evidence of record that the severity of symptomatology of the Veteran's PTSD, which was evaluated as 70 percent disabling without discounting the aggravated portion in the July 2012 final Board decision, was stable over the years during the claim period prior to August 2020. As evidenced by the October 2017 examination, the Veteran's psychiatric disability was productive of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships with additional symptoms of panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, mild memory loss, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. Thus, the disability picture documented in the competent medical evidence for the period prior to August 31, 2020, suggests that the PTSD symptoms subsequent to the July 2012 Board decision are characterized by absence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. In fact, her psychiatric symptoms are not even characterized by suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals interfering with routine activities, illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech, impaired impulse control (such an unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. And this assessment of the severity does not take into account the symptoms associated with pre-aggravation level. 

Third, the probative and competent evidence does not show that the combined impacts from the impairments from her back and psychiatric disabilities result in total occupational and social impairment. As reported by the Veteran over the years, she had work experience with clerical work prior to enlistment and during her employment at the Post Office. This type of sedentary work does not involve lifting or twisting and accomodation for periodic breaks to alleviate sitting for a long period of time is possible for such work; once settled in, it appears that she can spend some amount of time watching TV at home. Moreover, by her report, the immediate reason why she left the work at the Post Office is due to her pregnancy and the back condition exacerbated by it. The fact that she never went back to work since then does not necessarily imply that with reasonable accommodations and limited exposure to the public, she is still not able to do clerical work at desk. The evidence of record indicates that she has been able to manage her financial affairs without any problem during the pendency of the claim. 

Lastly, the Board notes that the Veteran is in receipt of Social Security benefits based on her physical and mental disabilities. The decision was rendered by SSA in 1998 prior to the VA grant of service connection for major depressive disorder as secondary to low back disability on the basis of aggravation. Since then, VA has accumulated more evidence that describes the Veteran's disability pictures pertinent to her VA claims. Moreover, VA is not bound by SSA decisions because the agencies have different disability requirement. See Collier v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 413, 417 (1991). 

Accordingly, the probative and competent evidence of record preponderates against finding that the Veteran is unable to secure and maintain gainful employment solely due to her service-connected disabilities. The claim is denied. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether the Veteran is unemployable. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b), is therefore not for application as to these claims. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. Taylor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.