Citation Nr: A25030324
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240727-459924
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1998 to May 2006, to include service in Southwest Asia.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Commendation Medal and the Army Achievement Medal.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a December 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider may be considered on readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities

The Veteran generally contends that he has obstructive sleep apnea due to his active service.  Specifically, the Veteran reports he went long periods without sleep during his service, and he slept in conditions and environments that kept him awake.  See July 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.  

The Veteran also reports he injured his back while in Iraq in 2005, and this caused his regular sleep cycle to be interrupted due to pain and fatigue.  Id.  He reports he is frequently tired throughout the day.  He often sleeps for short periods of time and wakes up abruptly.  He also finds it very hard to concentrate throughout the day.  Id.

Direct Service Connection   

In the December 2023 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  See also August 2023 VA Examination for Sleep Apnea.  The RO also conceded the Veteran's in-service participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), based on his service in Iraq and Kuwait.  See Form DD-214.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first and second criteria for direct service connection, a current disability and an in-service incurrence, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Nevertheless, the Board observes that the Veteran's January 15, 1998, enlistment examination was normal, and for the most part, his service treatment records (STRs) do not reflect complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to sleep apnea.  The Veteran's March 21, 2006, separation was normal as well, with no noted defects or diagnoses listed by the examiner.  However, in his concurrently completed report of medical history, the Veteran reported having "frequent trouble sleeping."  He explained that he cannot sleep more than 6 hours, and he frequently wakes up at night.  See March 2006 Separation Report of Medical History.  The examiner noted the Veteran's difficulty sleeping, and that he wakes easily to noise.  Id.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement from Sgt. B.H., who deployed with him to Iraq in 2005.  Sgt. B.H. shared living quarters with the Veteran during their deployment.  He reported experiencing firsthand the Veteran's aggressive snoring and trouble breathing while he slept, and that it occurred frequently throughout their deployment.  See October 2023 Statement from Sgt. B.H., a Fellow Servicemember.  The Board finds the evidence from the Veteran's report of trouble sleeping at separation, and Sgt. B.H.'s statement, represent competent evidence of a potential link between his current disability and his active service.  Accordingly, the second criteria for direct service connection, an in-service incurrence, is met based on this evidence as well.    

This determination is based upon the competency of the Veteran, and his fellow servicemember, to report events capable of lay observation; however, the Board offers no findings as to their credibility at this time.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).    

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to his active service, to include his conceded toxic exposure from participation in a TERA.  

To that point, in August 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for sleep apnea.  The August 2023 VA examiner determined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure throughout all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  As rationale, the examiner stated there is a lack of literature supporting any direct connection or secondary connection of obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner stated the literature supports that obstructive sleep apnea is caused when throat muscles relax and block the flow of air into the lungs.  The examiner concluded the Veteran's issues are not related to throat muscles relaxing and will not cause the throat muscles to block airflow into lungs, as the medical records and medical literature do not support it.  Therefore, his obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not due to service exposures or service. 

The August 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because it is conclusory and not supported with a reasoned medical explanation based on the specific facts of the Veteran's case.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

The August 2023 VA examiner's opinion is also inadequate because it relies on the absence of service (i.e., medical) records to support a nexus between obstructive sleep apnea and the Veteran's service, and failed to consider the onset and recurrence of his obstructive sleep apnea symptoms since the Veteran's service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  The examiner also failed to address the competent report of Sgt. B.H., the Veteran's fellow servicemember, regarding his sleep issues (i.e., snoring, trouble breathing) in service.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  

In the December 2023 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Secondary Service Connection

Turning to the secondary service connection framework, as discussed, the RO found the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in the December 2023 rating decision.  The RO also found the Veteran is service connected for thoracolumbar strain.  As the Board is bound by the RO's favorable findings, the first and second criteria for secondary service connection, a current disability (not already service connected) and a primary service-connected disability, have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Therefore, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by, or aggravated by, his service-connected thoracolumbar strain.  See generally 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

To that point, a November 2023 VA examiner provided an addendum opinion solely addressing secondary service connection.  The November 2023 VA examiner determined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to or the result of his service-connected thoracolumbar strain.  As rationale, the examiner gave a medical explanation for obstructive sleep apnea, and provided information regarding obstructive sleep apnea risk factors and associated conditions.  The examiner also mentioned medical literature showing a correlation between obstructive sleep apnea and obesity.  Ultimately, the November 2023 VA examiner concluded that, based on her medical explanation and the reviewed literature, thoracolumbar strain is not supported as a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea.  Instead, the examiner implied the Veteran had another risk factor, being overweight, for obstructive sleep apnea.  Thus, the examiner offered a negative nexus.  

The November 2023 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate for multiple reasons.  First, the VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because the incorrect standard for causation is applied.  In March 2023, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) invalidated the requirement of "proximate cause."  In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection.  The Federal Circuit explained that "but-for causation" is a broader standard than proximate causation and can include multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Pursuant to Spicer, secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  

The VA examiner's opinion is also inadequate because the nexus discussion is limited to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by the Veteran's service-connected thoracolumbar strain.  The examiner did not address whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected thoracolumbar strain.  Therefore, the opinion is inadequate because it does not address both the "caused by" and "aggravation" avenues of secondary service connection associated with the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013).

Furthermore, the Board notes that the November 2023 VA examiner implied the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was associated with the Veteran's body mass index, which indicates that he is overweight, but did not provide a secondary service connection opinion addressing whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused or is aggravated by his service-connected disability based on the theory of obesity as an intermediate step.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  

In the December 2023 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum opinion to address the deficiencies above.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).    

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner as to the questions below.  If the reviewing examiner determines that it is not possible to offer an opinion without first examining the Veteran, then schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.  

Direct Service Connection 

(A)	Regardless of whether an examination is performed, the examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea had its onset during his active service, or is otherwise related to his active service, to include his participation in a TERA.

In answering this question, the examiner must consider the following: (1) the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable deployments, and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

The examiner must also specifically consider the following treatment records and lay evidence documenting symptoms: (1) the Veteran's March 21, 2006, separation report of medical history, in which he reports having "frequent trouble sleeping," and frequently waking up at night; and (2) the October 2023 statement from Sgt. B.H., in which he reports the Veteran aggressively snored and had trouble breathing while they were deployed to Iraq in 2005.

Secondary Service Connection

(B)	The examiner is to state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, or caused by, his service-connected thoracolumbar strain and/or another service-connected disability.

(C)	The examiner is to also state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected thoracolumbar strain and/or another service-connected disability.

(D)	Address the November 2023 VA opinion that identified the Veteran's weight as a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), and then determine: (1) whether the Veteran is obese; and (2) whether obesity is an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and the Veteran's OSA. The examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to the following:

a.	Is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that a service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated obesity? The examiner must render an opinion on both causation and aggravation.

b.	If obesity was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that obesity was a substantial factor in causing OSA?

c.	If obesity was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability and obesity was a substantial factor in causing OSA, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the OSA disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability?

Note that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment in earning capacity, worsening of functionality) resulting from service-connected disabilities. 

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. 

The examiner is instructed that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  

The Veteran's lay contentions, and those of his fellow servicemember, must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.