Citation Nr: A25030663
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 201229-129364
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability evaluation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1968 to March 1972, April 1987 to May 1991, June 1997 to September 1997, October 1999 to March 2000, March 2000 to July 2000, and March 2004 to July 2004.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2020 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of background, an August 2019 rating decision increased the Veteran's residuals left knee total arthroplasty to 100 percent based on surgical or other treatment necessitating convalescence effective May 20, 2019, and assigned an evaluation of 30 percent from July 1, 2020, the first of the month following 13 months after his prostetic replacement of his left knee joint.  In June 2020, the Veteran filed a claim to extend the temporary 100 percent disability due to total knee replacement and to increase the evaluation for his left knee due to severe weakness and severe painful motion.  See June 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ.  The November 2020 rating decision presently on appeal continued the 30 percent evaluation.   

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held in June 2023, and a transcript of the hearing is associated with the record.  

In December 2023, the Board issued a decision denying a rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty and also granting a separate 10 percent rating for left knee instability.  The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In a November 2024 Order, the Court vacated that portion of the December 2023 Board decision which had denied a rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty and a separate rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability, and remanded the matters on appeal for readjudication consistent with the instructions outlined in a November 2024 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR).

With the Veteran's claims having been returned to the Board from the Court, it is noted that at the June 2023 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he had a medical appointment scheduled at the end of June 2023 with his doctor to complete a disability questionnaire.  In September 2023 the Veteran asked for additional time to submit evidence and in October 2023, he submitted a scar disability questionnaire regarding a scar on his left knee.  More recently, in February 2025 and March 2025, the Veteran submitted additional evidence pertinent to these claims.  In the February 2025 correspondence, the Veteran stated that "this letter constitute[d] [his] statement for [his] appeal which [was] being held in abeyance for further submission of pertinent evidence relative to [his] claim."  

However, due to the Veteran's prior election of the Hearing docket (see December 2020 VA Form 10182), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  Any evidence submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, may not be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  Notably, following the Court's remand, the Veteran was informed in a November 29, 2024 correspondence that he had 90 days from the date of the correspondence to submit additional argument (i.e., not evidence) in support of his appeal.  The Veteran was instructed not to submit new evidence as the Board must review the Veteran's case under the same option he initially chose on his VA Form 10182.  As the window for evidentiary submission had closed for all review options, the Veteran was informed that the Board could not consider new evidence.  

Nevertheless, it is observed that because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty and entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Also as an introductory matter, the Court has held that a request for TDIU, whether expressly raised by a Veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate "claim" for benefits, but rather is part of a claim for increased compensation.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453-54 (2009).  As will be discussed in greater detail below, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has been reasonably raised by the record and will therefore be addressed herein as part and parcel of a Veteran's increased rating claim.

Finally, in a November 2024 Appellate Brief, it was contended that the Board had in its December 2023 decision "effectively determined that it lacked jurisdiction to hear [the Veteran's] right knee claim" without providing any notice to the Veteran or VA before dismissing the Veteran's claim.  It was further contended that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.104(c), the Board should provide the Veteran with proper notification and give him time to present written argument and evidence relevant to the Board's jurisdictional concerns and to request a hearing to cure any jurisdictional defects.  The Board emphasizes, however, that its December 2023 decision did not dismiss an appeal related to the Veteran's right knee (nor does it do so in this decision and therefore notice of a potential jurisdictional defect is not necessary).  Rather, as explained at the June 2023 hearing, in the December 2023 Board decision, and again herein, the matter of the rating to be assigned for limited extension of the Veteran's right knee, status post surgery, was previously docketed as part of the present appeal.  However, this was in error as the issue was never appealed to the Board.  Specifically, the Veteran was granted service connection for right knee torn meniscus, status post surgery, and osteoarthritis in a May 2019 rating decision.  The Veteran did not seek review of the May 2019 rating decision and, indeed, the issue was not listed on the December 2020 VA Form 10182.  For this reason, the Board explained in the December 2023 decision that it had removed the issue from the appeal stream and the Board will likewise not address the issue in the present decision.  The Board further observes that the Veteran did not appeal the Board's December 2023 finding that the issue of the rating assigned for limited extension of right knee status post surgery was improperly docketed in his appeal to the Court nor was this issue addressed in the November 2024 JMPR.  Should the Veteran desire a higher rating for his right knee, he should file an increased rating claim.  

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty 

The Veteran contends that his complete medical history status post total replacement warrants a disability rating in excess of 30 percent due to severe weakness and severe painful motion.  He also seeks to extend his temporary 100 percent disability evaluation due to total knee replacement.  See December 2020 VA Form 10182.  

Accordingly, the issue before the Board is whether the Veteran is entitled to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent, to include extension of a temporary total rating based upon a need for convalescence.

In the November 2024 JMPR, the parties agreed that vacatur and remand were warranted because the Board erred when it failed to ensure VA's duty to assist was satisfied and because the Board failed to provide adequate reasons or bases explaining its decision.  Specifically, the parties agreed that the Board erred when it failed to ensure that VA provided the Veteran with an adequate examination and by not explaining how it found the November 2020 VA examination adequate given that the November 2020 examiner failed to provide range of motion results in the non-weight bearing or passive range of motion testing portions of the examination instead stating that testing could not be performed or was not medically appropriate without further explanation regarding why testing could not be performed or why range of motion estimates could not be provided.  Consequently, the parties agreed that remand was warranted for a new examination that conducts passive range of motion testing and non-weight bearing testing to determine if the Veteran's reported pain further limits his range of motion.  

The parties also agreed that the November 2020 VA examination was inadequate because the examiner's findings appeared contradictory without further explanation.  Specifically, the parties agreed that the examiner noted that the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up and that pain, weakness, and fatigue significantly limit the Veteran's functional ability with flare-ups.  However, the examiner also provided the same range of motion estimates for flare-ups as were provided for the initial range of motion test results without providing an explanation for the finding that flare-ups cause a functional impact by then finding that range of motion is not altered by the functional impact of the flare-up.  Consequently, it is not clear from the information and rationale provided in the examination how the examiner found that the Veteran suffered from functional loss during flare-ups while also finding that the Veteran did not experience any range of motion change.  The parties agreed that on remand, the examiner must clearly address the Veteran's flare-ups and determine the degree to which his flare-ups impact his range of motion.

In satisfaction of the November 2024 JMPR, the Board finds that remand is warranted for a new VA left knee examination and opinion consistent with the directives herein.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee instability  

As noted above, in the December 2023 rating decision, the Board granted a separate rating for left knee instability.  

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g).  If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change.  38 U.S.C. § 5110.  Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to February 7, 2021, and both the old and new rating criteria from February 7, 2021.  The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.

Prior to the February 7, 2021 regulatory change, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5257 provided for a 10 percent rating for slight recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  A 20 percent rating was warranted for moderate recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  A 30 percent rating was warranted for severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.   The words "slight," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes were not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  However, slight has been defined as small of its kind or in amount. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/slight. Moderate has been defined as not violent, severe or intense. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/slight.  Additionally, severe has been defined as "of a great degree." https://www.merriam-webster.com/ dictionary/severe.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence in reaching a decision that is "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

The February 2021 regulatory changes to DC 5257 removed the descriptor terms of slight, moderate, and severe and replaced them with detailed descriptions of levels of impairment resulting from recurrent subluxation or instability, or from patellar instability.

Following the regulatory changes, DC 5257 provides for evaluation of recurrent subluxation or instability.  A 10 percent rating is warranted if: sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted if one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation. (b) Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 30 percent evaluation is warranted if: Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

In the November 2024 JMPR, the parties agreed that vacatur and remand were warranted because the Board erred when it failed to address all evidence regarding the Veteran's left knee instability when determining that a rating in excess of 10 percent was not warranted because no evidence showed that his instability was moderate or severe.  Specifically, the parties agreed that the Board erred when it failed to address whether the November 2020 examination report that the Veteran's pain causes instability of station with disturbance of locomotion in his left knee was indicative of a higher rating based on instability.  The Board previously noted in its December 2023 decision that the November 2020 examination found no joint instability on examination.  Given the November 2024 JMPR, these conflicting examination notations, and the lack of instability symptomology and severity information in the November 2020 examination report, the Board finds that remand for a retrospective opinion as to the severity and frequency of the Veteran's left knee instability is also warranted.

3. Entitlement to TDIU

In argument submitted in November 2024 following the issuance of the JMPR, the Veteran's representative contended the evidence reasonably raised that the Veteran's left knee condition impacted his ability to work and thus reasonably raised entitlement to TDIU pursuant to Rice.  Specifically, the Veteran's representative contended that the Veteran's June 2023 testimony that he would have to quit his new job because it required balance and strength that he did not have any more was sufficient evidence to raise entitlement to TDIU pursuant to Rice.  

The Board observes that the issue of entitlement to TDIU was not addressed in the November 2024 JMPR.  However, affording the Veteran all due process and sympathetic reading, the Board finds the Veteran's testimony reasonably raised whether his left knee condition impacted his ability to maintain employment.

In February 2025 correspondence, the Veteran again contended that his left knee condition impacted his ability to work and stated that he had to terminate his employment because he could no longer performed the duties assigned and he was concerned that he was a safety hazard.  However, the Veteran has not completed a VA Form 21-8940 clearly setting forth his occupational and educational history.  While a VA Form 21-8940 is not required to initiate a TDIU claim, the form is still extremely helpful because once completed, it contains information necessary to fully consider the Veteran's claim.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  Here, the Veteran has not provided a complete delineation of his most recent employment timeline, and as the record currently stands, the Veteran's employment status during the period under consideration remains unclear.  Accordingly, remand is necessary in order to obtain employment information from the Veteran.

Additionally, consideration of entitlement to a TDIU is dependent upon the impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on his ability to obtain or retain substantially gainful employment.  Accordingly, the matter of a TDIU is also inextricably intertwined with the Veteran's claims remanded herein.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).  Remand of the inextricably intertwined TDIU claim is, thus, also required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected residuals of total left knee arthroplasty including left knee instability.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(a)	The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(b)	The examiner must also attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If the examiner finds that the Veteran has functional loss during flare-ups but also finds that the Veteran does not experience any range of motion change, the examiner must explain why that is so.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(c)	The examiner must also comment on the extent, severity, and frequency of the Veteran's left knee instability throughout the appeal period.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered. If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-8940 and undertake any additional development indicated by the results of the development requested above pertinent to the Veteran's claim for TDIU.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Coburn

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.