Citation Nr: A25030392
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240216-417966
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy is remanded. 

Entitlement to total disability evaluation based on individual unemployability, due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) prior to August 15, 2023 is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record shows service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with IVDS does not more nearly approximate forward flexion at 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine; or IVDS with incapacitating episodes of any duration.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with IVDS have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.14, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5003, 5010, 5242, 5243.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1982 to July 1985 and from March 1986 to February 1994. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 higher level review (HLR) decision, which followed a February 2023 decision on appeal denying the claims. Both decisions were issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO), which is also the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran filed a timely appeal to the Board under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA) with the submission of a February 2024 Decision Review Request (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) (VA Form 10182), disagreeing with the December 2023 decision on appeal. The Veteran specified the claims of higher ratings for lumbar spine and for right-lower-extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve. The Veteran requested the Direct Review docket, whereby the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Accompanying the NOD is a February 2024 Brief by the Veteran's representative, providing argument in support of this appeal.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence which was added to the claims file which the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. 

Schedular Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (rating schedule), found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-81 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Additionally, it is possible for a veteran to be awarded separate percentage evaluations for separate periods (staged ratings), based on the facts. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-27 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Where an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of the veteran's disability is the primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  

However, for claims other than those appealing the initial rating assigned, attention in adjudicating an increased rating claim will be directed to evidence concerning the state of the disability from the period of one year before the claim was filed until VA makes a final decision on the claim. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as "pyramiding," must be avoided. However, separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury, so long as the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities, VA, in addition to applying the schedular criteria, may assign a higher disability rating when the evidence demonstrates functional loss due to limited or excessive movement, pain, weakness, excessive fatigability, or incoordination, to include during flare-ups and with repeated use, if those factors are not considered in the rating criteria. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; see also DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-07 (1995); Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011). Nonetheless, a disability rating higher than the minimum compensable rating is not assignable under any diagnostic code relating to range of motion where pain does not cause a compensable functional loss. Rather, the "pain must affect some aspect of 'the normal working movements of the body' such as 'excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance,'" as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, before a higher rating may be assigned. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 37 (2011) (noting that while "pain may cause a functional loss, pain itself does not constitute a functional loss," and, is therefore, not grounds for entitlement to a higher disability rating).

Additionally, the intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. Thus, with or without degenerative arthritis, actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to a healed injury, are recognized as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; see also Burton v. Shinseki at 5 (holding that the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 are not limited to disabilities involving arthritis).

Further considerations required of VA when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities are to ensure findings on examination include range of motion measurements made during active and passive motion and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing maneuvers. Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 168 (2016).  Additionally, findings must account for the effects of pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination on range of motion during flare-ups and in repeated use over time.  When flare-ups are not occurring during the examination or repeated use over time is not tested that day, findings nonetheless must include estimations of additional loss of motion made in actual degrees, based on a veteran's reports or as demonstrated by the veteran. Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017).

In adjudicating the claims on appeal, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of the Veteran and probative value of the evidence of record in its whole. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005), 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2) (2021) (Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person). In determining whether documents submitted by a veteran are credible, the Board may consider internal consistency, facial plausibility, and consistency with other evidence submitted on behalf of the claimant. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995).

1. Entitlement to an increased disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with IVDS.

The Veteran contends that he has chronic low-back pain which is worsening. He further contends that the November 2022 VA examination is not adequate.

The December 2023 HLR decision on appeal, as well as the prior February 2023 rating, did not identify any favorable findings of fact for this issue.

As background, in February 2007, the Veteran filed an informal claim in the legacy appeals system for service connection for low back.  A March 2008 rating decision granted service connection at a 10-percent rating for a lumbar-spine condition. The effective date of the rating was later assigned as August 1, 2006. The Veteran did not appeal that decision. In March 2012, the Veteran filed an informal claim for a higher rating. A November 2012 rating decision granted a 20-percent rating for service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease with IVDS. The effective date later assigned was March 22, 2012. The Veteran did not appeal the decision. 

The current appeal period commenced with VA's receipt in August 2021 of the Veteran's claim in the AMA appeals system for an increased rating. An October 2021 decision denied an increased rating. Early in November 2022, VA received the Veteran's claim for TDIU. A February 2023 decision continued the rating for the Veteran's 20-percent rating and denied the claim for TDIU. After requesting HLR in August 2023, a December 2023 HLR decision proceeded to address the claims fully on the merits and denied higher ratings. In so doing, the decision became the decision now on appeal. As stated, the Veteran appealed that decision in February 2024.

The Veteran's lumbar spine condition is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 5242-5243. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. Hyphenated codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. The additional code is shown after the hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. A hyphenated diagnostic code is assigned to specify the diagnosis of the condition and further to show its symptoms or development. Therefore, the condition was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease and the resulting symptoms are associated with IVDS. 

Revisions to the rating criteria were effective before the pendency of this appeal and therefore provide the sole criteria to which the Board has looked for rating purposes.

The rating criteria for above diagnostic codes fall under General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula) and the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes (IVDS Formula). The Veteran's condition can be rated either under the General Rating Formula or under the IVDS Formula, whichever method results in the higher evaluation when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. 

The General Rating Formula provides a 20-percent rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis or abnormal kyphosis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. A 40 percent rating is available when there is forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine of 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating will be assigned for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. Id.

The IVDS Formula provides a 20 percent rating for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months. A 40 percent rating is assigned with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. A 60 percent disability rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. An "incapacitating episode" is defined as a period of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS which required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Note (1).

As stated, the Veteran's disability is rated under DC 5242, specifying "degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome (also, see either DC 5003 or 5010)." DC 5010 concerns traumatic arthritis. DC 5003 specifies degenerative arthritis, "other than post-traumatic." However, at the outset, the Board notes that DC 5003 provides only two ratings of 10 and 20 percent. The Veteran is already rated at 20 percent and is not permitted any additional ratings of 10 or 20 percent to be "pyramided" one upon the other. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. Moreover, DC 5003 requires involvement of two or more major joints or two or more minor joint groups. However, the spine is considered for VA rating purposes as one major "joint." For these reasons, the rating criteria under DC 5003 do not apply.

In September 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for thoracolumbar-spine conditions. The examiner's diagnoses were IVDS and degenerative disc disease at lumbar 4-5 with intervertebral disc syndrome. The Veteran reported he incurred his back injury during active service when carrying heavy objects. He added that it is worsening and his current symptom is pain. The Veteran reported use of meloxicam as needed and diclofenac gel, topically as needed.

The Veteran further reported he does not experience flare-ups. However, he added that he does have functional loss during repeated use over time, during or after which he is unable to bend over and pick items up off the ground and unable to sit in one position for a prolonged period.

Active range-of-motion testing showed the following measurements.

Forward flexion	0-50/90 Degrees

Extension	0-20/30 Degrees

Right lateral flexion	0-20/30 Degrees

Left lateral flexion	0-20/30 Degrees

Right lateral rotation	0-20/30 Degrees

Left lateral rotation	0-20/30 Degrees

The combined range-of-motion findings were 150 degrees. The examiner noted that all range-of-motion maneuvers elicited pain from the Veteran and there was pain on weight-bearing, both causing functional loss. See Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 168. The Veteran again described his functional loss, as stated, as being unable to bend over, pick things up or sit in one position for a prolonged period. The examiner did not conduct passive-range-of-motion testing, observing that it is not feasible to do in a safe and reasonable manner. In repetitive use range-of-motion testing, the Veteran could do three repetitions without pain or functional loss.

The examiner found the evidence did not suggest that pain, weakness, fatigability or incoordination significantly limited functional loss ability with repeated use over time. The examiner therefore did not provide any estimated range-of-motion measurements. However, the Board notes that, as already stated, the Veteran reported at the beginning of the examination that he does have functional loss with repeated use over time and described the symptoms as above. See Sharp, 29 Vet. App. at 34-36. The Veteran, consistent with his report at the beginning of the examination, denied experiencing flare-ups. Any estimated measurements therefore were unnecessary. 

In any case, the latest VA examination in November 2022, discussed below, is sufficient to determine the present claim. The Veteran has reported a progressive worsening of his back symptoms and impairment so the Board finds the 2022 VA examiner's determination may be applied retroactively without prejudice to the Veteran.  The Board therefore finds for VA rating purposes no prejudice results from the absence of estimated repeated-use-over-time findings in the September 2021 examination.

Other findings in the September 2021 examination include there was no crepitus. Although the examiner did not find guarding or muscle spasm, she found there was localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the spine or associated soft tissue, due to lumbar degenerative disc disease. However, it did not result in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. Muscle strength in all segments was normal (5/5). There was no muscle atrophy. Knee and ankle reflexes were normal (+2). Sensory responses were normal in all segments tested. The straight-leg-raising test results were negative for right and left sides. There was no radicular pain and no ankylosis. The examiner found the Veteran had IVDS, but with no episodes of bed rest prescribed in the past twelve months. The examiner noted the Veteran's report of no use of an assistive device. 

No imaging studies were produced for the examination. The examiner found there was no thoracic vertebral fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of height. The examiner noted from the record an August 2021 lumbar-spine x-ray which revealed progressive multilevel degenerative disc disease. The examiner found the Veteran's condition impacted his ability to work as, according to the Veteran's reports, he could not bend over and pick things up or sit for a prolonged period.

In the November 2022 examination, the examiner diagnosed degenerative joint disease at lumbar 4-5 with IVDS. The Veteran reported that he had hurt his back in service after pushing a car. The symptoms at that time were lower-back pain, stiffness, swelling, painful to touch, difficulty to stand up straight, pain through the buttocks, hips and legs. The Veteran added that the pain worsened. The Veteran further reported his current symptoms were overall the same as at onset. Although the Veteran reported that past treatment had included spinal injections for pain, he stated his current treatment to be the use of Tylenol and meloxicam, as well as treatment by a chiropractor.

The Veteran further reported that during flare-ups it is difficult to move because pain worsens with any movement. He described the effects of flare-ups as decreased productivity, chronic absenteeism, decreased motivation, moodiness, mental-health decline and his quality of life is negatively affected. The Veteran further described his flare-ups as moderate to severe, occurring three to four times a year depending on activity. They last three to five weeks, but with chiropractor care a flare-up will last only two to three weeks. Flare-ups are precipitated by prolong or repetitive activity, bending, walking, standing, using stairs, pushing, pulling, sitting, and excess stress. They are alleviated by chiropractor care and rest. The Veteran further reported that during flare-ups it is extremely difficult to perform any household or recreational activities. Movement worsens pain. Flare-ups affect sleeping, bending, stooping, lifting, standing, sitting, pushing, pulling, driving, and putting on socks and shoes.

Active range-of-motion measurements were normal, as follows. 

Forward flexion	0-90 Degrees

Extension	0-30 Degrees

Right lateral flexion	0-30 Degrees

Left lateral flexion	0-30 Degrees

Right lateral rotation	0-30 Degrees

Left lateral rotation	0-30 Degrees

The combined range-of-motion findings were 240 degrees. Although findings were normal, the examiner found forward flexion elicited pain. The examiner found pain in active range-of-motion testing, but not on weight-bearing or non-weight-bearing, See Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 168. The examiner did not conduct passive-range-of-motion testing. She explained, "The lumbar musculature are in constant use for positioning and posture. For this reason, passive range of motion of the back is not possible." 

The Veteran could do at least three repetitions without additional loss of function. In repeated-use-over-time testing, the examiner found pain, fatigability and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability. As the Veteran was not being examined immediately after repeated use over time, the examiner provided the following estimated range-of-motion measurements. See Sharp, 29 Vet. App. at 34-36.  

Forward flexion	0-80/90 Degrees

Extension	0-30/30 Degrees

Right lateral flexion	0-30/30 Degrees

Left lateral flexion	0-30/30 Degrees

Right lateral rotation	0-20/30 Degrees

Left lateral rotation	0-20/30 Degrees

The combined range-of-motion findings were 210 degrees. The examiner found pain significantly limits functional ability. As the Veteran was not being examined during a flare-up, the examiner provided the following estimated range-of-motion measurements. 

Forward flexion	0-80/90 Degrees

Extension	0-30/30 Degrees

Right lateral flexion	0-30/30 Degrees

Left lateral flexion	0-30/30 Degrees

Right lateral rotation	0-30/30 Degrees

Left lateral rotation	0-30/30 Degrees

The combined range-of-motion findings were 230 degrees. Further findings on examination include there was no localized tenderness. There were muscle spasms and guarding. Both resulted in abnormal gait or abnormal spine contour, due to degenerative joint disease with radiculopathy. The examiner found as an additional contributing factor of disability disturbance of locomotion and interference with standing. The contributing factors were described by the Veteran as causing the need to take breaks while sitting/standing and being unable to sit/stand for prolonged periods.

The examiner found muscle strength in all maneuvers was normal (5/5). There was no muscle atrophy. The examination of reflexes showed right and left ankles and knees were hypoactive (+1). Sensory responses in all segments were normal. The straight-leg-raising test showed bilateral negative results. The examiner did not find ankylosis. The Veteran had radicular pain. Associated findings of radiculopathy will be addressed when the Veteran's radiculopathy claim is returned from remand. 

The examiner found the Veteran has IVDS, but without prescribed bed rest in the past twelve months. The Veteran used no assistive device. There was no imaging done for this examination. The record did not show thoracolumbar vertebral fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of height. The examiner identified in the record other significant test findings from an April 2016 CT scan of the lumbar spine. It revealed mild degenerative joint disease of the sacroiliac joints and mild degenerative facet arthropathy at L4-5 and L5-S1. There was severe spondylosis at L4-5 with osteophytosis, vacuum gas phenomenon and severe disc space narrowing. Mild spondylosis was seen at the L1-2 and L3-4 levels. 

The examiner found the Veteran's condition has a functional impact on his ability to work. Due to pain with functional mobility, work-related activities could not be performed with the appropriate speed, accuracy or quality. Focus on work-related activities would be sub-optimal due to distractions from pain, discomfort and the inability to perform optimally.

Review of the record of VA in the appeal period between August 28, 2021 and February 14, 2023 shows in September 2021, the Veteran presented to VA with back pain. In May 2022, the Veteran reported chronic low-back pain. His medical problems list in May and July 2022 again included degeneration of lumbar intervertebral disc, as well as chronic low-back pain and lumbar radiculopathy. Later in May 2022, the Veteran reported chronic low-back pain. He also reported that he experiences exacerbations of his back pain about three to four times in a year. The Veteran added that he works for the post office and his job involves pushing, pulling and lifting about 40 to 60 pounds. Additionally, the treatment provider reviewed the findings of the August 2016 lumbar CT scan, set forth above.

Private treatment records in the appeal period show in April 2022 the Veteran's past medical history included diagnoses of degeneration of lumbar intervertebral disc and chronic pain in his back and lower leg. On examination of the Veteran's general musculoskeletal system, the treatment provider found normal range of motion. In June 2022, the Veteran's active problems list included lumbar-disc degeneration.

Analysis

Review of the applicable rating criteria for higher ratings set forth earlier shows that the findings in the two VA examinations do not satisfy the rating criteria for greater severity in excess of the assigned 20-percent evaluation. Most pertinent to the Veteran's contentions, the symptom of chronic pain was considered and factored into the rating. DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. at 206; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45. As a matter of law, there is no medical evidence on which the Board can base the assignment of higher ratings. For example, neither the September 2021 examiner nor the November 2022 examiner found forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine at 30 degrees or less for a 40-percent rating, even when motion further diminished in estimated range-of-motion measurements for repeated use over time and during flare-ups. No examiner found ankylosis of any sort as an alternative finding for a 40-percent rating or as the required sole rating criterion for 50 and 100-percent ratings. Although both examiners found the Veteran had IVDS, neither made findings of episodes of bed rest prescribed in the past twelve months.

The record of private and VA treatment in the appeal period between August 2021 and February 2023 shows reports and findings indicating an ongoing back condition and are consistent overall with the findings on examination and the Veteran's reports summarized above. However, the record does not offer any findings to support higher disability evaluations under the rating criteria of the General Rating Formula or the IVDS Formula. For example, there are no range-of-motion findings of forward flexion of 30 degrees or less, no findings of ankylosis and no findings of incapacitating episodes of any duration due to IVDS.

The Board again notes here that the Veteran asserts in the February 2024 Brief that the November 2022 VA examination is not adequate, as it is internally inconsistent. The Brief refers to the examiner's statement that she could not perform passive range of motion because "the lumbar musculature are in constant use for positioning and posture. For this reason, passive range of motion of the back is not possible." The Veteran argues that the examiner's statement means that passive range of motion testing was not possible without causing extreme pain to the Veteran. This in turn means that the passive range of motion "is zero and warrants a rating in excess of 20%." 

The Board does not agree. The examiner said nothing about pain or even physical safety. Her finding is passive range of motion is not possible because the lumbar musculature is in constant use and therefore can never be in a passive state. Her finding therefore reasonably indicates that passive range of motion of the back conceptually is not "possible" to measure. 

The Board has weighed the probative value the November 2022 examiner's findings on examination. It is based on a medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the examiner's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusions reached. Cf. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993) (addressing the probative value of an opinion). The Board therefore finds the November 2022 VA examination and the examiner's conclusions therein are adequate for VA rating purposes.

Although no examiner or treatment provider found ankylosis, in a recent decision of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court), it was noted that the criteria for a rating based on ankylosis may be met by evidence demonstrating the "functional equivalent" of ankylosis. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1, 20 (2021). Therefore, ankylosis pertaining to the Veteran's lumbar-spine disorder could be shown by functional loss consistent with that contemplated by ankylosis under the General Rating Formula. Essentially, ankylosis indicates "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure." DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY, 94 (32nd ed. 2012).

The above VA examinations and treatment records do not indicate such a definition in reports by the Veteran or in findings. For example, in the September 2021 examination, the Veteran more than once reported that he is unable to bend over and pick items up off ground and he is unable to sit in one position for a prolonged period, particularly during repeated use over time. The examiner found functional impact on work to be the same as the Veteran's report. In the November 2022 examination, the Veteran reported that his current symptoms are low-back pain, stiffness, pain in hip/buttocks, and during flare ups it is difficult to move because pain is worsened with any movement. The examiner found the ability to work is affected because, due to pain with functional mobility, work related activities cannot be performed with the appropriate speed, accuracy or quality. Additionally, the Veteran would be distracted by pain, discomfort and his hampered performance.

The above reports by the Veteran and the examiners' prospective assessments of his capability in the workplace implicitly indicate that, nonetheless, the Veteran can move. Possible difficulty at work such as limited movement, bending down, decreased speed in movement, and difficulty sitting for a "prolonged" period are not reasonable equivalents to the inability to move the spine at all. The Board therefore finds ankylosis cannot be established by functional loss consistent with or equivalent to ankylosis as contemplated under the General Rating Formula. Chavis, 34 Vet. App. at 20.

The Board notes again that in the September 2021 and November 2022 VA examinations, the Veteran reported current treatment by a chiropractor, the use for treatment of Tylenol and the further use of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) meloxicam and diclofenac topical gel. The Board's reviewing court, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, has held the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not contemplated specifically by the rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012). The relevant rating criteria make no mention of medication. Under Jones, the Board therefore must consider that the Veteran's lumbar-spine condition would be worse without the above treatment and medications. 

However, the Board finds any ameliorative effects of such treatment and medications do not change the Board's analysis of the disability rating for lumbar degenerative disc disease with IVDS. For example, the Veteran's reports do not indicate and the September 2021 and November 2022 examiners did not find any discernible improvement pertaining to the Veteran's functional loss with the use of medications and chiropractic care. Moreover, the Veteran reported in the September 2021 examination that meloxicam and diclofenac gel were used "as needed," thereby suggesting that functional loss was not noticeably improved with the medications, otherwise the Veteran likely would have used them regularly. In the November 2022 examination, the Veteran did not report the frequency of use of the medications. However, he also did not report any specific positive results of their use. The Board therefore can reasonably conclude that the Veteran's condition would not necessarily be worse without medications and chiropractic treatment. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. at 61. Therefore, the Board further finds there is sufficient evidence to rate the disability without an opinion regarding the ameliorative effects of medications and other treatment. Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, No. 23-1798 (March 12, 2025).

The Board has considered whether the Veteran's back disability resulted in a level of functional loss greater than that already contemplated by the assigned ratings for these periods. DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. at 206; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45. Functional loss due to pain is rated at the same level at which functional loss is impeded. Stated another way, range of motion may be possible beyond the point when pain sets in but, for rating purposes, only to the extent pain limits motion will be considered. Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. at 43. While the Veteran complains of chronic pain throughout the range of motion of his back, the objective evidence of record indicates such pain does not limit the Veteran's functional range of motion except to the degree recorded on examination testing, as discussed above. The Board therefore finds there is no indication of greater pain on movement which has not been compensated in the evaluation assigned.

The Board has carefully considered the lay evidence of record in the appeal period, to include the Veteran's reports to treatment providers and examiners as they appear throughout the record. Lay persons are competent to report on matters observed or within their personal knowledge. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). Therefore, the Veteran is competent to provide statements of symptoms which are observable and perceived through his senses. Nonetheless, the Veteran's lay evidence in turn must be weighed against other evidence, as all relevant evidence of varying kinds must be considered. See Caluza, 7 Vet. App. at 511.

Greater probative weight is given to the findings of the examiners then nonspecific lay statements. Examiners are medical professionals who examined and tested the Veteran during in-person sessions, they thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's medical history and record and their findings, for the reasons stated above, are therefore adequate for VA rating purposes. Cf. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (the central issue in assessing the adequacy of an opinion is whether the examiner was informed of the relevant facts in rendering a medical opinion).

For the reasons stated and based on the evidence of record, the Board finds there is not at least an approximate balance of the evidence to support the claim for a disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent. 

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. However, as the evidence is decidedly against the claim, the rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7; see also Lynch, 21 F.4th at 780-81 (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to an initial disability evaluation in excess of 20 percent for right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy. 

The Veteran contends that the current rating for right-lower-extremity radiculopathy does not represent the level of severity of his disability.

The December 2023 HLR decision on appeal did not identify any favorable findings of fact.

In the November 2022 VA examination for thoracolumbar-spine conditions, the examiner diagnosed radiculopathy, sciatic-nerve involvement right-lower extremity. The examiner found for the right-lower extremity moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and moderate numbness. The examiner found no other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy and no other neurological abnormalities or findings.

The Board notes the Rating Schedule provides 10 percent, 20 percent and 40 percent evaluations when there is mild, moderate, and moderately-severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, respectively. A 60 percent evaluation is available for severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve with marked muscular atrophy. A maximum 80 percent evaluation is warranted where there is complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, as indicated specific symptoms which may be present in segments of the lower extremity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. Based on the rating criteria, "moderately severe" impairment (rated at 40 percent) represents greater severity than "moderate" impairment (rated at 20 percent). 

On November 3, 2022, the RO requested an examination for "DBQ (Disability Benefits Questionnaire) NEURO Peripheral Nerves" to address right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy. However, on November 4, 2022, the RO canceled that request and instead requested the use of a back examination in lieu of the Peripheral Nerves DBQ. The RO stated, "the contention is specifically regarding radiculopathy which can be addressed on the Back DBQ. The Back DBQ is already being utilized for a separate contention elsewhere on this referral and contains a section specifically for radiculopathy as well."

The November 2022 VA examination report for thoracolumbar-spine conditions provides the examiner with only the choice "moderate" as one of the levels of severity. However, the text of the examination report does not include the severity level of "moderately severe." As such, a VA examination for peripheral nerves conditions would have provided more information pertinent to the current severity of the right-lower-extremity radiculopathy than the thoracolumbar-spine examination. 

Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified in the cancellation of the peripheral nerves conditions examination. Remand is required for a VA examination for peripheral nerves conditions to determine with precision the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy.

3. Entitlement to TDIU prior to August 15, 2023.

On November 1, 2022, VA received the Veteran's VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim for entitlement to TDIU and his VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. The Form 10182 states the service-connected disabilities preventing securing or following a substantially gainful occupation are lumbar-spine degenerative disc disease, right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy and right-knee condition. The Veteran reported he became too disabled to work in December 1, 2021, but also reported he last work full-time in April 30, 2022. 

The Board notes from the procedural record that a September 2024 supplemental-claim decision granted TDIU and special monthly compensation (SMC), based on the need for regular aid and attendance or being housebound, both effective August 15, 2023. As such, the Veteran's combined evaluation for his service-connected disabilities was 70 percent as of February 24, 2023. This issue remains on appeal via Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356 (2018). 

Because the increased rating for radiculopathy is being remanded above, this issue remains on appeal and will need to be readjudicated for the same reasons as the radiculopathy above. Correction of such an error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating an appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for peripheral nerves conditions for his service-connected right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy. The most current Disability Benefits Questionnaire must be used and all relevant findings indicated in that questionnaire must be addressed. 

The examiner is requested to determine the current severity of right-lower-extremity sciatic-nerve radiculopathy. In doing so, the examiner is to consider all categories of levels of severity for the sciatic nerve, to include "moderately severe." 

2. After the increased rating for radiculopathy is readjudicated, also readjudicate the earlier effective date for a TDIU. 

 

EMILY TAMLYN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Franke, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.