Citation Nr: A25030963
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240122-411583
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, diagnosed as depressive and general anxiety disorders, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left forearm disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disorder is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Affording him the benefit of the doubt, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders onset during, or are otherwise related, to active service. 

2. The Veteran does not have hearing loss within the statutory definition of that disability for VA purposes.

3. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of hypertension for VA purposes.  

4. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis or disability of a left forearm condition for VA purposes. 

5. The Veteran's headaches are a known clinical diagnosis; his headache condition did not onset during, or is otherwise related, to his active service. 

6. The Veteran's OSA did not onset during, or is otherwise related, to his active service, to include as due to a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). 

7. The Veteran's GERD did not onset during, or is otherwise related, to his active service, to include as due to a TERA. 

8. The Veteran's musculoskeletal disabilities (bilateral ankle, bilateral pes planus, bilateral elbow, bilateral hand, bilateral knee, bilateral shoulder, bilateral wrist, bilateral hip, low back and neck disorders) were not shown in service or for many years thereafter and are not otherwise etiologically related to service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorders, diagnosed as depression and general anxiety, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.307, 3.309. 

2. The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303(a), 3.304, 3.385.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left forearm condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for headaches are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1119, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.317, 3.320.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1168; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

7. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1168, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

8. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's musculoskeletal disabilities (bilateral ankle, bilateral pes planus, bilateral elbow, bilateral hand, bilateral knee, bilateral shoulder, bilateral wrist, bilateral hip, low back and neck disorders) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303(a), 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the Marine Corps, on active duty from January 2010 to January 2014. His awards include the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, among others. 

This claim has a complicated procedural history. The Veteran was initially denied service connection for the above issues in rating decisions dated February and April 2023, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In April 2023, he submitted a request for Higher-Level-Review (HLR). 

In August 2023, the RO issued the HLR rating decision. In this decision, the RO denied the issues of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, bilateral hearing loss, hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea. As to the other issues listed above, the RO found several duty-to-assist (DTA) errors, and the Veteran's HLR appeal was turned into a Supplemental Claim. Following the required development, his supplemental claim was denied in a January 2024 rating decision. 

After the issuance of the latest rating decision, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 that same month. He specifically appealed all issues; however, he identified several rating decisions in his appeal. These included rating decisions dated February, April and August 2023. However, as these issues were most recently readjudicated in January 2024 after development of the record following the HLR decision and would afford the Veteran a larger evidentiary window for review, the Board finds one of the rating decisions on appeal to be from January 2024. Thus, the Board liberally construes the January 2024 VA Form 10182 to be appealing the rating decision issued that same month, among others. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).

Lastly, the claims file does not include all of the Veteran's service treatment records. In a February 2015 Memorandum, the Marine Corps communicated to VA that after a comprehensive review, "no further records exist" other than what is in the claims file. Notably, the file includes no separation examination. In light of the missing STRs, the Board acknowledges its heightened duty to explain its findings, including consideration of the benefit of the doubt rule, and to assist the Veteran in the development of his claim. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 371 (2005).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131 (2012). Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 505 (1995). "In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim." Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Moreover, evidence of continuous symptoms since active duty is a factor for consideration as to whether a causal relationship exists between an in-service injury or incident and the current disorder as is contemplated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In addition, certain chronic diseases, including arthritis and hearing loss, may be presumed to have been incurred during service if the disorder becomes manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active duty. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. For those listed chronic conditions, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Regardless of whether or not a disability is considered chronic for presumptive purposes, a continuity of symptoms from the time of service is a factor to consider in assessing any appeal.

Service connection may be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest to any degree at any time. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i).  

If an examiner has determined the Veteran's disability pattern to be either a diagnosable chronic multi symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis, then service connection cannot be granted under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 and may only be granted if the medical evidence is sufficient to establish service connection on a direct basis. See generally, Combee v. Principi, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043 (1994).

A Persian Gulf veteran is defined as a veteran who served on active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(1). The Southwest Asia theater of operations refers to Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations. Id. § 3.317(e)(2). The period of the Persian Gulf War is from August 2, 1990, through the present. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2(i). Additionally, for veterans diagnosed with an infectious disease as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(2), the qualifying period of service also includes active military, naval, air, or space service in Afghanistan on or after September 19, 2001. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(3)(ii).  

Further, effective August 10, 2022, if a veteran was exposed to environmental hazards (burn pits and other toxins) during specified service in Southwest Asia, then certain listed diseases, pursuant to the PACT Act, are presumptively service connected. See PACT Act, Pub. L. No. 117-168 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

The December 2022 and January 2023 VA Memorandums stated that the Department of Defense (DOD) has verified that the Veteran is a Persian Gulf Veteran as specified in 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and had presumptive toxic exposure per 38 U.S.C. § 1119. Therefore, exposure to burn pits and other toxins is presumptively established.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as anxiety and depression. 

The Veteran contends that he has a current psychiatric disorder that is related to service. After a review of the record, the Board agrees and finds that service connection is warranted. 

As an initial matter, the RO made several favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal that are binding on the Board. First, that the Veteran has current diagnoses of generalized anxiety disorder and depressive disorder. Second, that he participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) while serving in Bahrain. 

Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorders are related to service. 

Concerning the second element to establish service connection, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show some mental health symptoms during service. For example, in a February 2010 treatment note, he expressed feelings of being "depressed." Further, in a February 2023 addendum opinion, his VA examiner opined that his psychiatric symptoms started "after a combat tour." Given this and affording him the benefit of the doubt, the Board determines that the second element has been demonstrated. 

Regarding the third element, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2022. Here, the VA examiner wrote two opinions - both checking a box that his psychiatric disorder is related to service. However, in one opinion the examiner stated that while he has increased withdrawal, hypervigilance and insomnia, there is no military record to support a positive rationale. In the other opinion, they noted his in-service complaint for a referral regarding his depression. Lastly, in an addendum opinion dated February 2023, the same VA examiner explained that his psychiatric disorder symptoms began "after a combat tour" indicating that they onset during service. 

Given the positive, although vague, opinions from the December 2022 and February 2023 VA examiners, the Board finds the evidence is at least in equipoise and that service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders is warranted. The Board notes that no negative medical opinions are of record. 

Accordingly, under these circumstances, and giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that service connection for his diagnosed depressive and general anxiety disorders is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss (BHL). 

The Veteran contends that he has current bilateral hearing loss that is related to his active service. After a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted as he does not have bilateral hearing loss for VA purposes. 

In cases where a hearing loss disability is claimed, as it is here, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the above frequencies are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

38 C.F.R. § 3.385 does not preclude service connection for a current hearing loss disability where hearing was within normal limits on audiometric testing at separation from service. Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). Rather, when audiometric test results at a veteran's separation from service do not meet the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.385, a veteran may nevertheless establish service connection for a current hearing disability by submitting medical evidence that the current disability is causally related to service. Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993).

In this instant case, the Board finds that service connection must be denied because the Veteran does not meet the statutory criteria for a diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2022. At that time, pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	20 	20	15	25	20

LEFT	20 	15	10	15	25

Speech audiometry revealed speech recognition ability of 100 percent in the right ear and of 94 percent in the left ear.

In light of the result of this examination, the only one of record, the Board must deny the claim. None of the auditory thresholds are 40 Hertz or greater, and he does not have at least three thresholds of 26 Hertz or greater in either ear. Further, his speech discrimination scores are not less than 94 percent for either ear. As such, the Board must determine that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of hearing loss for VA purposes at this time. Essentially, the Veteran fails the first criteria for service connection, namely, a presently diagnosed disability.

Further, the Board has reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment notes for indications of hearing loss. Here, the Veteran reported "good" hearing during treatment in June 2017.

As such, the Board finds no present disability for VA purposes and the claim is denied. 

The Board notes that this holding does not preclude the Veteran from obtaining service connection for hearing loss in the future, presuming that his hearing loss worsens to the point of meeting the statutory criteria for that disability. However, under the present statutory guidelines, the Board cannot grant the claim. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left forearm disorder

The Veteran contends that he has hypertension and a left forearm disorder that are related to service. Unfortunately, the Board must deny both claims as the evidence of record does not show current disabilities. 

As for the Veteran's claimed hypertension, this disorder for VA purposes means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90 or more, or systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160 or more. Hypertension must be confirmed by readings taken two or more times on three different days. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104 Diagnostic Code 7101, Note (1).

Here, the Board finds that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of hypertension for VA purposes, and has not had one during the pendency of this appeal. 

In November 2022, the Veteran a VA examination. He reported elevated blood pressure readings during service, with no current treatment and its impact as "none." The VA examination report indicates the Veteran does not have a treatment plan in place, including the use of continuous medication for hypertension. Further, the VA examiner explained that he had no initial diagnosis of hypertension or blood pressure readings of record. The examiner provided the following blood pressure readings upon examination: 143/88, 136/83, and 135/90. Unfortunately, the Veteran, according to the examination report, did not return to the examiner to repeat blood pressure readings in the following two days. The examiner concluded that there is no objective evidence or abnormal findings to support a current diagnosis of hypertension. Indeed, the examiner found no functional impact from his claimed hypertension. 

As for the Veteran's claimed left forearm disorder, he underwent a VA examination in November 2022. Here, he reported left elbow pain with left forearm weakness. Further, he told the examiner that his left elbow pain had a gradual onset with current symptoms of elbow pain. While the Board addresses his elbow pain further below in this decision, the Veteran does not report symptoms other than weakness in his left forearm during the period on appeal. Indeed, the VA examiner opined upon examination that he does not have a current diagnosis, nor "findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis" regarding his left forearm. While the VA examination report notes functional impairment, the examiner indicates this is related to his elbow condition - not his claimed left forearm disorder. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has not had a left forearm disability during the pendency of this appeal. 

The evidence of record also includes the Veteran's VA treatment records. However, these treatment notes do not include complaints or treatment for his claimed hypertension and/or left forearm disorder. 

Given the above, the Board must deny the claims of service connection for hypertension and a left forearm condition as the Veteran does not have current diagnoses for these disorders for VA purposes. 

In arriving at this conclusion, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement that he currently has a left forearm disorder. Further, the Board observes that even without a diagnosis, pain alone can qualify as a disability if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity." See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). However, the Veteran reports weakness in his left forearm and not pain. Moreover, there is no evidence that it results in functional impairment. As such, the evidence of record is persuasive in showing that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of hypertension and a left forearm disorder for VA purposes, nor does his reported left forearm condition result in functional impairment. 

Therefore, because the evidence of record persuasively shows that the Veteran does not have hypertension or a left forearm disability for VA purposes, service connection is not warranted. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for headaches

6. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

7. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed headaches, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) are related to service. Specifically, that he developed GERD due to eating Meals Ready-to-Eat (MREs) during service. In the alternative, he asserts that headaches, OSA and GERD onset during service after his deployment to Southwest Asia. 

After a review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to be persuasively against the claim. 

As an initial matter, the Board concedes current diagnoses of headaches, OSA and GERD. Specifically, during VA examinations dated November 2022 and March 2023, the Veteran's VA examiners noted a current diagnosis of each condition. As such, the first Shedden element is met.

Next, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not reflect diagnoses, complaints or reports of symptoms related to headaches, OSA or GERD. For example, in March 2010 he denied headaches and gastrointestinal issues. Further, in August 2010, he again denied nausea or stomach problems. As noted above, the Veteran's STRs are incomplete and without a separation examination. However, the first noted symptoms of the Veteran's disorders come in November 2022 and March 2023, during his VA examinations. 

Despite the lack of complete service treatment records, the Board finds probative that there are no annotated symptoms, manifestations, or diagnoses related to his headaches, OSA and GERD prior to 2022. Therefore, continuity of symptoms has not been shown based on the clinical evidence, including for purposes of the chronic disease presumption under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(3).

The Board recognizes the statements from the Veteran regarding his history of symptoms since service. While he is competent to report that he experienced symptoms of his disorders, he is not competent to provide diagnoses in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of his current disorders. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Next, although the Veteran is not competent to diagnose and provide etiological opinions related to his claimed disorders, service connection may nonetheless be demonstrated if a relationship may be otherwise established by competent evidence, including medical evidence and opinions. 

In this case, the competent evidence fails to establish a relationship between active-duty service and the Veteran's headaches, OSA and GERD. In this regard, the Board places significant probative value on the opinions of the VA examiners who performed a detailed review of the Veteran's medical treatment records, as well as comprehensive physical examination. 

In November 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for his headaches. Here, the VA examiner diagnosed him with migraine headaches. He reported onset as 2013 following a deployment in Southwest Asia, with treatment from over-the-counter medication. The VA examiner opined that his migraine headaches were a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology. After a review of the evidence of record, the VA examiner opined against service connection. The examiner clarified that migraines are "not known clinically" to be associated with conceded exposures in Southwest Asia and/or burn pit exposure. Furthermore, the examiner indicated there is a lack of in-service complaints, treatment or a diagnosis related to headaches, and thus, the examiner opined against service connection on a direct basis. 

In addition, the Veteran was afforded an addendum opinion in April 2023. Here, the VA examiner opined that his headaches are not related to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). Specifically, the examiner opined that after considering the total potential exposure and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA, there is no evidence of a causal relationship between his TERA and his diagnosed headaches. 

As to the Veteran's OSA, he was afforded a VA examination in March 2023. Here, he reported onset as 2023 when he noticed snoring and daytime hypersomnolence. The VA examiner diagnosed him with obstructive sleep apnea following a sleep study that same month. The VA examiner conceded his TERA during service. However, the examiner opined against service connection. In support, the clinician indicated that after considering all potential TERA, the medical evidence does not show a relationship between TERA and his OSA.

Regarding the Veteran GERD, he underwent a VA examination in November 2022. Here, he was diagnosed with GERD and described onset as 2012 during service with over-the-counter medication for treatment. After a review of the evidence, the examiner opined against service connection. The examiner explained that he did not complain of, get treatment, or was rendered a diagnosis for his GERD in-service. Moreover, according to the examiner, there is a lack of continuity of treatment since service as he was first diagnosed in 2022. As to burn pit exposure, the VA examiner indicated that GERD is not clinically known to be associated with such exposures. Thus, the November 2022 VA examiner opined that his GERD is not related to service. 

In April 2023, the Veteran was provided an addendum opinion for his GERD. Specifically, the April 2023 VA examiner opined that his GERD is not related to his TERA. Despite considering the total potential exposure through his service and its synergistic, combined effect, the examiner explained that the medical records do not support an association between TERA and GERD. 

Lastly, in September 2023, the Veteran was provided with an addendum opinion regarding his GERD. Specifically, the VA examiner was asked to opine whether his GERD is related to his in-service consumption of MREs. The VA examiner opined against service connection, explaining that he had no in-service complaints of GERD symptoms. Moreover, the VA examiner indicated that he first complained of such symptoms in November 2022, and that it onset well after service. 

The Board places significant probative value on the opinions of the November 2022, March 2023, and September 2023 VA examiners. Specifically, they reviewed the claims file, examined the Veteran, discussed his lay statements and provided well-reasoned rationales as to why his disorders are not related to service. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran has provided insufficient evidence, including private opinions and/or medical evidence, to establish a nexus between his headaches, OSA, GERD and service, to include as due to his TERA. 

In light of the above discussion, the Board finds the competent evidence of record is persuasively against his headaches, OSA and GERD claims. Therefore, service connection is not warranted.  

8. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ankle disorder

9. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus

10. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral elbow disorder

11. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hand disorder

12. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disorder

13. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral shoulder disorder

14. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral wrist disorder

15. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disorder

16. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder

17. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip disorder

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed musculoskeletal disabilities, bilateral ankle, bilateral pes planus, bilateral elbow, bilateral hand, bilateral knee, bilateral shoulder, bilateral wrist, bilateral hip, low back and neck disorders, are related to active service. 

Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he developed these conditions due to a variety of in-service events. Like, marching and performing physical tests, running, holding 30-pound ammunition crates, lifting rifles, doing pushups, ruck marching, carrying heavy radios, participating in hand-to-hand combat training, wearing a rifle sling, and kneeling during training exercises. 

After a review of the evidence, the Board concludes that while the Veteran has current diagnoses of the above musculoskeletal disorders, the evidence is persuasively against finding that his disorders began during service or are otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury, event or disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363. 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.304.

As an initial matter, the RO made several favorable findings in the rating decisions on appeal that are binding on the Board. First, that the Veteran has current diagnoses for the above claimed musculoskeletal disabilities. Second, that participating in a TERA is conceded based on service in Bahrain. Nonetheless, the record does not show that these disorders onset in or are otherwise related to service.

First, the Veteran's STRs do not reflect complaints of, treatment for, or diagnoses of any of his claimed musculoskeletal disorders. Indeed, the only mention of these musculoskeletal disabilities in the STRs are clinicians noting they are "normal." For example, in a February 2010 STR, his treating clinician opined that his back was "normal." Further, in a September 2011 STR, his treating clinician indicated that this neck was "normal." As discussed at length above, the Board is mindful that his STRs are partially missing, to include a separation examination. In a case such as this, there is a heightened obligation to explain our findings and conclusions, and to carefully consider the benefit-of-the-doubt rule. 

Unfortunately, the Veteran's separation examination is not available. However, the post-service medical evidence of record includes VA treatment records. Following service, he first complained of left shoulder, bilateral knee, and low back pain during VA treatment in June 2017. During that same visit, his VA clinician observed that his neck and extremities were normal, to include full range of motion with no deformities. As to the other claimed disabilities, the first post-service indications of symptoms occur through the filing of this claim. 

Given the Veteran's statements and the evidence of record, the Board cannot find that his claimed musculoskeletal disorders onset during service and have continued since. The Veteran reported to his November 2022 VA examiners that his disorders onset during service from physical training, wearing of military boots and "unknown." However, his STRs do not show any complaints regarding these disorders. Moreover, his other records do not show requests for new boots, or negative counseling for physical fitness that would indicate restrictions due to his claimed issues. Despite this, he reported only left shoulder, bilateral knee and back pain in June 2017 - more than three years after service. While the Veteran is competent to report pain, the Board does not find his lay statements indicating his musculoskeletal disabilities onset during service and have continued since, to be credible. 

Given the evidence of record fails to show in-service complaints, and the more than three to eight years between service and his first complaints, the Board finds that continuity of symptoms cannot be established. Thus, service connection cannot be awarded based on his statements alone. 

Finally, service connection may also be granted when the evidence establishes a medical nexus between active-duty service and current complaints. In this case, the weight of the competent evidence is persuasively against attributing the Veteran's disorders to service.

The Veteran underwent VA examinations for his claimed musculoskeletal disorders in November 2022. Here, he was diagnosed with bilateral knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, bilateral flat foot, bilateral plantar fasciitis, bilateral metatarsalgia, bilateral heal bursitis, bilateral shoulder impingement syndrome, bilateral rotator cuff tendonitis, bilateral subacromial bursitis, degenerative arthritis of the spine, lumbosacral strain, intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), thoracic spondylosis, bilateral olecranon bursitis, bilateral lateral epicondylitis, cervical strain, bilateral lateral collateral ligament sprain, bilateral deltoid ligament strain, bilateral ankle tendinitis, bilateral Dequervain's syndrome, bilateral wrist tendinitis, bilateral femoral acetabular impingement syndrome, bilateral iliopsoas tendinitis, and bilateral hand/finger strain.

In conjunction with the November 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner provided an opinion as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed musculoskeletal disabilities are related to exposures sustained during service in Southwest Asia. However, the VA examiner opined against service connection for the Veteran's claimed musculoskeletal disorders above. Specifically, the examiner indicated that his bilateral knee disorder was caused by overuse, from running or jumping sports that put repetitive stress on the knee joint. Further, the examiner explained that his bilateral shoulder condition is most commonly seen in individuals who participate in sports and activities that require repetitive overhead activities, as well as repetitive overuse. As to his hip disorders, the examiner indicated that it occurs because a childhood deformity that results in joint damage and pain. In discussing his hand disorders, the examiner opined that they generally onset due to sport and everyday activities, along with typing or an individual who works with their hands. 

The November 2022 VA examiner continued, opining that the Veteran's diagnosed back disorder is not related to service as it stems from overuse, and general wear and tear. His elbow disorders, according to the examiner, are commonly referred to as "tennis elbow" because of overuse during activities that involve loaded and repetitive gripping, while his wrist disorders are due to repetitive stress on the tendons during day-to-day activities, such as using a computer, writing, manual work and playing sports. As to his feet, the VA examiner explained that his conditions can be congenital or acquired; most commonly occurring in adults who participate in repetitive high impact sports, like basketball, running, and soccer, or from overuse stress. Regarding his ankle disorders, the examiner indicated that they were due to being forced out of its normal position caused by a fall, twist, or awkward landing, while his ankle tendinitis could be caused by repetitive use. Lastly, the examiner indicated that his neck strain could simply be caused by poor posture, stretch injuries or compressive forces like a car crash or sports injury. 

Regarding all the Veteran's claimed musculoskeletal disabilities, the November 2022 VA examiner opined that they are not related to any exposures sustained during his deployment to Southwest Asia. Indeed, for each diagnosis, the VA examiner explained that they are not known to be clinically associated with such exposure. 

In March 2023, the Veteran was provided an addendum opinion regarding his bilateral foot disorder. Specifically, the VA examiner was asked to determine whether his bilateral foot numbness and pain is related to his TERA. The VA examiner opined against service connection based on TERA, explaining that upon review of all available records, there is no evidence of a relationship between his TERA activities and the development of a bilateral foot disorder. 

Subsequently, in September 2023, the Veteran was provided with addendum opinions for his claimed bilateral hips, ankle, knee, foot, shoulder, elbow, wrist, hands, neck and back disorders. Specifically, the VA examiner was asked to opine as to whether these disorders are related to his in-service activities, such as physical training, ruck marching, rifle training, lifting ammunition crates and other military activities. 

After a review of the record, to include his November 2022 VA examination reports, the September 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's musculoskeletal disorders are not related to service on a direct basis. In support, the September 2023 VA examiner explained that he did not complain, exhibit symptoms or seek treatment for any of these disorders during service. Moreover, according to the VA examiner, the Veteran did not have any diagnoses for these disorders until June 2017, or November 2022, depending on the disability. Given the lack of in-service complaints, and the large gap between service and his first treatment, the VA examiner opined against direct service connection for all musculoskeletal disorders. 

Overall, the Board places significant probative value on the opinions of the November 2022, March 2023 and September 2023 VA examiners. Specifically, these clinicians examined the Veteran, accepted his lay statements, acknowledged his TERA exposures, and provided well-reasoned rationales as to why his disorders are not related to service. Moreover, these are the only medical opinions of record. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has provided insufficient evidence, including private opinions and/or medical evidence, to establish a nexus between his musculoskeletal disorder and service. 

The Board recognizes the statements from the Veteran regarding the relationship between his musculoskeletal, OSA, GERD, headaches, bilateral hearing loss, and claimed left forearm to active service. Specifically, he contends that his disorders onset during active service, and/or are otherwise related to TERA. Nevertheless, while he is competent to provide testimony regarding observable symptomatology such as pain, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case. This issue is also medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Therefore, the unsubstantiated statements regarding the claimed diagnosis and etiology of the Veteran's disorders are found to lack competency. 

In light of the above discussion, the Board concludes that the competent evidence is persuasively against the claim of service connection for the Veteran's claimed disorders, other than acquired psychiatric disorders, and there is no reasonable doubt to be otherwise resolved. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990). Therefore, other than for an acquired psychiatric disorder, the appeal is denied.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	McDonald, Thomas K.