Citation Nr: A25030869
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220818-269827
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee patellofemoral syndrome (left knee disability) is denied.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral syndrome (right knee disability) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's left knee disability manifested with painful motion but did not manifest as recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, patellar instability, flexion limited to 45 degrees or less, and/or extension limited to 10 degrees or more.

2. The Veteran's right knee disability manifested with painful motion and extension limited to 10 degrees but did not manifest as recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, patellar instability, flexion limited to 45 degrees or less, and/or extension limited to 15 degrees or more.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5003-5260.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected right knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5003-5261.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from September 1994 to April 1996. 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2022 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which continued 10 percent ratings for the left and right knee disabilities. The Veteran appealed the August 2022 decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, and electing the Direct Review docket. In a Direct Review docket under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

VA has adopted a Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Schedule) to evaluate service-connected disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part IV. Disability evaluations assess the ability of the body as a whole, the psyche, or a body system or organ to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, to include employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10. The percentage ratings in the Schedule represent the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from service-connected diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The percentage ratings are generally adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the disability. Id.

In disability rating cases, VA assesses the level of disability and determines whether the level of disability warrants the assignment of different disability ratings at different times over the course of the claim, a practice known as "staged ratings." See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). When all the evidence is assembled, the Board is then responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding an issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In deciding claims, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss every piece of evidence submitted by the Veteran or on his behalf. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim. See Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

When evaluating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 allows for consideration of functional loss due to pain and weakness causing additional disability beyond that reflected on range of motion measurements. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 provides that consideration also be given to decreased movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, swelling, and deformity or atrophy of disuse. Painful motion is considered limited motion at the point that pain actually sets in. See VAOPGCPREC 9-98.

Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 recognizes that painful motion is an important factor of disability. Joints that are painful, unstable, or misaligned, due to healed injury, are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. Id. Special note should be taken of objective indications of pain on pressure or manipulation, muscle spasm, crepitation, and active and passive range of motion of both the damaged joint and the opposite undamaged joint. Id.; see Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011). Pain that does not result in additional functional loss does not warrant a higher rating. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 42-43 (2011).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for the left knee disability.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for the right knee disability.

As there is substantial overlap between these two claims, the Board addresses them together.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to disability ratings in excess of 10 percent for the left and right knee disabilities.

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was in receipt of a staged rating for the left knee disability, with a non-compensable rating from April 16, 1996, and a 10 percent rating from June 18, 2003, pursuant to Diagnostic Codes 5003-5260. For the right knee disability, the Veteran also has a staged rating, with a non-compensable rating from April 16, 1996, and a 10 percent rating from June 18, 2003, pursuant to Diagnostic Codes 5003-5261.

For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that the Veteran was not entitled to disability ratings in excess of 10 percent for the bilateral knee disability.

Legal Criteria

Diagnostic Code 5003 provides that degenerative arthritis established by x-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes for the specific joint or joints involved. When, however, the limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints involved is noncompensable under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes, the minimum compensable rating is applicable for each such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion, to be combined, not added under Diagnostic Code 5003. 

Under Diagnostic Code 5257, for recurrent subluxation or instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 20 percent rating is warranted for one of the following: (a) Sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or (b) Unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.

For patellar instability, a 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker. A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: A brace, cane, or walker. A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker.

Note (1) provides that, for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon.  Note (2) provides that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as a surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration).]

Recurrent is not defined in the regulation. Absent an express definition, it is presumed that VA regulation employ words using their ordinary meanings at the time the regulation was promulgate. Merriam-Webster's online dictionary defines recurrent as "returning or happening time after time." Recurrent, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/recurrent, Definition 2 (last visited 4/1/2025).

Under Diagnostic Code 5260, a noncompensable evaluation is warranted when flexion is limited to 60 degrees, a 10 percent disability evaluation when flexion is limited to 45 degrees, a 20 percent disability evaluation when flexion is limited to 30 degrees, and a 30 percent disability rating when flexion is limited to 15 degrees.

Under Diagnostic Code 5261, a noncompensable evaluation is assigned for extension limited to 5 degrees, and a 10 percent disability evaluation is contemplated for extension limited to 10 degrees. When there is limitation of extension to 15 degrees, a 20 percent evaluation is warranted. A 30 percent rating will be assigned for extension limited to 20 degrees, and a 40 percent rating is contemplated for limitation of extension to 30 degrees. A 50 percent disability evaluation is warranted for extension limited to 45 degrees. 

The regulations provide that a normal range of motion of the knee is 0 degrees on extension. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

Factual and Procedural Background

In a June 1996 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for a bilateral knee disability, with non-compensable ratings for each knee, effective April 16, 1993.

In a September 2003 rating decision, the RO granted increased ratings for both knees, assigning 10 percent ratings each, effective June 18, 2003.

August 2021 x-rays of the bilateral knees showed no acute bone findings, degenerative arthritis in both knees, and small joint effusion in the right knee.

An October 2021 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran complained of chronic bilateral knee pain, with the right being more painful than the left. The Veteran stated that prolonged driving bothered his knees. Upon physical examination, both knees were tender on the medial joint line, with the right being much greater than the left. The Veteran was noted to have a mildly antalgic gait. The Veteran's range of motion in the right knee was extension to 10 degrees and flexion to 100 degrees. He had full range of motion in the left knee. Both knees had joint effusions, and both knees were noted to be stable. The Veteran was diagnosed with moderate to severe bilateral knee medial compartment arthritis. The Veteran reported he used a knee sleeve and took over-the-counter anti-inflammatories. 

A November 2021 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran reported his knees continued to cause him problems, including being unable to bicycle with his family because of the pain.

In a June 2022 VA treatment record, the Veteran stated that for the past few days he had been presenting with knee pain, which was more intense on the back of the knee. According to the Veteran, it caused weakness in the left lower extremity and was causing his knee to give out. The Veteran stated he was not interested in any medication for pain control. 

On August 2, 2022, VA received the Veteran's claim for increased ratings for both knees. 

In August 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for the knees, at which he was diagnosed with bilateral patellofemoral pain syndrome and degenerative arthritis (other than posttraumatic). The Veteran reported that currently he still had pain and swelling of the knees and denied having treatment. He asserted that he could not run, stand, or walk for long periods of time, and could not kneel or squat. The Veteran reported having flareups in both knees. According to the Veteran, flareups occurred a couple of times a week, with moderate to severe pain, lasting a couple of hours. He stated he used Ibuprofen to relieve the pain during flareups. The Veteran did not report a history of knee instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee or frequent effusion of the knee. The Veteran had abnormal range of motion in both knees, with flexion to 100 degrees and extension to 0 degrees for both knees, with pain on flexion and extension. The Veteran had crepitus and localized tenderness/pain on palpation of the joint in both knees. Range of motion measurement after observed repetitive use were the same as the initial range of motion measurements. Likewise, estimated range of motion after repeated use over time and flareups was flexion to 100 degrees and extension to 0 degrees for both knees. The examiner found no evidence of muscle atrophy, ankylosis, joint instability, tibial or fibular impairment, meniscal conditions, or a history of surgical procedures. The Veteran reported the occasional use of knee sleeves for knee pain, bilaterally. Regarding functional impact, the VA examiner wrote that the Veteran had an inability to stand for extended periods of time, trouble walking for extended periods of time without stopping due to pain, reduced ability to bend or squat down to pick up things off of the ground, and difficulty with stairs.

In the August 2022 rating decision on appeal, the RO denied increased ratings for both knees and continued the 10 percent ratings for each knee based on evidence of painful motion in each knee.

Analysis

At the outset, the Board has considered all applicable Diagnostic Codes pertaining to the knee and leg. Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptomatology for a disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of any other disability. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits paying compensation twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment). The Board observes the evidence does not show the Veteran's bilateral knees were manifested by: traumatic arthritis; ankylosis; dislocated semilunar cartilage; removal of the semilunar cartilage; impairment of the tibia and fibula involving nonunion or malunion; genu recurvatum; or a knee replacement (Diagnostic Codes, respectively, 5010, 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, 5263, 5055). As it is not possible to assign higher or separate, compensable ratings under these Diagnostic Codes, they will not be considered further in this analysis. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes, 5010, 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, 5263, 5055.

Regarding Diagnostic Code 5257, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported his knees would give out at the June 2022 VA appointment, which would implicate potential bilateral knee instability. As a layperson, he is competent to testify to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge such as experiencing pain, perceiving instability in a joint, or witnessing actually observed symptoms such as swelling. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (discussing competence to report experienced or witnessed symptoms versus incompetent to offer render a medical diagnosis or identify the etiology of disease or injury that require medical knowledge). When considering whether lay evidence is competent, the Board must determine on a case-by-case basis whether a veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Here, the Board finds the Veteran is competent to describe many symptoms of his bilateral knee disability, such as perceived instability and pain. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376 (lay witness capable of diagnosing dislocated shoulder); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 403 (1995) (lay person competent to testify to pain and visible flatness of his feet); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (unlike varicose veins or a dislocated shoulder, rheumatic fever is not a condition capable of lay diagnosis). The Board also finds his statements regarding perceived bilateral knee instability generally credible.

To the extent, however, that VA medical personnel used specific clinical tests to assess the stability of the Veteran's knees, the Board finds the objective medical evidence is more probative than the lay evidence on the issue of instability because the clinical assessment of knee instability made by performing particular joint stability tests falls outside the realm of common knowledge of laypersons. Here, throughout the appeal period, competent medical evidence has consistently documented that the Veteran's bilateral knee joints were stable. 

In Jandreau, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that "[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when...lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional." Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1977. The issue of whether the Veteran's perceived symptom of bilateral knee instability is competent and sufficient to establish that he has actual instability of the bilateral knee sufficient to warrant separate disability ratings under Diagnostic Code 5257 is analogous to the situation described here in Jandreau. In this case, the Veteran has reported his knees gave out at one VA appointment. However, medical professionals have tested both knees for instability during the pendency of his appeal and did not find evidence of instability. Because the Veteran's perceived symptom of bilateral knee instability has not been demonstrated or confirmed on clinical testing by a medical professional, his lay testimony is insufficient to establish the presence of anterior, posterior, medial, or lateral instability sufficient to warrant a separate disability rating for the bilateral knee.

In English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347 (2018), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the Board cannot find objective medical evidence categorically more probative than lay evidence without explaining why that is the case. To be clear, the Board finds the objective medical evidence more probative than the Veteran's reports of perceived bilateral knee instability for three reasons. First, the clinical findings by the August 2022 VA examiner involved physical examinations, and none of the clinical findings demonstrated bilateral knee instability. The stability testing, which did not reveal patellar instability, supports the conclusion that the Veteran's perceived knee instability is not due patellar instability. 

Second, at the October 2021 VA appointment the provider found that both knees were stable. This shows that two, different medical examiners at two, different times (before and after the Veteran's report at the June 2022 VA appointment of his knee giving out), utilizing stability testing, found that the Veteran's knees were not unstable. Third, at the August 2022 VA examination, the Veteran did not report a history of knee instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee. The Veteran's reporting of no knee instability at the August 2022 examination is inconsistent with his earlier assertion of instability. These inconsistencies render the Veteran's lay statements unreliable. It is for these reasons that the Board finds the clinical findings by a medical professional outweigh the Veteran's allegation of knee instability, and the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has instability in either knee to warrant a separate rating under Diagnostic Code 5257.

Turning to Diagnostic Code 5260, limitation of flexion, to warrant a compensable rating, the Veteran's bilateral knee flexion would need to be limited to 45 degrees or less. However, the record reflects that the Veteran did not have flexion limited to less than 100 degrees in both knees. Thus, based on range of motion measurements alone throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran would not have been entitled to a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5260.

Under Diagnostic Code 5261, limitation of extension, to warrant a compensable rating, the Veteran's bilateral knee extension would need to be limited to 10 degrees or more. However, the record reflects that the Veteran had normal extension of both knees, with no limitation of extension at the August 2022 VA examination. The Board notes that the Veteran had right knee extension to 10 degrees at the October 2021 VA appointment; however, the Veteran did not have limitation of extension of the right knee limited to 15 degrees or more during the period on appeal. Therefore, based on the range of motion measurements throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran would not have been entitled to a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 5261 for the left knee or a rating in excess of 10 percent for the right knee.

Despite the evidence supporting non-compensable ratings for limitation of flexion and extension of the left knee, the evidence showed painful motion, which allowed for the 10 percent rating for the left knee that encompassed painful motion (to include both flexion and extension) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. Additionally, at the time of the August 2022 VA examination, the Veteran had full motor strength in the lower extremities and no atrophy, which is evidence against more than mild weakness. The Board finds that the evidence does not show that the Veteran had functional impairment in excess of what the 10 percent rating contemplates for the left knee. Additionally, the Veteran would not be entitled to two, separate ratings for painful flexion and extension, as that would be considered pyramiding. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban, 6 Vet. App. at 261; VAOPGCPREC 2-90 (1990).

Regarding the right knee, the Veteran has a 10 percent disability rating for limitation of extension of the right knee, which encompasses painful motion and weakness. Therefore, he would not be entitled to a separate rating under Diagnostic Code 5260 for painful flexion, because that would result in separate ratings based on the same manifestation involving painful and limited motion of the right knee. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban, 6 Vet. App. at 261; VAOPGCPREC 2-90 (1990). 

The record shows that the Veteran has arthritis, which requires consideration of Diagnostic Code 5003, degenerative arthritis (hypertrophic or osteoarthritis). Diagnostic Code 5003 provides that degenerative arthritis established by x-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes for the specific joint or joints involved. When, however, the limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints involved is noncompensable under the appropriate Diagnostic Codes, a rating of 10 percent is applicable for each such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion, to be combined, not added under Diagnostic Code 5003. Limitation of motion must be objectively confirmed by findings such as swelling, muscle spasm, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5003. The Veteran, as noted above, is already in receipt of a compensable rating that fully assesses the pain and limitation of motion caused by his degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knee. Thus, a separate, compensable rating based on a diagnosis of arthritis alone is not warranted.

Caselaw requires the Board to take due consideration that the beneficial effects of medication are discounted unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, ___ Vet. App. ___ (2025). In this case, the VA examiner, in rendering range of motion findings, noted and considered the Veteran's lay statements describing functional limitations when his pain and functional impairment is at its worst (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.) and provided an estimated range of motion during flare ups. The examination report, as a whole, does not indicate whether the Veteran was on any pain medications at the time of the examination, but in any case, it is clear the examiner already provided an opinion estimating range of motion findings discounting any potential ameliorating effects of medication. As such, the Board finds the report and the remainder of the evidentiary record adequate to base a decision, resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor.  

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claims for ratings in excess of 10 percent for the bilateral knee patellofemoral pain syndrome. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against ratings in excess of 10 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tarkenton, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.