Citation Nr: A25030911
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 210723-174115
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to PTSD, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's symptoms and overall impairment have more nearly approximated deficiencies in most areas, but not total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from July 1989 to August 2011. 

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2021 rating decision (PTSD) and a June 2021 rating decision (erectile dysfunction) issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran appealed both rating decisions in a July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2021 (PTSD) and June 2021 (erectile dysfunction) rating decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative, within 90 days from receipt of the Notice of Disagreement. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for erectile dysfunction, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a Veteran's present symptoms with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991). If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In general, it is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for an increased-rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms warranting different ratings irrespective of whether an initial or established rating. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The effective date of an award of increased compensation should not be assigned mechanically based on the date of an examination. Rather, all of the facts should be examined to determine the earliest date that it is ascertainable that an increase in disability first manifested. Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015).

DC 9411 provides that PTSD is to be rated under the General Rating Formula (General Formula) for evaluating psychiatric disabilities other than eating disorders. 

A noncompensable, or zero percent, rating is assigned when a condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when occupational and social impairment is due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. Id. 

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Ordinarily, a lay person is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by their senses; however, usually, they are not competent to prove a matter requiring medical expertise. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).

Reasonable doubt as to the degree of the disability will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for PTSD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an increased disability rating for his PTSD. See July 2019 Notice of Disagreement. As a procedural matter, as this claim stems from the January 2021 rating decision, which granted service connection for PTSD and assigned a 30 percent rating, the evidence to be considered is that covering the entirety of the period on review and is not limited to the present level of the Veteran's disability. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The Board concludes that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. 

During the Veteran's VA examination for PTSD in December 2020, he reported symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner reported that the Veteran's PTSD was characterized by symptoms including irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects, avoidance, and heightened arousal. The examiner noted that the Veteran suffered from occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, as associated with the 30 percent rating criteria. 

In July 2021, the Veteran submitted a private psychological evaluation for PTSD from Dr. P.W. with C.P.S., P.A. The clinician reported the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as having deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood, as associated with the 70 percent rating criteria. The Veteran reported symptoms including a depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and persistent flashbacks, delusions, or hallucinations. The Veteran exhibited limited impulse control, anger outbursts, inability to get along with other employees in a work setting, and inability to complete tasks of daily living. He reported socially isolating and stated that his spouse was the only significant person available to him for social and economic support. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating. The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity with deficiencies in most areas. Medical evidence shows that the Veteran had difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. During the July 2021 private psychological evaluation, the Veteran reported creating a self-protective environment at work because of his anger outbursts and inability to get along with other employees. The December 2020 and July 2021 examinations reported symptoms associated with the 70 percent rating criteria, including irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities. 

Notably, the Veteran reported suicidal ideation. See July 2021 private psychological evaluation. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held that suicidal ideation generally rises to the level contemplated in a 70 percent evaluation. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017) (stating the language of 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 "indicates that the presence of suicidal ideation alone, that is, a veteran's thoughts of his or his own death or thoughts of engaging in suicide-related behavior, may cause occupational and social impairment in most areas.").

The Board finds that the next higher 100 percent rating is not warranted. Although the Veteran avoided direct contact with others in the performance of his job, he continued to interact with others via email and telephone, and the evidence shows he has maintained employment consistently throughout the appeal period. Additionally, in the July 2021 evaluation, the clinician stated that the Veteran was not a persistent danger to himself or others, as contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria. The evidence does not demonstrate that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation, or other symptoms, rose to the level contemplated by the 100 percent rating criteria. 

Based on the foregoing, a 70 percent rating for PTSD throughout the appeal period is warranted, and the appeal is granted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to PTSD.

The Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction is due to service, to include as secondary to his PTSD. See July 2021 Notice of Disagreement. 

Generally, a favorable finding made by a VA adjudicator or the Board is binding on all subsequent adjudications by the AOJ and the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The AOJ made an explicit favorable finding that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. See June 2021 rating decision. The Board is bound by this finding, and it will not be revisited. 

The Veteran's claim was denied without affording the Veteran a VA examination. As part of VA's duty to assist, VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2). The third requirement of "an indication" that a disability "may be" associated with service is a "low threshold." McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not ensuring the Veteran was provided an adequate medical examination and a medical opinion, and a remand is necessary to correct this error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction. The record must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner in conjunction with this evaluation. 

If deemed necessary, the Veteran should be scheduled for an examination. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to do the following: 

(a.) Opine as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was caused or aggravated (worsened) by his service-connected disabilities, to specifically include PTSD. Causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be answered. 

(b.) If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the degree of additional disability resulting from the aggravation (specifying the baseline level of disability and current level of severity, based on consideration of VA's rating schedule).

The examiner is reminded that for secondary service connection purposes, the term "aggravation" means any incremental increase in the severity of the claimed disability due to a service-connected disability. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating the above requested opinion. A clear explanation for all opinions requested herein would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, they should explain why.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cress, L., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.