Citation Nr: A25030669
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240506-438279
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for anxiety with depression and insomnia from October 9, 2023, is granted. 

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for migraines prior to November 9, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for migraines from November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023, is granted. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine from December 19, 2023, is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From October 9, 2023, the Veteran's anxiety with depression and insomnia has manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity; however, it has not manifested in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as wok, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, nor has it resulted in total occupational or social impairment. 

2. Prior to November 9, 2023, the Veteran's migraine was not manifested by characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. 

3. From November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023, the Veteran's migraine was manifested by very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

4. From December 19, 2023, the Veteran's migraine was not manifested by characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for anxiety with depression and insomnia have been met from October 9, 2023. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

2. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for migraine prior to November 9, 2023, were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.2500, 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

3. The criteria for a 50 percent rating, but no higher, for migraine from November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023, were met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.2500, 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

4. The criteria for a compensable rating for migraine from December 19, 2023, were not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.2500, 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Marine Corps from August 2017 to August 2021. 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (the Board) following two separate rating decisions. On March 8, 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted service connection for anxiety with depression and insomnia. An initial 30 percent rating was assigned from October 9, 2023. Subsequently, on March 20, 2024, the AOJ also granted service connection for migraine and assigned an initial noncompensable evaluation effective August 29, 2023. 

The Veteran appealed both March 2024 rating decisions in the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement). He elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 8, 2024 rating decision with respect to the claim for an increased rating for anxiety with depression and insomnia and the evidence at the time of the March 20, 2024 rating decision with respect to the claim for an increased rating for migraine. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the relevant AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

VA regulations require that the Board contact an appellant and request clarification if the Board cannot identify which review option an appellant intends to select. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f). Furthermore, a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) may be unclear if an appellant attaches evidence to a NOD indicating that the appellant is seeking Direct Review, as evidence submitted along with a NOD may not be considered by the Board under that review option. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). 

In the instant appeal, the Veteran's attorney submitted argument along with the VA Form 10182, to include that there were errors in the processing of the claims. These contentions are posited as errors in the application of the law and are properly before the Board, as they are not new evidence. The present appeal is therefore factually distinguishable from Edwards, and the Board can proceed with a decision without clarifying the Veteran's intent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f). 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined in accordance with VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1. When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability picture more closely approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

The Board will consider whether staged ratings should be assigned to compensate for times when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the pendency of the claim. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). 

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claims of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

1. Entitlement to an Initial Rating in Excess of 30 Percent for Anxiety with Depression and Insomnia

The Veteran's service-connected anxiety with depression and insomnia is currently assigned a 30 percent rating. He seeks a 100 percent rating for this condition. 

Anxiety with depression and insomnia is rated under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130; Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Under the General Formula, a noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental disorder has been formally diagnosed, but the symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication or to interfere with occupational and social functioning. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

A 10 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and the ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or for symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation) due to symptoms such as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly-learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood due to symptoms such as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting oneself or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but they are not meant to be exhaustive. The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). However, a veteran may only qualify for a specific disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that such symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18. 

The Veteran submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) regarding his service-connected psychiatric disorder in November 2023. The examiner concluded that the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment due to his anxiety, depression, and insomnia. She stated that he had ongoing irritability, anger, worry, restlessness, depressed mood, lack of pleasure in activities, overall feelings of sadness, and difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep. He also had "significant and worsening impairments both at home and at work" due to symptoms such as irritability, difficulty controlling worry, restlessness, and sleeping difficulties. The examiner noted the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short- and long-term memory (for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks), memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting), inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, and disorientation to time or place. 

VA treatment records from February 2024 show that the Veteran presented to his primary care physician with reports of chest pain associated with anxiety. This occurred when he was in large crowds or new places. He was also concerned about depression, stating that he did not feel happy about anything and mostly felt "flat." Although the depression screening was negative, he reported that he had little interest or pleasure in doing things and that he felt down, depressed, or hopeless several days over the past two weeks. He was prescribed a beta blocker (propranolol) for anxiety in large crowds. It was also noted that he had an upcoming appointment with the behavioral health clinic for his symptoms of depression and anxiety.  

Two days later, the Veteran presented to the Mental Health Triage Clinic for an appointment. He stated, "I feel numb to most things" and "I am not really feeling as much as I think I should feel." He reported concerns related to depression, anxiety, and panic attacks. 

Regarding his depression, the Veteran had lost interest and pleasure in doing things several days during the week, and he did not enjoy his usual hobbies, such as golfing, as much as he used to. He felt down and depressed more days than not, but he did not feel hopeless. He had trouble falling asleep and staying asleep, and he felt tired several days during the week. He reported overeating and gaining weight, but on some days, he ate less. He stated that he sometimes felt like he was letting people down, but he also believed he might put too much pressure on himself. The Veteran did not report problems with concentration, though he could get distracted. He also reported being fidgety and restless, having to move around more than usual, and being unable to sit still most of the time. He did not have thoughts of harming himself or others, nor did he feel as if he would be better off dead. He stated that socializing was hard. The Veteran indicated that he had a good job and good family, and he was unsure why he felt the way he did. 

The Veteran also described symptoms of anxiety to his health care provider during this February 2024 appointment. He felt nervous, anxious, and on edge more days than not. He also worried about everything most days. He had trouble relaxing and was unable to identify activities he does to relax, though he did say that he enjoyed hunting and golfing after some prompting. He was restless, easily annoyed, and irritable, especially in public. He described feeling like something bad might happen all the time. The Veteran also described panic attacks characterized by chest pain in crowds. This was triggered when he had to go out in public. His most recent panic attack was the previous weekend when he was at a hunting show. He started sweating and felt like something was standing on his chest. The Veteran stated that his wife was supportive of him seeking help for his mental health symptoms. 

Less than two weeks later, the Veteran had a mental health initial assessment. He stated, "My wife thinks I need to see someone about what [is] going on in my head." He reported feeling down and losing interest in things that would normally bring him pleasure. He was sad and depressed almost daily, and he was afraid to leave the house and participate in social activities with his family due to fear that something bad would happen. He described feeling like his chest would cave in, muscle tension, hypervigilance, and rapid heartbeat. He also ended events abruptly at times due to his fear and other symptoms. He primarily had these symptoms in crowded places, and he denied experiencing these symptoms while at work or places with fewer people. He reported symptoms of depression, including loss of interest, depressed mood, guilt, sleep disturbances, trouble falling asleep, social isolation, and decreased energy. He also reported worry, anxiety, muscle tension, agitation, and palpitations. 

During the February 2024 VA examination, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's anxiety and depression with insomnia resulted in occupational and social impairment with an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. His symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, and chronic sleep impairment. He also described restlessness, difficulty controlling worry, wandering thoughts, loss of interest, feelings of being easily overwhelmed, lack of motivation, and irritation. 

Regarding his social, marital, and family history, the Veteran reported during the February 2024 examination that he was married and had one child. He stated that he often felt "numb" around his wife and child, despite loving them very much. He tended to isolate himself more and withdraw from his extended family. The Veteran also found it difficult to socialize and interact with civilians, explaining that people do not understand what soldiers have gone through. He has kept in contact with his military friends. As for occupational impairment, he stated that he had worked for a train company for the past year. He struggled with the social aspect of his job, and interacting with others was difficult. He reported having called out of work due to symptoms of anxiety and depression. He also reported irritation with his coworkers, as many of them are civilians and did not understand him. 

Another VA examination was performed in March 2024. Again, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The only listed symptoms noted during this examination were depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment. He also worried about his family's safety, had wandering thoughts, grogginess, limited socialization, and avoided crowds or new places. The Veteran lived with his wife and son at the time of the March 2024 examination. Again, he reported work as a train operator. When asked about any problems on the job, he stated that he has called out from work once or twice when "[he is] not feeling up to it" and "[he is] feeling down and want[s] to be by [himself]." 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms have been consistent with a 50 percent rating under the General Formula throughout the entire period on appeal. The Veteran experienced impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks), flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. He also experienced symptoms associated with lower ratings, including depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment. 38 C.F.R. 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. 

The Board acknowledges that the November 2023 DBQ indicated that the Veteran experienced some symptoms associated with 70 and 100 percent ratings under the General Formula. These symptoms included near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting), instability to establish or maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), and disorientation to time or place. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400. However, the mere fact that the Veteran has experienced some symptoms associated with a 70 or 100 percent rating under the General Formula does not mean that a 70 or 100 percent rating is warranted. Rather, the question is whether the symptoms cause the level of impairment required for a 70 or 100 percent rating. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 114-18. 

The Board also notes that the Veteran reported suicidal ideation at the time of the November 2023 DBQ. The Board is mindful of the decision in Bankhead, in which the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130). See Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 19. However, the facts in this appeal are distinguishable from those in Bankhead. 

Under the unique facts of Bankhead, the claimant was noted to have had recurrent suicidal thoughts and behaviors of varying severity, frequency, and duration throughout the relevant period on appeal. The Court in Bankhead provided a discussion on the background of "suicidal ideation," explaining that VA defines it as "[t]houghts of engaging in suicide-related behavior" with "various degrees of frequency, intensity, and duration." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 19 (quoting VA/Department of Defense Clinical Practice Guideline for Assessment and Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide 13 (June 2013)). The Court stated that, pursuant to medical research and terminology, suicidal ideation involves a wide range of thoughts, from a person wishing that he or she would not wake up in the morning to creating a specific suicide plan. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 19-20. The Court then stated that passive suicidal ideation "entail[ed] thoughts such as wishing you were dead, while active suicidal ideation "entail[ed] thoughts of self-directed violence and death." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 20. Lastly, the Court acknowledged that, because the General Formula did not contain language limiting the scope of suicidal ideation, "suicidal ideation" for the purpose of assigning a 70 percent rating encompassed both passive and active thoughts, i.e., "a veteran's thoughts of his or her own death or thoughts of engaging in suicide-related behavior." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 20. 

The holding in Bankhead does not create a compulsory award of a higher evaluation based solely upon the presence of such symptoms. To the contrary, Bankhead succinctly states that "the presence or lack of evidence of a specific sign or symptom listed in the evaluation criteria is not necessarily dispositive of any particular disability." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22 (citing Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 115). Instead, the Court again implores it upon VA to "engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment." Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22. 

The Veteran reported suicidal ideation once during the period on appeal in the November 2023 DBQ. He did not report suicidal ideation during the February 2024 or March 2024 VA examinations, nor did he report suicidal ideation in his VA treatment records. The Board does not wish to minimize such a serious symptom. However, this single report of suicidal ideation has not affected the Veteran's social and occupational functioning such that it more nearly approximates the level of impairment required for a 70 percent or 100 percent rating. The Veteran has not indicated that this single instance of suicidal ideation has impacted his relationships or occupation. As such, the Veteran's suicidal ideation does not warrant a 70 percent rating, even after considering the holding in Bankhead. Furthermore, the Veteran is not shown to experience the persistent danger of self-harm as contemplated by a 100 percent rating, as he has repeatedly denied intent or plans of harming himself or others in the DBQ, VA examinations, and treatment records. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms have been most consistent with a 50 percent rating throughout the entire period on appeal beginning on October 9, 2023. Furthermore, the evidence establishes that the Veteran has experienced the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating throughout the entire period on appeal, as it shows that he has experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

Regarding occupational impairment, the evidence shows that the Veteran has been employed with a train company as an operator or maintenance technician during the entire period on appeal. The examiner who completed the November 2023 DBQ indicated that the Veteran had "significant and worsening impairments both at home and at work," but she did not describe how his psychiatric symptoms affected his job. In February 2024, he reported that he struggled with the social aspect of his job and interacting with others at work. He reported having to call out of work due to his mental health symptoms, and he also reported irritation with his coworkers. In March 2024, he clarified that he had only called out of work once or twice due to his mental health symptoms. In his VA treatment records, he also indicated that he did not have issues with panic while at work. Nevertheless, the fact that he has had to call out of work at times due to his mental health symptoms, as well as his social struggles and irritation with coworkers, demonstrates the level of occupational impairment needed for a 50 percent rating under the General Formula. 

The Veteran also experienced social impairment due to his anxiety with depression and insomnia. Again, though the November 2023 DBQ showed "significant and worsening impairments both at home and at work," the examiner did not provide any detail about how his symptoms affected the Veteran's social functioning. However, the February 2024 and March 2024 VA examinations and VA treatment records showed some degree of social impairment. The Veteran had a positive, supportive relationship with his wife and son, and his wife even encouraged him to seek mental health treatment. Although he kept in contact with his military friends, he struggled to socialize with others outside of the military or veteran community, and he isolated himself from his extended family. He also described panic and anxiety in crowds, and he reported having to leave social events with his family due to these symptoms. 

Based on the above, and after resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that an initial 50 percent rating was warranted for the Veteran's anxiety with depression and insomnia from October 9, 2023. The Veteran's symptoms, when viewed in their totality, are consistent with the symptoms contemplated by a 50 percent rating under the General Formula. Additionally, the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran experiences occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, as he has had to call out from work due to his symptoms and he experienced impaired relationships with his extended family and non-military friends. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120, Diagnostic Code 9400. Thus, resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial 50 percent rating have been met from October 9, 2023. 

A 70 or 100 percent rating is not warranted at any point during the period on appeal, however. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms are most consistent with that contemplated by a 50 percent rating under the General Formula. Although the Veteran experienced some symptoms associate with a 70 or 100 percent rating, as discussed above, the persuasive weight of the evidence, when viewed holistically, does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 70 or 100 percent rating. Notably, the evidence does not show that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking, and mood. The Board again acknowledges that the Veteran missed one or two days of work due to his mental health disorder and struggled in his interactions with his coworkers. This evidence was considered in the assignment of the 50 percent rating above. However, he has not indicated that he is unable to perform his job on a frequent basis or that his work performance has been negatively impacted by his psychiatric symptoms. Moreover, the Veteran has not exhibited the degree of social impairment required for a 70 or 100 percent rating. Although he isolates himself from his extended family and struggles to form non-military friendships, he has repeatedly described having strong, supportive relationships with his wife and son, and he has been able to maintain friendships from his days in the military. The evidence of record, including the November 2023 DBQ, VA examinations, and VA treatment records, also fail to show impairment of judgment or thinking. The Veteran's thought processes were noted to be good, and he had good understanding of his symptoms and disability. 

The Board acknowledges that the examiner who completed the November 2023 DBQ indicated that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder caused total occupational and social impairment. However, the mere fact that the examiner selected this box on the DBQ does not entitle him to a 100 percent rating. The Board must still conduct a holistic analysis of the record, and the evidence clearly fails to show total occupational and social impairment. The Veteran has been employed throughout the entire period on appeal, and he has been able to maintain positive relationships with his wife, son, and military friends. Such shows that he is not totally occupationally and socially impaired. Moreover, the November 2023 examiner failed to describe how the Veteran was totally occupationally and socially impaired, instead vaguely describing worsening psychiatric symptoms affecting his home and work life. The Board therefore assigns little probative weight to the November 2023 examiner's finding of total occupational and social impairment, as it is unsupported by the evidence of record. 

Finally, the Board has considered the assertion from the Veteran's representative that the February 2024 and March 2024 VA examinations were scheduled in an attempt to obtain "negative information" against the Veteran's claim following the submission of the November 2023 DBQ. However, he did not identify any specific flaws with the February 2024 and March 2024 VA examination reports or examiners, and there is no indication that these examinations were inadequate. The Board therefore finds no reason to doubt the credibility or accuracy of the February 2024 or March 2024 examinations. 

Thus, the Board concludes that an initial 50 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's anxiety with depression and insomnia from October 9, 2023. For the reasons and bases discussed, however, the evidence for the claim versus the evidence against the claim is not in "approximate" balance (i.e., nearly equal). Instead, the most probative and, therefore, most persuasive evidence is against this claim. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; see also Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The claim for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for anxiety with depression and insomnia is denied. 

2. Entitlement to an Initial Compensable Rating for Migraine

The Veteran has been in receipt of an initial noncompensable rating for his service-connected migraine from August 29, 2023. He contends that an initial 50 percent rating is warranted. 

Migraine is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is assigned for migraine with less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is assigned for migraine with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraine with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average once a month over the last several months. A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraine with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 8100. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

The rating criteria of Diagnostic Code 8100 are considered successive. This means that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018). This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable. Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252. 

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraine, but it is not defined in the regulation. Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (32nd ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness. 

The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency of at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating. See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253. The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraine attack must render the veteran entirely powerless. See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253. The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract." See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253 (internal citation omitted). Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria require that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability." Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing." Regarding severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work to qualify for a 50 percent rating. Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 446 (2004). 

These rating criteria do not explicitly contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication. Therefore, the assigned rating should contemplate the nature and frequency of characteristic prostrating attacks that would occur without medication. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100; see also Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). 

During the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he has tinnitus that causes pressure and headaches that "push[] into the side of [his] head," lasting from five minutes to an hour. These headaches usually occurred when he went to sleep or when there were high-pitched sounds, and they occurred at least once or twice a week. He treated these headaches with Tylenol as needed. He described his headache pain as pressure located in the temples and above the eyes, and he also reported sensitivity to light and changes in vision. His headache pain had a typical duration of less than one day. The August 2023 examiner determined that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain, nor did he have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain. The occupational impact of the Veteran's headaches was described as difficulty going to sleep. He missed zero weeks to one week of work time during the last year because of his headaches. 

The Veteran also submitted a November 2023 DBQ, which indicated that the Veteran reported migraine/headache pain starting during his active service that progressively worsened over the years. He described constant head pain, pulsating or throbbing head pain, pain on both sides of the head, and pain that worsened with physical activity. He reported intense pain that occurred at least three times a month. He also reported nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision. The Veteran treated his headaches using acetaminophen, as well as Dramamine for nausea. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's headaches had a typical duration of more than two days. He had characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain once a month, and the examiner also concluded that he had very prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain productive of severe economic inadaptability. The Veteran's migraine headaches had a "substantial" impact on his ability to perform occupational tasks. The Veteran reported missing work at least twice a month over the past year due to severe migraine attacks. During attacks, the Veteran had to turn off all the lights due to photosensitivity. He also had to rest and cease working until his headache improved. The Veteran further stated that he has had to leave work early a few times a month due to his headache pain and an inability to concentrate during headaches. 

Another VA examination was performed in December 2023. He continued to describe headaches with sensitivity to light and blurred vision that affected his ability to sleep. He again reported treating his headaches with Tylenol. His headaches had a typical duration of less than one day. The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain, nor did he have completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain. Moreover, the examiner found that the Veteran's headache condition did not affect his ability to work. 

The Board concludes that staged ratings are appropriate in this case. 

First, the Board concludes that an initial compensable rating was not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected migraines prior to November 9, 2023. Prior to November 9, 2023, the Veteran did not have migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months. Although the Veteran reported having headaches that occur one to two times a week during the August 2023 VA examination, these headaches were not shown to be prostrating. The Veteran described pain and pressure, sensitivity to light, and changes in vision that caused him difficulty going to sleep. However, this does not meet the definition of prostration, as the Veteran did not describe "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (32nd ed. 2012). He did not describe an inability to perform activities of daily living or occupational tasks due to his headaches. As such, the criteria for a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8100 were not met during the period prior to November 9, 2023, and an initial compensable rating was not warranted prior to November 9, 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

However, from November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023, the Board concludes that a 50 percent rating is warranted. First, the Board finds that the Veteran's headaches were very frequent. The examiner stated that the Veteran experienced intense headache pain at least three times a month. Such meets the definition of "very frequent," as they occurred more than once a month. See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253. The Veteran also experienced completely prostrating headache attacks. The examiner who completed the DBQ indicated that the Veteran experienced completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache pain. Moreover, the Veteran explained that he had to turn off all the lights, rest, and stop working during his headaches. Such rendered the Veteran entirely powerless because he was unable to continue his daily activities until his headache improved. See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253. Furthermore, the Veteran's headaches were prolonged. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's headaches lasted for more than two days. This meets the definition of prolonged, which is "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue: protract." See Johnson, 30 Vet. App. 253. 

Finally, the November 2023 DBQ suggests that the Veteran's headaches were productive of severe economic inadaptability. The examiner who completed the DBQ specifically stated that the Veteran's headaches were productive of severe economic inadaptability. Furthermore, the Veteran had to miss work at least twice a month over the last year due to his headaches. He also left work early a few times a month due to pain and an inability to concentrate during headaches. The Veteran explained that he was unable to work during headache attacks, as he had to turn out the lights and rest. The fact that he missed work multiple times a month demonstrates that his headaches were productive of severe economic inadaptability during the period from November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023. See Pierce, 18 Vet. App. at 446. 

Thus, the Board finds that a 50 percent rating was warranted for the Veteran's migraine under Diagnostic Code 8100 from November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023. See 38 C.F.R. 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. This is the highest schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 8100. 

However, beginning December 19, 2023, the Board finds that a noncompensable rating is once again warranted for the Veteran's service-connected migraine. During the December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran did not describe characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain. Although he reported pain, sensitivity to light, and changes in vision, these symptoms were not prostrating. Like the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran's migraine headaches affected his ability to sleep in December 2023. He did not describe an inability to perform activities of daily living or occupational tasks due to his headaches. Again, this does not meet the definition of prostration, as the Veteran did not describe "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (32nd ed. 2012). The Veteran's headaches were also significantly less severe than described in the November 2023 DBQ, as the Veteran did not describe needing to turn off the lights, rest, and cease working during the December 2023 examination. As such, the criteria for a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 8100 were not met during the period from December 19, 2023, and a compensable rating was not warranted from December 19, 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

The Board has again considered the assertion from the Veteran's representative that the December 2023 examination was scheduled in an attempt to obtain "negative information" against the Veteran's claim following the submission of the positive November 2023 DBQ. However, he did not identify any specific flaws with the December 2023 examination report or examiner, and there is no indication that this examination was inadequate. The Board therefore finds no reason to doubt the credibility or accuracy of the December 2023 examination. 

In sum, for the reasons and bases discussed, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating was not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected migraine prior to November 9, 2023. From November 9, 2023, to December 18, 2023, a 50 percent rating, but no higher, was warranted for migraine. Finally, from December 19, 2023, a noncompensable rating was once again warranted for migraine. The evidence for the claim versus the evidence against the claim for a compensable rating prior to November 9, 2023, and from December 19, 2023 is not in "approximate" balance (i.e., nearly equal). Instead, the most probative and, therefore, most persuasive evidence is against this claim. See Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82; see also Ortiz, 274 F.3d at 1364. The claim for entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine prior to November 9, 2023, and from December 19, 2023 is denied. 

 

 

T. Berry

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R.M. Sachs, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.