Citation Nr: A25030968
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-436888
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for cause of death is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1969 to January 1971. He died in March 2022. His surviving spouse has been substituted as the Appellant in this appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 101 (3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1010.

In June 2023, the Appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for cause of the Veteran's death most recently addressed in an April 2023 rating decision. In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the January 2024 supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for cause of death, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).  

1. Entitlement to service connection for cause of death is remanded.

The official certificate of death reflects that the cause of the Veteran's death was severe sepsis secondary to pneumonia, with severe aortic stenosis and myelofibrosis listed as significant conditions contributing to death. 

Prior to the Veteran's death, service connection had been established for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus. See April 2023 rating decision. Prior to his death, he had also submitted a claim seeking service connection for myelofibrosis and had indicated that he believed his coronary artery disease was linked to his in-service exposure to herbicides. See May 2021 VA Form 21-526 and September 2021 Veteran statement. 

In this regard, the Board notes that service connection for the cause of death may be warranted where the evidence indicates that the cause of the Veteran's death should have been service-connected. That is to say that, to establish service connection for a particular disability found to have caused his death, the evidence must show that the disability resulted from disease or injury which was incurred in or aggravated by service or, in the alternative, is secondary to another service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.304.

The relevant evidence includes several medical opinions that purport to address whether the Veteran died from a disability incurred as a result of his active service; however, there remain several unanswered questions in this case. 

First, there is a question as to whether the Veteran's myelofibrosis was due to his exposure to herbicides. In August 2022, a VA clinician opined that there is no link between herbicide exposure and any of the listed causes of death, to include myelofibrosis; however, the clinician did not provide any significant rationale or explanation in support of the opinion or address the article submitted by the Veteran which states that myelofibrosis is a chronic leukemia with risk factors that include exposure to certain industrial chemicals, such as toluene and benzene. 

In this regard, the Board notes that, while myelofibrosis is not a disease that is presumptively related to herbicide exposure, it may nonetheless be considered on a direct basis. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). 

There is also a question as to whether the Veteran's coronary artery disease (CAD) or hypertension contributed to cause his death, specifically the aortic stenosis listed as a contributory cause of death on the death certificate. In October 2022, a VA clinician stated that there is no credible medical evidence to connect the Veteran's CAD to the causes of his death, without providing a supportive rationale. In February 2023, a VA clinician noted that aortic stenosis can give hypertension and that aortic stenosis is caused by hypertension, which suggests a bidirectional relationship between the two conditions, but then opined that hypertension is not likely caused by herbicide exposure, which is inaccurate. 

In this context, the Board notes that, while service connection was not established for CAD or hypertension prior to his death, the Veteran's in-service herbicide exposure has been acknowledged by VA and both diseases are presumed as due to herbicide exposure. 

Given the foregoing deficiencies, the Board concludes that the VA opinions of record are inadequate, which is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires corrective action on remand. Indeed, the remaining questions must be adequately addressed before a fully informed decision may be rendered in this case. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the claims file and provide an opinion that addresses the following:

(a)	Was the Veteran's myelofibrosis related to his period of active service, to include his presumed tactical herbicide exposure?

(b)	Did the Veteran's coronary artery disease OR hypertension contribute to cause his death, specifically the aortic stenosis noted as an intermediate cause of death? 

In other words, did the CAD or hypertension contribute so substantially or materially to death, combine to cause death, OR aid or assist in the production of death?

Note: The debilitating effects of the CAD or hypertension disability must have made the decedent materially less capable of resisting the fatal disease or must have had a material influence in accelerating death. 

In answering the foregoing, the reviewing health care provider must consider and address the articles submitted by the Appellant in support of this claim, as well as the other medical opinions of record. 

(Continued on the next page.)

?

A clear rationale must be provided for each opinion and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Turnipseed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.