Citation Nr: A25030487
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240223-419147
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine degenerative disc disease (DDD), secondary to service-connected cervical strain, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is due to, or aggravated by, service-connected cervical strain.

2. The Veteran's radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve is due to, or aggravated by service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain.

3. The Veteran's radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve is due to, or aggravated by service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for lumbar spine DDD, secondary to service-connected cervical strain are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and cervical strain are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably on active duty with the United States Marine Corps from December 1976 to December 1980 and June 1982 to June 1998.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the June 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  In February 2024 the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship (nexus) between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  See, e.g., Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for disability that is due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury, or for additional disability resulting from the aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (2016).

For secondary service connection to be granted, generally there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

An adequate medical opinion with regard to etiology should consist of a thorough review of the claims file and discussion of the relevant evidence (including the disability in question), a consideration of the lay contentions of the Veteran, and clear conclusions with a reasoned supporting rationale.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

The determination as to whether the requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value.  38 U.S.C. § 7104 (a); Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant; however, if the evidence of record is either persuasively for or persuasively against the claim, then the benefit-of-the-doubt rule no longer applies, and the claim is instead adjudicated in accordance with the evidence.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine DDD, secondary to service-connected cervical strain is granted.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine DDD, secondary to service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.

The February 2024 rating decision made the favorable findings: the primary disability of cervical strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion, is service connected; the Veteran is diagnosed with the disability, lumbar spine DDD, other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS); the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirement for presumptive service connection; the claimed disability of lumbar spine DDD is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service, if manifest to a compensable level within one year of separation from service; the Veteran's disability of lumbar spine DDD manifest to a compensable degree following service, confirmed by the May 2023 VA medical exam.

The matter remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion, caused or aggravated the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.

Factual Background

The November 2021 private medical opinion of Dr M.W. states that he is the Veteran's treating physician since 1998.  The November 2021 private medical opinion states the Veteran has continued to have high levels of pain associated with the conditions of the Veteran's neck and shoulders.  Dr M.W. states that as a result of chronic pain the Veteran has adopted an abnormal gait which has resulted in back and leg pain.  The November 2021 private medical opinion noted the Veteran has experienced a permanent reduction on range of motion as a result of his conditions.

The March 2023 private medical opinion of T.D. pain and spine center states that the Veteran was seen as a new patient in January 2023.  The Veteran is noted to present with chronic neck pain, that travels down his back and radiates between his shoulder blades.  The March 2023 private medical opinion opines the Veteran's condition is caused or aggravated by his previous surgery.  The March 2023 private medical opinion notes the Veteran's second complaint is low back pain with numbness that radiates down the back of both legs.    

The April 2023 private medical opinion of Dr E.W. states that the medical office provides the Veteran's primary care.  The Veteran was referred to a local specialist for back pain.  The April 2023 private medical opinion states Dr E.W. agrees with the spine and pain specialist, that the Veteran's lower spine condition is a result of, or aggravated by, having to adapt to the continual pain of the cervical spine fusion. 

The May 2023 VA medical exam reviewed the Veteran's record and conducted an in-person examination of the Veteran.  The examiner recorded the Veteran believes his lumbar spine pain resulted from his cervical fusion surgery in 2012 as he was left paralyzed, and he had to relearn to walk.  The Veteran stated he had several months of rehabilitation in hospital.  The examiner opined the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The examiner noted the Veteran underwent anterior cervical discectomy and fusion of C5-T1, complicated by an epidural hematoma at the surgical site requiring repeat surgical intervention, including resection of the Vertebral body with bone graft.  The examiner opined the Veteran's cervical spine surgery was to address an age-related issue, just as the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is an age-related wear and tear process.  The examiner opined the Veteran's cervical spine condition did not cause the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD which usually develops with age.

The June 2023 VA medical opinion reviewed the Veteran's record and opined the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner opined the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is an age-related wear and tear process unlikely to develop before age 40.  The examiner noted the Veteran was seen for lower back ache in May 1977, and for intermittent back pain over 6 months April 1978, there were no further complaints of back pain for the remaining 20 years of service.  The examiner opined the two notes of back pain during the Veteran's service were therefore resolved and continuity for back pain was not established.

The November 2023 VA medical opinion reviewed the Veteran's record and opined the Veterans lumbar spine DDD is less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative joint disease (DJD), to include cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals.  The examiner opined the Veteran had cervical discectomy and fusion of C5-T1, complicated by epidural hematoma requiring repeat surgical intervention.  The examiner opined the Veteran's cervical spine surgery was done due to DJD which is the same age-related process as the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  The examiner opined that while the Veteran's cervical DJD and lumbar spine DDD are the same degenerative process, the cervical spine DJD does not cause the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  The examiner opined the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's cervical spine DJD.  The examiner opined the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is an age-related wear and tear process unaffected by the cervical spine strain, DJD, or cervical spine surgery.   

  

Analysis 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service-connection for lumbar spine DDD, secondary to service-connected cervical strain with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  For the reasons set out below, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is at least "nearly equal" or "in approximate balance" in favor of finding that the Veteran's disability is caused, or aggravated by, his service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  

The Board finds the Veteran is competent to report his observable symptoms.  The Board finds the Veteran's account of his observable symptoms and their onset, including pain, consistent with the other evidence of record.  However, the Board finds the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD condition is medically complex, it requires specialized knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board finds there is no evidence of record the Veteran is appropriately medically qualified.  The Board finds the Veteran is not competent to opine that his lumbar spine DDD is a result of his service-connected cervical spine strain including surgery.  The Board affords the Veteran's account of his observable symptoms contained in the May 2023 VA medical exam probative weight.

The Board finds the November 2021 private medical opinion competent and credible.  The November 2021 private medical opinion is by the Veteran's treating physician, an appropriately qualified medical professional.  The November 2021 private medical opinion's understanding of the Veteran's cervical and lumbar condition is consistent with the evidence of record.  The November 2021 private medical opinion has the benefit of observing the Veteran's pain over a long period.  The Board finds the November 2021 private medical opinion provides a clear rationale for the opinion given.  The Board affords the November 2021 private medical opinion probative weight.

The Board finds the March 2023 private medical opinion competent and credible.  The March 2023 private medical opinion is by the Veteran's treating spine and pain specialist, an appropriately qualified medical professional.  The March 2023 private medical opinion's description of the Veteran's cervical and lumbar condition is consistent with the evidence of record.  The Board finds the March 2023 private medical opinion rationale is minimal but sufficient to understand.  The Board affords the March 2023 private medical opinion probative weight.

The Board finds the April 2023 private medical opinion competent and credible.  The April 2023 private medical opinion is completed by the Veteran's primary care provider, an appropriately qualified medical professional.  The April 2023 private medical opinion supports and adopts the opinion given in the March 2023 private medical opinion.  The Board finds the April 2023 private medical opinion adequate for the same reasons given above in consideration of the March 2023 private medical opinion.  The Board affords the April 2023 private medical opinion probative weight.

The Board finds the May 2023 VA medical exam and the November 2023 VA medical opinion are the same opinion by the same examiner, however the November 2023 VA medical opinion adds additional rationale.  The Board finds no need to separately consider the May 2023 VA medical exam.  The Board finds the November 2023 VA medical opinion competent and credible, completed by an appropriately qualified medical professional following review of the Veteran's record and a physical examination in the May 2023 VA medical exam.  The November 2023 VA medical opinion confirms the examiner considered the Veteran's private medical opinions.  The examiner provides adequate rationale for the opinion given.  The Board notes the examiner appears to offer an opinion that the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain with DJD is not due to service.  The Board has disregarded these comments as the service connection of the Veteran's cervical spine conditions are settled.  The Board affords the May 2023 VA medical exam and the November 2023 VA medical opinion probative weight.

The Board finds the June 2023 VA medical opinion competent and credible, completed by an appropriately qualified medical professional following review of the Veteran's record.  The Board finds the June 2023 VA medical opinion consistent with the evidence of record.  The Board finds the June 2023 VA medical opinion provides adequate rationale for the opinion given.  The Board affords the June 2023 VA medical opinion probative weight.

The Board finds, after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the probative medical evidence of record is in equipoise, or "equally balanced".  The evidence of record provides equally competent and credible differences in medical opinion.  The November 2021 private medical opinion, May 2023 VA medical exam, and the November 2023 VA medical opinion are provided by medical professionals with the same level of qualification, Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.).  The Board finds the November 2021 private medical opinion, May 2023 VA medical exam, and the November 2023 VA medical opinion considered the Veteran's record, had the benefit of in person examination or long-term treatment, and provided equally reasoned opinions as to the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  

However, the Board finds the May 2023 VA medical exam, and the November 2023 VA medical opinion do not directly address the November 2021 private medical opinion that the Veteran's cervical spine condition and treatment resulted in an abnormal gait that cause or aggravated the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  The Board finds the May 2023 VA medical exam, and the November 2023 VA medical opinion do not provide any reasons to contradict the November 2021 private medical opinion.  The May 2023 VA medical exam, and the November 2023 VA medical opinion do not directly consider the Veteran's gait or if an abnormal gait caused or aggravated the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  Rather, the November 2023 VA medical opinion provides an opinion the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is cause by the normal aging process, indirectly rejecting any other cause.  Put another way, the Board finds the probative medical evidence offers two equally valid, but different, medical opinions on the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD.  

The Board finds at a minimum, the positive evidence in favor of the claim and the negative evidence against the claim are "nearly equal" or "in approximate balance." 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  Therefore, after resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the probative medical evidence supports a grant of service connection for lumbar spine DDD, secondary to cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  The Veteran's claim is hereby GRANTED.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, is granted.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.

The February 2024 rating decision made the favorable finding, the diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is due to the diagnosed lumbar spine DDD.

For the reasons set out above, the Board finds in this decision, the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is service-connected, secondary to service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is in favor of finding that the Veteran's radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, is secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  At a minimum, the positive evidence in favor of the claim and the negative evidence against the claim are "nearly equal" or "in approximate balance."  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  Therefore, after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the evidence supports a grant of service connection for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  The Veteran's claim is hereby GRANTED.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, is granted.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.

The February 2024 rating decision made the favorable finding, the diagnosed bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is due to the diagnosed lumbar spine DDD.

For the reasons set out above, the Board finds in this decision, the Veteran's lumbar spine DDD is service-connected, secondary to service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve is secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.

The Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is in favor of finding that the Veteran's radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve is secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  At a minimum, the positive evidence in favor of the claim and the negative evidence against the claim are "nearly equal" or "in approximate balance."  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  Therefore, after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the evidence supports a grant of service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, sciatic nerve, secondary to service-connected lumbar spine DDD and service-connected cervical strain, with degenerative arthritis of the spine, to include post cervical spine fusion surgery and residuals of cervical fusion.  The Veteran's claim is hereby GRANTED.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Shepherd DeRosa, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.