Citation Nr: A25030106
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 231229-404847
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for Hashimoto's thyroiditis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea (SA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left-hand disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right-hand disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow tendinopathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not as total occupational and social impairment.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's allergic rhinitis has not resulted in nasal polyps.

3. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected Hashimoto's thyroiditis was manifested with normal thyroid function.

4. The medical evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not currently have bilateral hearing loss for VA purposes.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 - 4.14, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.14.14, 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6522.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for Hashimoto's thyroiditis is denied. have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.119, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7906.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2016 to March 2022.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2023.  In December 2023, the Veteran elected the modernized review system.  84 Fed. Reg. 138, 177 (Jan. 18, 2019) (to be codified at 38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d)).  

The Veteran elected the Direct Review lane.  Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence of record as of the March 2023 rating decision.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, and the entire history of the Veteran's disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  After consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, and the evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses, are to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged rating" (assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found) is required.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Where an increase in the level of a service-connected disability is at issue, the primary concern is the present level of disability.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Nevertheless, the Board acknowledges that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than is normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").

If a claimant is already receiving the maximum disability rating available based on symptomatology that includes limitation of motion, it is not necessary to consider whether 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 are applicable.  Spencer v. West, 13 Vet. App. 376, 382 (2000); Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 85 (1997).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, which relate to painful motion, are not limited to arthritis and must be considered when raised by the claimant or when reasonably raised by the record.  Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 70 percent for his psychiatric disability.

The Veteran is currently assigned an initial 70 percent evaluation from August 30, 2022, under Diagnostic Code 9411.  This evaluation is assigned under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

After careful consideration, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric disability did not manifest as total occupational and social impairment during the appeal period, and, accordingly, that an initial rating in excess of 70 percent rating is not warranted.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in January 2023.  In terms of his social impairment, the Veteran reported he's been married for the past ten years, noting that they have a good marriage, while not being as intimate as they used to be.  The Veteran also reported having positive relationships with both of his children.  The Veteran also noted having a good relationship with his father and brothers, while noting that he works with two of his brothers.  The Veteran also stated that he has a close friend that he served with, that he talks with every day.  Occupationally, the Veteran reported that he was a product manager at a flower shop for the past 6 months, noting that it is therapeutic and that he liked working with plants.  During the examination, the Veteran shared he had intrusive memories and distressing dreams related to stressors, psychological distress when reminded of stressors, avoidance of thoughts and reminders of stressors, negative thoughts about the world, persistent negative emotional state, decreased interest in activities, feelings of detachment/isolation, irritability, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, difficulty concentrating, restlessness, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness and guilt.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder manifested with symptoms, such as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Lastly, the examiner concluded the Veteran displayed occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

The Veteran's other medical records in the claims file show similar symptoms and manifestations for his psychiatric disability.

After careful consideration of the evidence of record, the Board finds that, for the entire appeal period, the Veteran's psychiatric disability was not reflective of total occupational and social impairment.  Notably, the Board reflects that the evidence does not demonstrate any of the following symptoms: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

In particular, throughout the Veteran's records and VA examinations, it is noted that the Veteran has good social support and positive familial relationships.  Based on these relationships and social interactions, in particular, the Board cannot find that the Veteran is totally socially impaired. 

Accordingly, entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's psychiatric disability, throughout the appeal period, is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis

The Veteran contends that an increased rating is warranted for his service-connected allergic rhinitis, which is currently assigned a 10 percent disability rating thereafter under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522.

Under DC 6522, allergic or vasomotor rhinitis warrants a 10 percent rating where there are no polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522.  A maximum 30 percent rating is for application when there are polyps.  Id.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  The Veteran reported experiencing current symptoms of  'obstructed left nasal passage and mouth breathing."  The current treatment was taking over-the-counter allergy medication such as Allegra.  The examination revealed that there wasn't greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides.  However, there was complete obstruction on the left side, but not on the right side.  The examiner noted that there was no permanent hypertrophy and no nasal polyps.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis resulted in a functional impact, noting that it caused the Veteran "not to sleep very well," as he will awaken with a dry mouth and sore throat, as it has caused him to start snoring, and sometimes the Veteran would have head pressure which he will have to "sit up as this would relieve some of the pressure so that he can breathe better."

A review of the VA and private treatment records did not reveal findings contrary to those found in the VA examination reports.  That is, there was no description of polyps at any time.

Based upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis.  As such, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent is not appropriate, because to obtain an increased rating of 30 percent under DC 6522, there must be a presence of nasal polyps.  There is no evidence to indicate that Veteran has been diagnosed with nasal polyps at any time during this period of the appeal.  Therefore, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis is denied.

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for Hashimoto's thyroiditis

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his service-connected Hashimoto's thyroiditis. 

The Veteran's Hashimoto's thyroiditis is currently evaluated as 0 (zero) percent disabling effective August 30, 2022.  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, DC 7906.

DC 7906 provides a 0 percent rating for thyroiditis with normal thyroid function (euthyroid).  Note: Manifesting as hyperthyroidism, evaluate as hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease (DC 7900); manifesting as hypothyroidism, evaluated as hypothyroidism (DC 7903).  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, DC 7906.

DC 7900 provides a 30 percent rating for hyperthyroidism, including, but not limited to, Graves' disease for six months after initial diagnosis.  Thereafter, rate residuals of disease or complications of medical treatment within the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system.  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, DC 7900.  Note (1): If hyperthyroid cardiovascular or cardiac disease is present, separately evaluate under DC 7008 (hyperthyroid heart disease).  Id.  Note (2): Separately evaluate any eye involvement occurring as a manifestation of Graves' Disease as diplopia (DC 6090); impairment of central visual acuity (DCs 6061-6066); or under the most appropriate DCs in § 4.79.  Id.

DC 7903 provides a 100 percent rating for hypothyroidism manifesting as myxedema (cold intolerance, muscular weakness, cardiovascular involvement (including, but not limited to hypotension, bradycardia, and pericardial effusion), and mental disturbance (including, but no limited to dementia, slowing of thought and depression)) for a period of six months after an examiner has determined the condition has been stabilized.  Thereafter, the residual effects of hypothyroidism shall be rated under the appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system(s) (e.g., eye, digestive, and mental disorders).  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, DC 7903.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for hypothyroidism without myxedema for six months after initial diagnosis.  Thereafter, residuals of disease or medical treatment are rated under the most appropriate diagnostic code(s) within the appropriate body system (e.g., eye, digestive, mental disorders).  Id.

The Board has considered all the medical evidence and finds the criteria for a compensable evaluation for Hashimoto's thyroiditis have not been met.

Initially, the Board observes that the Veteran is currently receiving a separate disability rating for acquired psychiatric disorder and that the assigned 70 percent rating contemplates symptoms such as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting.  Therefore, the Board will not address these symptoms as they have been clearly attributed to the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability, as opposed to his Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  During the examination, the Veteran reported experiencing symptoms of weight gain, fatigue, sluggishness, tiredness, brain fog, increased sleepiness, joint pain and stiffness, tendonitis, and occasional difficulty with mobility.  There was no treatment at the time of the examination, however the Veteran is supposed to be taking Synthroid for the rest of his life.  However, the laboratories revealed results within normal levels while the Veteran is off his medications.  In this regard, the applicable criteria do not include the effects of medication, and thus, the Board has not considered such in the process of rating the subject disability.  In addition, it does not currently appear that laboratory results are affected by whether the Veteran is using medication or not.  The examiner also remarked the Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to his Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to an increased evaluation for his Hashimoto's thyroiditis.  In this regard, the overall evidence is not reflective of hyperthyroidism, including but not limited to, Graves' disease, or evidence of hypothyroidism, necessary for a compensable rating.

To the extent that the Veteran has evidenced a belief that his Hashimoto's thyroiditis symptoms were more severe than those contemplated by a noncompensable rating, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.  Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994).  However, he is not competent to report that his Hashimoto's thyroiditis disability is of sufficient severity to warrant a higher rating under the rating schedule, as such an opinion requires specialized medical expertise which falls outside the realm of the common knowledge of a layperson.  See Jandreau v. Nicolson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board must rely on the medical evidence of record to assign the appropriate disability rating, and therefore, accords the objective medical findings greater weight than any such subjective complaints of increased symptomatology.

In sum, the weight of the evidence is against the assignment of a compensable evaluation for the service-connected Hashimoto's thyroiditis.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the approximate balance of the evidence is against a compensable rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The appeal for an increased rating is denied.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F. 3d 1328 (1997); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  Evidence of pain alone which results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, can constitute a disability.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (2018).

If not manifest during service, where a veteran served continuously for 90 days or more during a period of war, or during peacetime service after December 31, 1946, and the 'chronic' disease became manifest to a degree of 10 percent within 1 year from date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307.

A lay person is competent to report on the onset and reoccurrence of current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  The Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether a veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Generally, the degree of probative value which may be attributed to a medical opinion of record takes into account such factors as its thoroughness and degree of detail, and whether there was review of the claims file.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Also significant is whether the examining medical provider had a sufficiently clear and well-reasoned rationale, as well as a basis in objective supporting clinical data.  See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999).

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material favorable to the claimant.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391, 1395 (2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

A claimant bears the evidentiary burden to establish all elements of a service connection claim, including the nexus requirement.  Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

4. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral hearing loss that he claims is due to his active-duty service.

With respect to claims for hearing loss, impaired hearing will be considered a disability when the auditory threshold in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  Even though disabling hearing loss is not demonstrated at separation, a veteran may, nevertheless, establish service connection for a current hearing disability by submitting evidence that a current disability is related to service.  Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993).

The Veteran's service treatment records are completely silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of bilateral hearing loss.

Post-service VA and private treatment records dating throughout the pendency of this appeal also do not contain a diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss and do not show auditory thresholds or speech recognition scores meeting the definition of a hearing loss disability for VA purposes.

In a January 2023 VA examination, it was noted that the Veteran does not have hearing loss in either ear pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  More specifically, his pure tone thresholds on the right averaged 17.50 and on the left, 16.25, and his word recognition scores were 94 percent bilaterally.

The only evidence in support of the Veteran's claim are his lay assertions that he currently suffers from hearing loss.  While the Veteran may, in fact, experience some level of hearing loss, the fact remains that the objective medical evidence does not support a diagnosis of hearing loss for VA purposes.  The issue before the Board is medically complex and specialized medical education pertaining to the complicated organic system of the ear, as well as the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing in the form of audiograms, is necessary to render a diagnosis.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.

The Board must deny service connection because there is no evidence the Veteran currently has bilateral hearing loss for VA purposes.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1995) (Congress specifically limited entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents had resulted in a disability); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim... even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim.").

In sum, the Veteran's claim fails to meet the first prong of service connection, which is the requirement of a current disability.  As the medical evidence of record is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  As such, the claim must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea (SA) is remanded.

Remand is necessary, as the January 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate.

The Veteran maintains that this disability had its onset during his service, noting that his wife told him he would snore since 2008.  Specifically, when the condition began, the symptoms were "snoring, pauses in breathing during sleep, fatigue and tiredness during the day, difficulty sleeping, insomnia, waking to gasping for air, and waking with a dry mouth and sore throat."  During the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported experiencing these symptoms.  The VA examiner opined that since the Veteran's SA was only diagnosed after a sleep study in January 2023.

The Board finds that the opinion is inadequate as it disregarded the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disability merely because they are unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006). 

The opinion did not explain the basis for disregarding the Veteran's competent lay evidence.  The opinion is silent for discussion of lay evidence and solely considered whether the conditions were documented in service treatment records. Remand for a new opinion is therefore required.

Additionally, the Veteran has asserted that his service-connected allergic rhinitis may have contributed to his SA.  Therefore, a remand is also appropriate to determine if a theory of secondary service connection is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left-hand disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right-hand disability is remanded.

Remand is necessary, as the January 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate.  In this regard, the examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a disability, however, the Veteran reported symptoms of bilateral wrist pain. 

The Veteran maintains that this disability had its onset during his service, but admits he never sought treatment for it.

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), that pain resulting in functional impairment could constitute a current disability, even if there is no diagnosis connecting the pain with a current underlying condition.  In this regard, the Veteran has reported continuous bilateral wrist or hand pain with its onset during service and continuing since service and indicated that this pain limits his functional ability.  Additionally, the Board concedes a cumulative impact injury to his bilateral wrist or hand as consistent with the circumstances of his service.  Thus, the Board finds that a VA examination and a medical nexus opinion is warranted on remand to determine the etiology of any current bilateral wrist or hand disability and any pain that results in functional impairment.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006); see also Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical strain is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbosacral strain is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder strain is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder strain is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is remanded.

Remand is necessary, as the January 2023 VA examinations and opinions are inadequate.

The January 2023 VA examinations diagnosed the Veteran with a cervical strain, a lumbosacral strain, bilateral shoulder strains, and bilateral ankle lateral collateral ligament sprains and found that they were not likely due to service. 

As for rationales, while the examiner noted complaints of neck pain, back pain, bilateral shoulder, and bilateral ankle pain in service or shortly after, the examiner opined that due to a lack of continuity of treatment the disabilities a nexus could not be established. 

The Board finds that the opinions are inadequate as they disregarded the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disabilities merely because they are unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336-37. 

The opinions stated did not explain the basis for disregarding the Veteran's competent lay evidence.  The opinions are silent for discussion of lay evidence and solely considered whether the conditions were documented in service treatment records.  Remand for a new opinion is therefore required.

10. Entitlement to service connection for a left elbow disability is remanded.

11. Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow tendinopathy is remanded.

Remand is necessary, as the January 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate.

The January 2023 VA examinations diagnosed the Veteran with right elbow tendinopathy and found that it was not likely due to service. 

As for the rationale, the examiner noted no complaints of elbow pain in the Veteran's service treatment records, and based on the lack of in-service complaints the examiner opined that a nexus could not be established. 

The Board finds that the opinions are inadequate as they disregarded the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disabilities merely because they are unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336-37. 

The opinions stated did not explain the basis for disregarding the Veteran's competent lay evidence.  The opinions are silent for discussion of lay evidence and solely considered whether the conditions were documented in service treatment records.  Remand for a new opinion is therefore required.

The Board notes that resolution of the claim of service connection for right elbow tendinopathy will have a significant impact on the Veteran's claim for service connection of a left elbow disability, therefore, the issues are inextricably intertwined.

12. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis is remanded.

Remand is necessary, as the January 2023 VA examination and opinion are inadequate.

The January 2023 VA examinations diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis and found that it was not likely due to service, as it began to manifest after service. 

As for the rationale, while the examiner noted complaints of foot pain shortly after service, the examiner opined that due to a lack of continuity of treatment the disabilities a nexus could not be established.

The Board finds that the opinions are inadequate as they disregarded the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his disabilities merely because they are unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.  Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336-37. 

The opinions stated did not explain the basis for disregarding the Veteran's competent lay evidence.  The opinions are silent for discussion of lay evidence and solely considered whether the conditions were documented in service treatment records.  Remand for a new opinion is therefore required. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed SA.  The electronic claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated studies and testing must be conducted, and all pertinent symptomatology must be reported in detail.  After a review of the claims file, the examiner should provide answers to the following question.

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's SA, had its onset in service or is caused by or related at least in part to his active service?

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's SA, was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include the Veteran's allergic rhinitis?

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's SA, was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include the Veteran's PTSD?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to be able to report injuries and symptoms, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an examiner other than the January 2023 examiner as to the nature, onset and etiology of his claimed bilateral wrist or hand disability.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.  Any necessary testing must be performed.

The examiner should address the following:

(a) Diagnose any and all disabilities in the Veteran's bilateral wrists or hands.

(b) For each disability diagnosed in subsection (a), opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency.  If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his diagnosed cervical strain, lumbosacral strain, bilateral shoulder strains, and bilateral ankle lateral collateral ligament sprains.  The examiner should review the entirety of the claims file, to include the any lay statements, and provide answers to the following question.

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's cervical strain, lumbosacral strain, bilateral shoulder strains, and bilateral ankle lateral collateral ligament sprains, had their onset in service or were caused by or related at least in part to his active service?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to be able to report injuries and symptoms, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to be able to report injuries and symptoms, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an examiner other than the January 2023 examiner as to the nature, onset and etiology of his claimed bilateral elbow disability.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.  Any necessary testing must be performed.

The examiner should address the following:

(a) Diagnose any and all disabilities in the Veteran's bilateral elbows.

(b) For each disability diagnosed in subsection (a), opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency.  If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

5. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis.  The electronic claims file must be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated studies and testing must be conducted, and all pertinent symptomatology must be reported in detail.  After a review of the claims file, the examiner should provide answers to the following question.

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis, had its onset in service or is caused by or related at least in part to his active service?

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral Achilles tenosynovitis, was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's bilateral ankle disability?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to be able to report injuries and symptoms, and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions.  If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.R. Montalvo, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.