Citation Nr: A25030825
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220701-255390
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from April 1969 to October 1978 and January 1991 to March 1991. 

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In an April 2022 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for a left wrist condition. The Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) in July 2022 and, in so doing, requested the Hearing docket. 

Based on the Veteran's selection of the Hearing Lane, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. §?20.302(a). 

In February 2023, the Veteran testified at a virtual hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ), and a transcript of that proceeding has been associated with the claims file.

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As such, the Board may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Finally, the Board observes that the Veteran's representative submitted a request to withdraw her representation in October 2024. This request was received more than 90 days after the Veteran and his representative were notified that the appeal was placed on the Board's docket. See July 2022 BVA Docketing Letter. Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.6(a)(2), after an appeal has been filed with the Board, a representative may not withdraw services as representative in the appeal unless good cause is shown on motion. Furthermore, the representative must submit a signed statement certifying that a copy of the request was sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the Veteran as required by 38 C.F.R. § 20.6(a)(2). The representative did not set forth a good cause reason for withdrawal, the representative did not submit a signed statement certifying that a copy of the request was sent to the Veteran, and the record does not indicate that the Veteran received notice of the representative's motion to withdraw services. As such, the representative did not comply with the requirements to withdraw as representative in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 20.6(a)(2). The Board finds that good cause has not been shown and the motion to withdraw from representation is denied. Accordingly, the Veteran remains represented for purposes of this appeal. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a left wrist condition related to his service. He reports that he began to have numbness and tingling in his left hand during service in the 1970s and that the condition worsened over the years and evolved into pain and weakness of the left hand and wrist. He reports that he continues to experience numbness, tingling, and pain of the left hand and wrist. See March 2022 VA Examination. Alternatively, he contends that such is secondary to his service-connected disabilities. See November 2021 Fully Developed Claim. He reports that has had to overcompensate for his service-connected right index finger injury with use of his left wrist. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not include any complaints of or treatment for a left wrist condition during service. However, the Veteran reported broken bones on a May 1986 report of medical history and swollen or painful joints on a January 1990 report of medical history. The Veteran additionally reported swollen or painful joints, broken bones, and bone, joint, or other deformity on his August 1978 and March 1991 separation reports of medical history. 

The Veteran was accorded a VA examination in March 2022. The examiner recorded the Veteran's reports of numbness and tingling in his left hand beginning service in the 1970s and continuing to the present with the addition of pain in the left hand and wrist as well as his reports that he has had to overcompensate for his service-connected right index finger injury with use of his left wrist. The examiner diagnosed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. The examiner opined it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left wrist condition is related to his service. The examiner indicated that they were unable to locate a clear nexus of a left wrist condition or entry and separation examinations during service. It is unclear from this statement whether the examiner reviewed the Veteran's STRs, as entry and separation examinations are included in the record, and the examiner failed to note the Veteran's reports of swollen or painful joints, broken bones, and bone, joint, or other deformity indicated on multiple in-service reports of medical history. The examiner went on to note that the medical records indicate that the Veteran has an X-ray of the wrist that noted prior wrist injury and arthritis, but the examiner was unable to locate the wrist X-ray result. Despite this, the examiner then referred to 2017 medical evidence showing an old wrist trauma and deformity with degenerative change as well as other records indicating carpal tunnel syndrome and mild nerve compression of the left wrist. The examiner remarked that, without medical records to support a clear nexus and chronicity of a left wrist condition, the Veteran's current left wrist condition is less likely than not related to service. The examiner indicated that they would be willing to reconsider their opinion if medical records are available that document a clear left wrist nexus prior to 2021/2022. The examiner did not address the Veteran's contentions or the reports in his STRs in providing an opinion and a secondary service connection opinion was not provided. 

The Board finds the March 2022 VA examination to be inadequate, as the examiner failed to address Veteran's contentions and failed to address the reports recorded in the Veteran's STRs in providing an opinion. Failing to obtain an adequate examination and relying on an inadequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). This pre-decisional duty to assist error should be remedied on remand by providing the Veteran a new VA examination that includes an adequate opinion and rationale.  

Furthermore, the opinion provided by the March 2022 VA examiner and the available medical evidence of record indicate that there may be outstanding records relevant to the Veteran's claim that have not been obtained. The March 2022 VA examiner referred to a prior X-ray that was unable to be located and that such may change the examiner's opinion. It does not appear that the AOJ made efforts to obtain locate this prior imaging. During his February 2023 Board hearing, the Veteran's representative argued that this is a duty to assist error and the Board agrees. Given the potential significance of these records, the failure of the AOJ to request these records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and, on remand, these records must be requested. 

Evidence received in an appropriate evidentiary window further indicates that the Veteran has been seen by providers outside of VA for imaging and treatment related to his left wrist. See January 2023 VA Treatment Record. While this evidence is not the basis of the remand for a duty to assist error, the Board notes that this evidence supports the March 2022 VA examiner's indication of missing and potentially relevant treatment records. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Identify and obtain any outstanding VA and private treatment records. The Veteran should be asked to provide any information or authorization necessary for VA to assist in obtaining any outstanding records. All requests and responses for the records must be documented. If any identified records cannot be obtained, notify the Veteran of the missing records, the efforts taken, and any further efforts that will be made by VA to obtain such evidence, and allow him an opportunity to provide the missing records. 

2. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's left wrist condition. The record must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner in conjunction with this evaluation. If deemed necessary, the Veteran should be scheduled for an examination. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to do the following:?

a.	Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any such left wrist condition onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to,?the Veteran's service. In other words, is any diagnosed left wrist condition consistent with the Veteran's reported in service experiences, to include the Veteran's reports of numbness and tingling in his left hand and wrist during service and the Veteran's reports of swollen or painful joints, broken bones, and bone, joint, or other deformity noted in August 1978, May 1986, January 1990, and March 1991 reports of medical history? 

b.	Notwithstanding the above, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left condition, was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, to include his service-connected right index finger injury. Causation and aggravation are two separate inquires, and both must be answered. 

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating all opinions. A clear explanation for all opinions would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, he or she should explain why.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Goreham, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.