Citation Nr: A25030330
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250220-519430
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for entitlement to service connection for lower back pain is remanded.

The claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea secondary to hypertension or hypothyroidism is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1966 to January 1970. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 7, 2024, and March 18, 2024, rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In February 2025, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182. In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 7 and March 18, 2024, RO decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for low back condition and service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for lower back pain.

The Veteran contends that he should be service connected for lower back pain. 

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The Board notes that the Veteran did have an in-service injury in September 1968, that the Veteran did receive treatment for. 

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran does have a current diagnosis of lumbosacral strain. The examiner noted that the Veteran stated that his symptoms began in 1974. The Veteran indicated that the condition was due to his in-service injury, which he was treated for with muscle relaxers while in service. The Veteran indicated that the treatment methods were effective at that time, but the condition became constant and progressed. The VA examiner also noted that the Veteran experienced flare-ups of the back that occur every other month. The Board notes that a medical opinion was not obtained to determine whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed lumbosacral strain or reported pain is etiologically related to the pain that the Veteran experienced in service and since service. The Board notes that the Veteran reported that the lower back pain does cause a functional impairment. The Board notes that pain may be considered a disability; however, a medical opinion is needed to determine whether the Veteran's current lower back pain is etiologically related to the in-service back injury.

The Board finds that the February 2024 VA examination was inadequate as it did not provide an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's currently diagnosed condition and the Veteran's in-service injury. Furthermore, there is indication that the Veteran is contending that pain from his low back injury in service continued after service. The Board notes that the RO did not consider the Veteran's lay statements and an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lower back pain was not obtained. Therefore, the RO did make a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to fully develop the Veteran's claim. 

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the RO for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

2. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea secondary to hypertension or hypothyroidism.

The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected hypertension or hypothyroidism. 

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The Board notes that the Veteran does have a current diagnosis of sleep apnea. 

In December 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The VA examiner provided an opinion that although hypothyroidism is associated with obstructive sleep apnea, thyroid hormone replacement, has been shown to diminish or completely eliminate apneic episodes and arterial oxygen desaturation, as well as to affect many improvements in sleep patters and overall sleep efficiency. The examiner noted there was no medical literature indicating hypertension has any correlation with obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to obesity and not related to hypertension or hypothyroidism. 

The Board notes that the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's obesity was caused by or otherwise related to medications such as the thyroid hormone replacement medication, or any other medications the Veteran may be taking for his hyperthyroidism or hypertension. The Board notes that the examiner found obesity to be the cause; however, the examiner did not consider or provide an opinion as to whether any service-connected conditions may have caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity. The Board finds an opinion is needed to determine whether the likelihood was at least approximately balanced or nearly equal that the Veteran's obesity was caused by service-connected conditions. The Board finds that the December 2023 examiner's opinion is inadequate. The RO relied on an inadequate medical opinion to deny the Veteran's claim, and therefore the RO made a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the RO for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from a qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's chronic lower back pain. 

The examiner should be provided a copy of the February 2024 VA examination, the examiner may schedule an in-person or telephonic interview with the Veteran if additional information is needed. The examiner must also be provided a copy of this Remand and the Veteran's service treatment records. 

The examiner must address the following:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lower back pain is related to the in-service injury? Consider the Veteran's lay statements of symptoms since service, the Veteran's report of functional impairment, and the progression of the Veteran's condition. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. 

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the medical professional must indicate such and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.? 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with a qualified clinician to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed sleep apnea. The examiner must consider obesity as an intermediate step. 

The examiner should be provided a copy of the December 2023 VA examination, service treatment records, the Veteran's lay statements, and a copy of this remand.

The examiner must address the following:

(a) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea, was caused by or aggravated by any of the Veteran's service-connected conditions?? Particularly, consider and discuss the Veteran's contention that his sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected hypothyroidism and hypertension. Consider the effect that hormone replacement medications may have on the Veteran's weight. 

Aggravation is defined as any worsening beyond the natural progression of the disability.?The examiner should establish a baseline level of all diagnosed disabilities prior to aggravation.? 

(b) The examiner should also consider whether the likelihood was at least approximately balanced or nearly equal that the Veteran's service-connected conditions could have increased the risk or caused the Veteran's obesity. 

The examiner is reminded that the standard is whether it is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal that limited mobility or medications taken for treatment of any of the service-connected conditions could have caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity. 

The examiner is reminded that aggravation and causation must be addressed separately. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. 

If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, the medical professional must indicate such and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.? 

3. Thereafter, re-adjudicate the Veteran's claim. 

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Counsel, H. Hailu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.