Citation Nr: A25030988
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240516-442964
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 50 percent for service-connected chronic sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 10 percent for service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease is denied.

Service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is denied.

Service connection for functional gastrointestinal disorders is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for cardiovascular disease is remanded.

Service connection for hypertension, to include dyslipidemia, is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for chronic sinusitis; this disability was not productive of an exceptional or unusual disability picture or frequent periods of hospitalization.

2. The Veteran's GERD has been manifested by dysphagia, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, nausea, and persistent recurrent epigastric distress; it is not shown to have been manifested by symptom combinations productive of considerable or severe impairment of health.  

3. The persuasive weight of the evidence of record is against finding that the Veteran has, or has had at any time during the appeal, a current diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.  

4. The persuasive weight of the evidence of record is against finding that the Veteran has, or has had at any time during the appeal, a current diagnosis of functional gastrointestinal disorder.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an evaluation greater than 50 percent for service-connected chronic sinusitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6513.

2. The criteria for an evaluation greater than 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7399-7346.  

3. The criteria for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for functional gastrointestinal disorders are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from April 1988 to May 1991, and United States Marine Corps from July 1991 to June 2008.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Combat Action Ribbon.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in November 2023 and May 2024 by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

The rating decisions on appeal were issued November 2023 and May 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

The November 2023 VA rating decision denied the Veteran's claims of service connection for cardiovascular disease, chronic fatigue syndrome, and functional gastrointestinal disorder.  A May 2024 rating decision denied the Veteran's claims for increased ratings for his service-connected chronic sinusitis and gastroesophageal reflux disease.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2023 decision.  In November 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 and May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for cardiovascular disease and hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  A disability may require re-evaluation in accordance with changes in a veteran's condition.  It is thus essential, in determining the level of current impairment, that the disability be considered in the context of the entire recorded history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate for any initial rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  

1. Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 50 percent for service-connected chronic sinusitis.

From November 10, 2022, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum 50 percent rating available under DC 6513.  As such, his appeal may not be granted absent a finding that entitlement is warranted on an extraschedular basis.

Rather, the collective evidence establishes that the full scope of the Veteran's reported symptomatology-specifically, near constant sinusitis, headaches, and pain and tenderness of affected sinus. The Veteran also expressed experiencing nosebleeds and post-nasal drip.  See February 2024 VA examination; see generally VA and private treatment records.  Moreover, the evidence does not show that the Veteran's sinusitis necessitated periodic hospitalizations during the period on appeal.  The Veteran has not offered any specific argument as to why extraschedular consideration might be warranted in this case.

Notably, an extraschedular rating may be warranted upon evidence of marked interference with employment.  Here, the evidence clearly establishes that the Veteran's sinusitis interferes with his occupational capacity.  Consequently, the impact of the Veteran's sinusitis on his occupational capacity is properly contemplated in the criteria for the 50 percent rating as currently assigned. Moreover, the record does not establish such exceptional interference with employment as to warrant further consideration on an extraschedular basis.

In sum, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran's service-connected sinusitis is so exceptional in nature as to not be fully contemplated by the rating schedule. Rather, there are no unusual clinical pictures presented, nor is there any other factor which takes the disability outside the usual rating criteria.  Thus, even with the favorable resolution of doubt, the Veteran has not carried the burden of demonstrating that his disability is of such a nature that referral for extraschedular evaluation is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1); Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111.  

2. Entitlement to an evaluation greater than 10 percent for service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

The Veteran's GERD is rated under DC 7346, used to rate hiatal hernia.  There is no specific diagnostic code for GERD, which would be rated by analogy to DC 7346 in any case, for listed symptoms including dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), pyrosis (heartburn or reflux), and regurgitation, among others.  The Board finds that DC 7346 most nearly approximates the Veteran's symptoms.  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, used for rating disorders of the digestive system, a 60 percent rating is warranted where there are symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  A 30 percent rating is warranted where there is persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), pyrosis (acid reflux), and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.  A 10 percent rating is warranted where there are two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation, but of less severity.

The Veteran's GERD is currently rated as 10 percent, from July 1, 2008.  

Turning to the relevant medical evidence, during a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported experiencing constant reflux, heartburn, regurgitation, difficulty swallowing, burning pain in the esophagus, nausea and vomiting.  Moreover, the Veteran reported the use of omeprazole to treat his GERD.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD resulted in persistent recurrent epigastric distress, but did not raise to the level to be productive of considerable impairment of health.  The VA examiner assigned dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, and sleep disturbance due to the Veteran's GERD.   

Viewing the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture does not more nearly approximate persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, causing considerable impairment of health.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability is appropriately rated as 10 percent.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms that Veteran experienced due tohis service-connected GERD.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  The Board has considered the reports of the Veteran's symptoms.  The Veteran is also credible in his belief a higher rating is warranted.  However, the Board places a greater weight on the competent findings of record provided by medical professionals, given the professionals' expertise in evaluating gastrointestinal disorders.  The probative evidence does not support a finding that a disability rating more than the one granted herein is warranted for the service-connected GERD.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's disability is appropriately rated as 10 percent.  The weight of the persuasive evidence is against the assignment of a rating more than 10 percent for GERD.  As the evidence is not in approximate balance, the benefit of the doubt rule is not for application.  

Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be established for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To establish service connection on a direct incurrence basis, the Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The requirement for a current disability is satisfied if the disability is present at any point proximate to the claim, during the claim, or to the appeal period.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2014).  If there is no evidence of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  Additionally, there must be a demonstration of symptoms proximate to, or since, the time the application is filed.  Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

3. Service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS).  

4. Service connection for functional gastrointestinal disorders.

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for CFS and gastrointestinal disorder.  The Board will address the issues of service connection of CFS and a gastrointestinal disorder together for the sake of brevity.  

The initial threshold question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability, and if so, whether that disability began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of CFS or, a gastrointestinal disorder, and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the clam.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294 (2013); McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a), (d).

Review of the record indicates there is no evidence of record which reflects a current diagnosis of CFS or, a gastrointestinal disorder.

VA examinations in March 2023 did not find objective evidence of CFS or a gastrointestinal disorder.  

While the Veteran believes that he has a confirmed diagnoses of CFS or a gastrointestinal disorder, he is not competent to provide diagnoses in this case.  The issues are medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence provided by the March 2023 VA examiner.

Thus, the most probative evidence fails to demonstrate that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran currently suffers from CFS or has a diagnosis of a gastrointestinal disorder.  As such, service connection is not warranted.  Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1333 (1997) (holding that the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation).  As noted above, entitlement for service-connected disease or injury is specifically limited to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability, and in absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.

In sum, the Veteran has not satisfied the necessary element of a present disability with respect to CFS or a gastrointestinal disorder, and thus, further discussion of the in-service incurrence or nexus elements is unnecessary.  Furthermore, based on the reasons and bases discussed, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (2019); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  Accordingly, service connection is not warranted for CFS or a gastrointestinal disorder.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for cardiovascular disease is remanded.  

2. Service connection for hypertension, to include dyslipidemia, is remanded.  

The Veteran is seeking service connection for cardiovascular disease (heart disability).  

The recently passed Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that where a Veteran submits a service connection claim with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, the Secretary shall provide the Veteran with a medical examination and secure a nexus opinion unless VA determines that there is no assertion that the claimed disorder is related to the TERA.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  

Moreover, review of the VA memorandums of record indicates that the Veteran participated in TERA, specifically related to his active service in Southwest Asia.  

To that end, the Veteran was afforded the June 2023 VA examination to determine the etiology of his claimed heart disability.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran's heart disability was unrelated to his TERA exposure but due to the Veteran's non-service-connected hypertension and dyslipidemia.  

In DeLisio v. Shinseki, the Court held that when a claim is pending and evidence demonstrates that the claimed condition is caused by a disability that may be associated with service, VA generally must "investigate the possibility" of secondary service connection.  25 Vet. App. 45, 55 (2011).  In this case, there is evidence in the record that the Veteran's heart disability may be related to his non-service-connected hypertension; as such, the Board has a duty to investigate whether the Veteran's hypertension is related to his active service.  As the pending claim of heart disability encompasses a claim for service connection for hypertension, the Board will take jurisdiction of the matter.  Id.  

Under the AMA, remand is permitted only to correct a pre-decisional error or for any other error the correction of which raises a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

As such, the Board finds additional guidance is needed to address the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension, as it is encompassed by the Veteran's claim of service connection for a heart disability, and this pre-decisional error requires a remand.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and possible relationship to service of his hypertension.  The evidence of record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner and the examiner must indicate that the pertinent medical records and lay statements have been reviewed.

(a) Confirm the Veteran's diagnosis of hypertension.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

(b) Whether it is at least as likely as not that hypertension is due to the Veteran's active service, to include any verified TERA activity.  

A complete rationale is required for all requested opinions.

 

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Higgins, Jeffery

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.