Citation Nr: A25030685
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 230913-375782
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist disability, to include arthritis, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's right hip strain had onset in service

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for right hip strain are met.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from February 2001 to February 2005.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for right wrist arthritis and right hip strain.  The Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board, via VA Form 10182, in September 2023, and chose the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for right wrist disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service disease or injury; and (3) a relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

The August 2023 rating decision favorably found a diagnosis of right hip strain.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  The current disability element has therefore been met.

During the June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that her right hip pain had onset in 2004, during her active duty in the Navy, and it has progressed since then to the point where her right hip locks up and she must limit her activities.  The Board finds the Veteran's statements to be competent and credible, and the in-service injury requirement has thus been met.

The remaining question is whether the right hip strain is related to the in-service right hip pain, to include based on continuous symptoms since service.

The June 2023 VA the examiner provided a negative medical opinion, noting a review of records showed no documentation of right hip pain until January 2009 and that it was documented in January 2009 that the Veteran's right hip pain was likely secondary to an intramuscular shot.  The examiner concluded that it is therefore less likely than not that the Veteran's right hip strain incurred in or was caused by the right hip pain in service and that a nexus had not been established.  

Indeed, a January 2009 nurse during a rheumatology referral office visit reported that the Veteran had gone to the emergency room a month prior for a migraine and was given an "IM" shot in her buttocks and since then the pain carried all the way through her hip.  An above assessment on the same rheumatology referral office visit report noted the Veteran's right hip pain and that it was "likely secondary to IM injection and some muscular irritation/inflammation."  

The June 2003 and January 2009 opinions are inadequate because they did not take account of the Veteran's competent, credible lay statements of right hip symptoms in and since service.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (noting that VA's examiner's opinion, which relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence").

While the Board could remand the claim for an additional medical opinion, a request for another opinion could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").  The remaining evidence, including the Veteran's lay statements, is sufficient to decide the claim, as it reflects that the right hip strain had onset in service.

For the above reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right hip strain had onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by  this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337 ("If the Board concludes that the lay evidence presented by a veteran is credible and ultimately competent, the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence should not be an absolute bar to the veteran's ability to prove his claim of entitlement to disability benefits based on that competent lay evidence").

REASONS FOR REMAND

With regard to the Veteran's right wrist disability, favorable findings in the August 2023 rating decision included a diagnosis of right wrist osteoarthritis, sufficient service to meet minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, manifestation of the Veteran's right wrist arthritis to a degree of 10 percent or more following service, and categorization of the Veteran's right wrist arthritis as a chronic disease which may be presumptively service connected.  

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for her right wrist arthritis.  VA must afford a claimant an examination when there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms thereof; evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; an indication that the disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or another service-connected disability; and is insufficient evidence for VA to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  

Here, the Board is bound by the August 2023 rating decision's favorable finding of right wrist osteoarthritis diagnosis.  An August 2008 private medical examination revealed arthritic stiffness in the Veteran's hands, feet, and back (the latter two of which are already service connected), and the Veteran's original April 2023 claim contended that her arthritis, later clarified in a June 2023 letter to be right wrist arthritis, was worsened because of military service.

As the criteria for a VA examination or opinion have been met for the claim for service connection for right wrist disability, remand is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an opinion to determine the etiology of her right wrist disability, to include arthritis, to include an examination if one is deemed necessary.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (requiring remand to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal).

Accordingly, the above issues are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician as to etiology of the Veteran's right wrist disability, to include arthritis.  If the clinician feels that an examination should be conducted, one should be scheduled.

The clinician should indicate whether it is at least as likely as not (50 percent probability or greater) that the Veteran's right wrist arthritis had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.  

Additionally, the physician should address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right wrist arthritis (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within one year after discharge from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service.

The claims file should be provided to and reviewed by the clinician.  A complete rationale should accompany any opinion provided.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	JR Cummings, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.