Citation Nr: A25030743
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220825-270977
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip, to include as secondary to degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 1988 through December 1990, to include Gulf War Era service. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2021 rating decision. 

In July 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (HLR) and requested review of a March 2021 rating decision. In August 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2021 decision. 

In the August 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the March 2021 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision addressing the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Law and Analysis

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In addition, for Veterans who have served 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, certain chronic disabilities, including arthritis, are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

For the showing of chronic disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time. As arthritis is considered to be a chronic disease for VA compensation purposes, if chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge is required to support the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding that secondary service connection is warranted under the causation standard of 38 U.S.C. § 1110 where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the nonservice-connected disability). 

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the August 2021 rating decision, the AOJ made several favorable findings: that the Veteran has been diagnosed with disabilities as an October 2019 VA medical examination showed a diagnosis of symphysis pubis arthritis of the right hip while a December 2012 private treatment record from Columbus Clinic showed a diagnosis of degeneration of the thoracolumbar intervertebral disc; that the Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection as she served honorably in the Army from March 1988 through December 1990; and that the claimed disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to military service as arthritis is a chronic condition under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Findings identified as favorable in an AOJ decision are binding on subsequent adjudicators, including the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Favorable findings can only be rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).

 

Symphysis Pubis Arthrosis with Arthritis of Right Hip 

The Veteran contends her symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip, including as secondary to her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc, is related to her military service. See April 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

The Board is responsible for identifying duty to assist errors that were made by the AOJ, prior to the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Once identified, the Board must remand the claim to the AOJ to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Veteran has not received a VA medical opinion regarding whether her symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip is due to her military service, to include as secondary to her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc.

VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicates" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a right hip disability. Her service records do contain an entry dated April 5, 1988 where the Veteran sought treatment for an injury to her left thigh and hip while doing physical training (PT). She was diagnosed with a pulled quadricep. See April 5, 1988 Service Treatment Record.

In October 2019 the Veteran was afforded a VA medical examination for her left hip, which noted her diagnoses of bilateral hip degenerative arthritis and bilateral symphysis pubis arthrosis. A medical opinion regarding the right hip was not provided. See October 2019 VA Medical Examination. 

The Veteran's private treatment records include complaints of bilateral hip pain. In a November 2020 private medical opinion received by VA in January 2021, the Veteran's treating physician Dr. K.A. (initials used to protect privacy) noted that he had been treating the Veteran since 2011 and had reviewed her medical history to include pertinent events in military service. He stated her diagnoses were left hip pain, left trochanteric bursitis, and low back pain. He noted her complaints of left hip pain, followed by an x-ray in June 2021 which showed degenerative changes of the symphysis pubis. He also noted her treatment for left hip pain in April 1988 while in service. He then concluded it was his professional opinion that the Veteran's condition is more likely than not, military service connected. He also stated that the Veteran reported she did not have any symptoms related to her left hip and lower back prior to joining the military. Dr. K.A. did not address the Veteran's right hip disability. See November 2020 Private Nexus Opinion. 

In March 2021 the Veteran underwent a subsequent VA medical examination for both hips. Bilateral osteoarthritis was noted, as well as bilateral trochanteric pain syndrome including trochanteric bursitis. The Veteran reported during the examination that the onset date of pain was 1988 and that she had longstanding issues with bilateral hip stiffness since basic training, with symptoms of pain and some popping, associated difficulty with running, squatting, and heavy lifting, and that the left side was worse. A medical opinion was not provided. See March 2021 VA Medical Examination. 

In this case, the Veteran's treatment records indicate she has been diagnosed with symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip. Additionally, her lay statements indicate her belief that her disability was caused by her military training. Although she has submitted a private nexus opinion it is inadequate for review as it does not address the Veteran's right hip disability. Although the Veteran had two VA medical examinations, one was solely for the left hip, and neither included a medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of her right hip disability. Thus, a remand is required to obtain a VA medical opinion. 

Degenerative Arthritis of Thoracic or Lumbar Intervertebral Disc 

The Veteran contends her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc is related to her military service. See April 2019 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

The Board is responsible for identifying duty to assist errors that were made by the AOJ, prior to the decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). Once identified, the Board must remand the claim to the AOJ to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Veteran has not received a VA medical opinion regarding whether her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc is due to her military service.

VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicates" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a lower back disability. Her private treatment records, however, indicate she sought treatment as far back as 2004 for chronic lower back pain, which she contends has been present for many years. See March 2004 and August 2018 Columbus Clinic Medical Records.

In a November 2020 private medical opinion received by VA in January 2021, the Veteran's treating physician Dr. K.A. (initials used to protect privacy) noted that he had been treating the Veteran since 2011 and had reviewed her medical history to include pertinent events in military service. He stated her diagnoses were left hip pain, left trochanteric bursitis, and low back pain. He concluded it was his professional opinion that the Veteran's condition was more likely than not, military service connected. He noted her report that she did not have any symptoms related to her left hip and lower back prior to joining the military. See November 2020 Private Nexus Opinion. 

She was afforded a VA medical examination in March 2021, which noted her diagnosis of degenerative arthritis and her statement that the condition began in 1988. The Veteran also reported long-standing "chronic, dull, aching generalized low back pain, with resulting interference with many work and everyday tasks." She also stated that the pain radiated and that she had numbness affecting both legs, which was more defined on the right. A medical opinion was not provided. See March 2021 VA Medical Examination. 

In this case, the Veteran's treatment records indicate she has been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. Although she has submitted a private nexus opinion it is inadequate for review as it does not provide a rationale as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lower back disability. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that a medical opinion that contains only data and conclusions without any supporting analysis is afforded no weight). Although the Veteran was afforded a VA medical examination, she has not been provided a VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. Thus, a remand is required to obtain a VA medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should request that the Veteran provide the names and addresses of any and all health care providers who have provided treatment for her symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip and degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. After acquiring this information and obtaining any necessary authorization, the AOJ should obtain and associate these records with the claims file. 

2. After completing the development described above, the AOJ should afford the Veteran VA medical opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip and degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. Whether additional VA medical examinations are necessary to provide these medical opinions is left to the discretion of the medical examiner. 

The examiner should review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including this remand, the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and all assertions made by the Veteran. 

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation. 

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip was caused by her military service. 

The examiner should also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip is caused by or resulted from her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. 

The examiner should also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's symphysis pubis arthrosis with arthritis of the right hip was aggravated by her degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc. 

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are distinct legal concepts that must be addressed separately. 

The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's degenerative arthritis of thoracic or lumbar intervertebral disc was caused by her military service. 

A clear rationale for all opinions and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved must be provided. 

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna-Liisa Davis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.