Citation Nr: A25030203
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458717
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis with somatic dysfunction of the lumbar spine is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for maxillary sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 2002 to June 2022.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2023. They have all been continuously pursued since the Veteran's pre-discharge claim which was initially decided in July 2022. Within one year of that decision, the Veteran has submitted requests for Higher-Level Review (with respect to three of the issues) and more recently, in July 2023, submitted a supplemental claim accompanied by new and relevant evidence as to all four of those conditions. 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to increased ratings for the lumbar spine, cervical spine, sinusitis, and rhinitis conditions, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A?(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis with somatic dysfunction of the lumbar spine is remanded

The Board finds that VA failed to comply with its duty to assist prior to the August 2023 decision because the circumstances warranted the provision of a VA examination prior to the decision. In a statement submitted in July 2023, the Veteran appears to describe symptoms that were not present at the previous examination conducted in March 2022, including muscle spasms and flare-ups. The Veteran also claims that the muscle spasms have become severe enough that they have resulted in an abnormal curvature of his spine that has been confirmed by a medical professional. This appears to be a separate provider than the clinician the Veteran apparently contacted to provide an opinion as to the severity of this condition, as that clinician essentially ratifies the Veteran's lay description of that diagnosis having been made, rather than describing it as the clinician's own opinion based on an examination. Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran has described an increase in the severity of his condition that cannot be ascertained without an additional examination. This matter must be remanded for such an examination.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine is remanded.

The Board finds that VA failed to comply with its duty to assist prior to the August 2023 decision because the circumstances warranted the provision of a VA examination that was not provided. In a statement submitted in July 2023, the Veteran appears to describe symptoms that were not present at the previous examination conducted in March 2022, including muscle spasms and flare-ups. The Veteran also claims that the muscle spasms have become severe enough that they have resulted in an abnormal curvature of his spine that has been confirmed by a medical professional. This appears to be a separate provider than the clinician the Veteran apparently contacted to provide an opinion as to the severity of this condition, as that clinician essentially ratifies the Veteran's lay description of that diagnosis having been made, rather than describing it as the clinician's own opinion based on an examination. Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran has described an increase in the severity of his condition that cannot be ascertained without an additional examination. This matter must be remanded for such an examination.

3. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for maxillary sinusitis is remanded.

The Board finds that VA failed to comply with its duty to assist prior to the August 2023 decision because the circumstances required VA to provide the Veteran with a VA examination regarding this condition. In statements received in July 2023, the Veteran appears to describe symptoms that were not present at the previous examination in March 2022, including increased episodes of what he asserts are incapacitating episodes. In a statement that the Veteran's chosen clinician relied on to opine that the Veteran's rhinitis condition was insufficiently compensated, the Veteran described blocked nasal passages. As noted, these statements were addressed by a clinician selected by the Veteran who appears to have simply ratified the Veteran's lay statements without further examination. Consequently, the Board finds that this matter should be remanded for an additional examination documenting this increase in severity, if any.

4. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

The Board finds that VA failed to comply with VA's duty to assist prior to the August 2023 decision because the circumstances required VA to provide the Veteran with a VA examination regarding this condition. In a lay statement relied on by the Veteran's chosen clinician, the Veteran stated that a provider had diagnosed him with nasal polyps. This appears to have been a diagnosis made by a distinct medical provider from the clinician who opined that the Veteran's condition was insufficiently compensated, as that clinician appears to have simply ratified the Veteran's lay statement that this diagnosis was made by a third party. Consequently, the Board finds that there was evidence of a potential increase in severity of this condition that can only be resolved by the provision of a VA examination. Therefore, this matter must be remanded for that examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for the physicians who have diagnosed him with muscle spasms resulting in abnormal curvature of the spine and nasal polyps. Make two requests for the authorized records if they are identified, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected lumbar and cervical spine conditions. 

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

Also, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. 

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected sinusitis and rhinitis conditions. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Steven H. Johnston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.