Citation Nr: A25030593
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240615-451554
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for liver disability is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the most persuasive evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a liver disability. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for liver disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2006 to October 2006. 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for PTSD and entitlement to service connection for migraines, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for liver disability is denied.

The Veteran contends that she has a liver disability caused by or incurred in service; alternatively, she contends that she has a liver disability secondary to PTSD. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Generally, service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995).

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

With any claim for service connection, it is necessary for a current disability to be present. See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013). The requirement that a current disability exists is satisfied if the claimant had a disability at the time her claim for VA disability compensation was filed or during the pendency of the claim. See McClain, supra. Without a current diagnosis, there may be no service connection for the claimed condition.

In determining whether service connection is warranted, the Board shall consider the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claimant is entitled to the benefit-of-the-doubt when the competing evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal." That is, exact equipoise is not required to trigger the favorable benefit-of-the-doubt rule. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, symptoms, or diagnosis of a liver disability. 

Post-service treatment records do not contain any treatment for a liver disability, nor do they diagnose a liver disability.

The Veteran has not made any lay statements regarding her claimed liver disability.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of entitlement to service connection for a liver disability. In this case, the medical evidence of record does not reflect a current diagnosis of a liver disability, and no such diagnosis has been rendered at any time during the pendency of the appeal. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).  Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for a liver disability is denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her currently-diagnosed PTSD was caused by military sexual trauma (MST). 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), remands are proper for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

At a June 2023 VA examination, the Veteran stated after she was assaulted in service, her commanders gave her an Article 15 for fraternization. Additionally, the Veteran stated that she was diagnosed with PTSD through SSI. 

VA's duty to assist includes obtaining records that are in the custody of a Federal department or agency. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. 

To date, VA has not documented any attempts to locate the claimed Article 15, nor has VA documented any attempts to obtain the Veteran's SSI records. As these records are potentially relevant to the Veteran's claim, and the Veteran identified these records prior to the decision on appeal, a remand is required to allow VA to obtain them.   

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraines is remanded.

The Veteran contends that her migraines were caused by or incurred in service; alternatively, she contends that her migraines are secondary to PTSD.

The Veteran has not yet been afforded a VA examination for her migraines. 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), remands are proper for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

VA is obliged to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim for service connection when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability, the record indicates that the disability or symptoms of disability may be associated with active service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

On an in-service October 2006 report of medical assessment, the Veteran stated she had suffered from "constant splitting headaches" while on active duty.

On her February 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran claimed migraines. The Veteran is competent to report suffering from headaches, as headache pain is a symptom capable of lay observation. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).   

Based on the above evidence, the Board finds that the McLendon elements have been met prior to the decision on appeal. The Veteran has provided competent evidence of a current migraine disability. There is evidence - the in-service October 2006 medical assessment suggesting that the Veteran's migraines were incurred in or caused by service. The evidence of record indicates the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event. Therefore, the "low threshold" of McLendon has been satisfied pre-decision, and a remand for a VA examination is warranted. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that her migraine disability is related to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination. Although the Board is requesting a medical opinion regarding her lay contentions, this is for thoroughness and not based on a finding that these contentions are credible.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Make all necessary efforts to obtain the outstanding military personnel records, including the Article 15. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file. If such records are unable to be associated with the record, make a formal finding of unavailability and inform the Veteran and her attorney. 

2. Make all necessary efforts to obtain any outstanding records from the Social Security Administration (SSA), to include SSI records. If such records are unable to be associated with the record, make a formal finding of unavailability and inform the Veteran and her attorney.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate provider to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraine/headache disability. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety, including a copy of this REMAND, and that review should be noted in the report. Thereafter, the examiner is asked to fully respond to the following:

(a) Was the Veteran's migraine/headache disability caused by or otherwise incurred in active-duty service?

In providing an opinion, the examiner must consider the in-service October 2006 report of medical assessment where the Veteran reported suffering from "constant splitting headaches" during service. 

For all opinions, the examiner must provide a complete rationale, citing to the examiner's own expertise, medical principles, and/or evidence in the Veteran's record, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Eisenberg

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.