Citation Nr: A25030670
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240618-450390
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to specially adapted housing is denied.

Entitlement to special home adaptation is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a disability rated as permanent and total that causes loss or loss of use of both upper extremities or loss or loss of use of both of his lower extremities, one lower extremity together with the residuals of organic disease or injury, or one lower extremity together with one upper extremity, any of which preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; nor does he have service-connected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk, or loss of use of one lower extremity with blindness in both eyes resulting in only light perception.

2. The Veteran does not have a permanent and total service-connected disability which includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, or that is due to burn injuries or residuals of an inhalational injury, nor does he have a service-connected disability due to blindness in both eyes, with corrected central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to specially adapted housing have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809.

2. The criteria for entitlement to special home adaptation have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809a.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran has active service from November 1994 to November 1997.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that the AOJ requested the Veteran submit any relevant private treatment records or submit information with which VA can assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records. VA requested records for which the Veteran submitted a proper release. The duty to assist is not a one-way street. If a Veteran desires help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining evidence. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991). Thus, the Board finds that VA has satisfied the duty to assist. No further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist in development. Smith v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 227 (2000); Dela Cruz v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 143 (2001); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).

The standard set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) only permits constructive receipt of Veterans Health Administration (VHA) records that not only existed prior to the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal, but also for which the claimant furnished sufficient information to make the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) aware of the existence of those records. Thus, the Board's consideration of VHA records is limited to the same.  Here, the Board finds that VA treatment records were obtained and reviewed consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) and the AMA framework.

38 C.F.R. § 3.103 provides that a Veteran, upon request, is entitled to a hearing prior to VA's adjudication of an initial or supplemental claim.  The Board observes that notice regarding the opportunity for a hearing at the AOJ was not provided in this case. In Bowen, the Court found that there was no due process violation in the denial of the Veteran's requested hearing before the AOJ because the Veteran had subsequently been offered the opportunity to have a hearing before the Board. Bowen v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 250, 253 (2012). Here, the Veteran was offered a choice of three dockets in the AMA framework to include the Board hearing docket. Although the issue in Bowen was not one of notice, the Board cannot discern a basis to find that the underlying holding and logic of Bowen would not lead to the same finding of a lack of prejudicial error under the procedure and facts of this case.

Although all the evidence of record has been thoroughly reviewed, only the most relevant and salient evidence is discussed below. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The analysis in this decision focuses on what the evidence shows or fails to show with respect to the matter decided herein. The Veteran should not assume that pieces of evidence not explicitly discussed herein have been overlooked. See Allday v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 517, 527 (1995).

The November 2022 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims for specially adapted housing and special home adaptation. This is a favorable finding by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) and the Board will proceed to the address the claim on the merits.  See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

1. Entitlement to specially adapted housing.

2. Entitlement to special home adaptation.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to specially adapted housing under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809, or, in the alternative, entitled to a special home adaptation grant under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a. 

Legal Criteria

Specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who is entitled to compensation for permanent and total disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis rated as 100 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.

Specially adapted housing is additionally available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which affect the functions of balance or propulsion. 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran can qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if the veteran has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of his or her vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees; such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature. Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a veteran that has a service-connected permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)). 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a.

"Loss of use" is not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 or 3.809a. Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a hand or foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well-served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to grasp, manipulate objects, balance, or propel oneself forward. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63. The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has found that a "loss of use" exists when there is "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity, and functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination should be taken into account when making that determination. See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).

Background Facts

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for PTSD at 70 percent, PVD with pulmonary thromboembolism with asthma and sleep apnea at 60 percent, migraine headaches at 30 percent, TMJ with bruxism as 30 percent, right arm DVT at 20 percent, right arm and right axilla painful scars at 10 percent, tinnitus at 10 percent, left hear hearing loss at 0 percent, right arm scars at 0 percent, and residual lymph node scars at 0 percent. The Veteran was granted entitlement to TDIU based solely due to his PTSD.

A January 2022 VA respiratory examination noted the Veteran's service-connected respiratory did not require oxygen therapy or cause episodes of respiratory failure. The Veteran's PFT noted an FVC of 93, an FEV-1 of 101, and an FEV-1/FVC of 85.

A January 2022 VA scars examination indicated the Veteran's right upper extremity scar did not cause any limitation of function to include limited motion. 

A January 2022 VA hematologic and lymphatic examination indicted the Veteran's right arm DVT caused some limited function by way of discomfort with repetitive use but that the Veteran maintained full use of his right upper extremity.

An October 2022 VA treatment report noted the Veteran ambulated independently. 

Analysis

Based on the above facts and the following analysis, the Board finds the evidence weighs against a finding of entitlement to either specially adapted housing or special home adaptation.

The most persuasive evidence of record shows the Veteran's service connected disabilities do not loss or loss of use of both upper extremities or loss or loss of use of both of his lower extremities, one lower extremity together with the residuals of organic disease or injury, or one lower extremity together with one upper extremity, any of which preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; nor does he have service-connected amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk, or loss of use of one lower extremity with blindness in both eyes resulting in only light perception.

Also, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not include a permanent and total service-connected disability that constitutes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands, or that is due to burn injuries or residuals of an inhalational injury, nor does he have a service-connected disability due to blindness in both eyes, with corrected central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye.

In summary, the weight of the competent and probative medical evidence weighs persuasively against finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet any of the criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 or 3.809a for specially adapted housing or a special home adaption grant.

Accordingly, as the Veteran's service-connected disabilities are not shown to meet any of the applicable criteria, there is no basis for awarding entitlement to specially adapted housing or a special home adaptation grant, and the claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 2101; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809, 3.809a.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. MacTavish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.