Citation Nr: A25030916
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-446916
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for female sexual arousal disorder (FSAD), status post bilateral tubal ligation, as secondary to psoriasis is granted.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on loss of use of a creative organ is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran is shown to have FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, that is proximately due to service-connected disability.

2.  The Veteran is shown to have loss of use of a creative organ that is proximately due to service-connected disability; bilateral tubal ligation was advised on sound medical judgment to prevent possible future pathological consequences.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for entitlement to service connection for FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1701, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310, 4.1 (2024).

2.  The criteria for entitlement to SMC based on the loss of use of a creative organ have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(k), 5107 (2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310, 3.350 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1981 to December 1983.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by the Regional Office (RO). The Veteran filed an appeal to the Board by way of a June 2024 notice of disagreement (Form 10182) and elected Direct Review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

This case involves Direct Review by the Board of all of the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of a September 2023 rating decision.  The Board is prohibited by law from considering any new evidence received after the issuance of the September 2023 rating decision on appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 7113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2601(f), 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  Regardless, however, because the Veteran's claims have been granted herein, any evidence that was not considered by the Board has become moot.  

1.  Entitlement to service connection for FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, as secondary to psoriasis is granted. 

The Veteran essentially asserts that she underwent a bilateral tubal ligation procedure due to medication prescribed for her service-connected psoriasis, which procedure caused residual FSAD.

The Board notes by way of background that the Veteran's medical records show a history of treatment for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, noted as "severe" at times.  See, e.g., Records, January 1999 at p.5, November 2016 at p.1 of 9.  She has been service connected for psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis since May 1995. 

The Board is mindful that a medical procedure alone, without a residual medical condition arising due to the procedure, does not constitute a "disability" for VA compensation purposes.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1701(1) (defining a "disability" as a disease, injury, or other physical or mental defect); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (noting that 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 defines a disability as an impairment in earning capacity).  

Thus, although service connection cannot be awarded for the bilateral tubal ligation medical procedure by itself, as a medical procedure alone does not constitute a "disability" for VA compensation purposes involving impairment of earning capacity, in this particular case, the Veteran asserts that she incurred FSAD as a residual of the medical procedure.  Therefore, the Board has more properly characterized the claim as for entitlement to service connection for FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, as secondary to service-connected psoriasis.

A VA women's clinic note dated May 26, 2004, shows the nurse practitioner "stressed" to the Veteran that the soriatane (acitretin) she was prescribed to treat her service-connected psoriasis causes birth defects, and the Veteran was instructed that her birth control pills were not sufficient in light of the birth defect risk.  The Veteran verbalized understanding of the risk, that she had not been active for six months, and would continue abstinence until after a bilateral tubal ligation.  See CAPRI, February 2017 at p.403 of 488.  

An order for the procedure was entered stating "Veteran is taking acitretin (soriatane) for psoriasis which requires the use of effective birth control because of birth defects. . . pregnancy is a concern.  Please schedule a bilateral tubal ligation as soon as possible."  See Records, June 2022 at p.2 of 21.  A VA women's clinic record dated May 27, 2024, shows the nurse called the Veteran to notify her that a date was available in August to undergo a bilateral tubal ligation, and the Veteran agreed to have the procedure and to continue abstinence until after the procedure.  See CAPRI, February 2017 at p.403 of 488.  An August 2004 VA operative note shows a bilateral tubal ligation was performed.  See Records, June 2022 at p.6 of 21. 

A September 2022 VA examination report shows the examiner noted the Veteran's medical history, including the bilateral tubal ligation, and the examiner diagnosed FSAD.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral tubal ligation, and resultant loss of use of a creative organ, was at least as likely as not proximately due to her service-connected psoriasis.  The examiner noted the Veteran reported she underwent the tubal ligation at the recommendation of her dermatologist treating her psoriasis due to possible birth defects from the medication prescribed for the psoriasis, and that she reported she did not want to undergo the procedure because her husband wanted to have a son but was pressured to do so.  The examiner noted that it was documented in the VA medical records that neither of the Veteran's birth control prescriptions were considered sufficient to protect against pregnancy with use of acitretin (soriatane) for her psoriasis due to birth defects with this drug.  

The examiner further opined that the diagnosed FSAD is at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral tubal ligation.  The examiner reasoned the Veteran reported decreased sexual arousal and libido due to the tubal ligation and marital conflict resulting from the procedure.  The examiner cited to medical literature in support of his conclusion, including literature stating that post-permanent contraception regret is the only factor that appears to be a predictor of decreased sexual interest and pleasure.  

Subsequently, the RO requested an addendum from the same VA examiner to clarify whether the tubal ligation procedure was "elective."  In a July 2023 addendum, the VA examiner opined that the procedure was elective insofar as it was not necessitated for medical treatment of a condition.  The Board find this addendum opinion to have no probative value, however, because it fails to address the fact that the Veteran credibly reported that she was "pressured" into undergoing the procedure by her treating dermatologist for her psoriasis due to risks of the medication prescribed for her psoriasis.  Moreover, while a tubal ligation may generally be considered an "elective" medical procedure as a form of birth control, in this particular case, the alternative was total abstinence, or risking birth defects, such that as a practical matter, the Board finds ultimately that the procedure was required and not elective.  Furthermore, "an operation is not considered to be one of election where it is advised on sound medical judgment for the relief of a pathological condition or to prevent possible future pathological consequences."  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(1)(iii).

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran is shown to have FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, that is proximately due to her service-connected psoriasis.  As shown above, in September 2022, the VA examiner opined that the bilateral tubal ligation procedure was at least as likely as not proximately due to her service-connected psoriasis, and that the FSAD was at least as likely as not proximately due to the tubal ligation procedure.  The VA examiner's September 2022 VA medical opinion is consistent with the contemporaneous VA medical records from 2004 that show the procedure was recommended due to the risk of birth defects from the Veteran's psoriasis medication.  The Board also finds the Veteran's report that she was pressured into undergoing the tubal ligation to prevent the risk of birth defects due to her psoriasis treatment be credible, as well as her report of experiencing subsequent loss of libido.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that entitlement to service connection for FSAD, status post bilateral tubal ligation, is warranted, and the claim is granted.  

2.  Entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is granted.

The Veteran also seeks entitlement to SMC based on the loss of use of a creative organ.

SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) is payable for anatomical loss or loss of use of one or more creative organs as a result of a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).  Loss of a creative organ will be shown by acquired absence of both testicles or ovaries or other creative organ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(1).

The September 2022 VA examiner opined that the Veteran had loss of use of a creative organ based on her bilateral tubal ligation procedure, which tubal ligation the examiner opined was at least as likely as not proximately due to her service-connected psoriasis, as explained above.  Based thereon, the Board finds that SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) based on loss of use of a creative organ is warranted.

The Board has considered that SMC for loss or loss of use of a creative organ cannot be granted when such loss is entirely the result of elective surgery.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a)(1)(iii).  As explained above, however, the Board has found that the surgery was not elective in the practical sense.  Moreover, "an operation is not considered to be one of election where it is advised on sound medical judgment for the relief of a pathological condition or to prevent possible future pathological consequences."  The Board finds this Veteran's facts to be squarely contemplated by this exception because the tubal ligation surgery was advised on sound medical judgment to prevent possible future pathological consequences, specifically, to prevent birth defects.

Accordingly, the Board finds that loss of use of a creative organ due to service-connected disability is shown, and entitlement to SMC as described in 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) is warranted and the claim is granted.

 

Paulette Vance Burton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Juliano, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.