Citation Nr: A25030867
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 201015-116918
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include scoliosis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2009 to May 2009.

In April 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for a back disability most recently addressed in a March 2020 rating decision.  In August 2020, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  In the October 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2020 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

In an April 2024 decision, the Board denied service connection for a back disability, to include scoliosis.  In a December 2024 Court order, the Court vacated the Board's decision and remanded the claim for action consistent with the Joint Motion for Remand (JMR).

In this case, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include scoliosis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include scoliosis is remanded.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR THE REGIONAL OFFICE (RO) ADJUDICATOR:

An August 2020 medical opinion is insufficient because the examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statement noted at the August 2020 examination that she had "[w]orse back pain when leaving the [Army]."  A new medical opinion must be obtained with a rationale that adequately addresses whether the Veteran's back disability, to include scoliosis was aggravated by service.  This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW.

2. Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate medical provider.  Following a review of the record, and with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, assuming her statements are credible for the limited purpose of the request herein, the medical professional is requested to provide the following opinions:

(a)	Identify any back disability.

(b)	Is there clear and unmistakable (obvious or manifest) evidence that any back disability, to include scoliosis preexisted service? Why or why not? 

*In providing this opinion, the examiner should address and reconcile the January 2014 private treatment record from Crisp Regional Hospital that included an x-ray revealing scoliosis and finding "no congenitally abnormal thoracic or lumbar vertebra" along with the August 2020 VA examiner's opinion that the Veteran's scoliosis was present prior to service because it is congenital. 

(c)	For any back disability, to include scoliosis, that clearly and unmistakably pre-existed service, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability, to include scoliosis, worsened during service.  Why or why not? 

(d)	For any back disability, to include scoliosis which DID preexist service and also worsened during service, opine as to whether there is clear and unmistakable (obvious or manifest) evidence that the disability was NOT aggravated beyond its natural progression. Why or why not? 

*In providing the opinions in (c) and (d) above, the examiner must address the Veteran's lay statement that "she had [w]orse back pain when leaving the [Army]."  

(e) If any current back disability, to include scoliosis DID NOT preexist service, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any back disability, to include scoliosis, had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service. Why or why not?

The examiner's attention is drawn, but not limited to, the following additional evidence:

*An October 2007 entrance medical examination reflects a normal clinical evaluation for the Veteran's spine, and in an October 2007 medical history report, the Veteran indicated that she did not experience recurrent back problems. 

*A January 2009 medical re-examination indicates that the Veteran was qualified for service, with no defects or diagnoses found.

* An April 2009 entry in the STRs documents complaints of chronic upper back pain, with pain 9/10, that is worse with exercise, stooping, lifting, and sit-ups.  An x-ray of the thoracic spine revealed scoliosis.  The Veteran reported that she had scoliosis prior to the military and "just dealt with it" through basic training. 

*The Veteran reported that her back pain had its onset during basic training.  See August 2020 VA examination.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy.  See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.  In addition, a copy of this Remand must be provided to the examiner for review.

All requested opinions must be supported with a rationale based on generally accepted medical principles and the examiner's medical training and expertise.

3. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mecone, Alison M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.