Citation Nr: A25030200
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240730-458344
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder, due to another medical condition, to include insomnia (chronic sleep impairment) (hereinafter "depressive disorder with insomnia"), as secondary to service-connected degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's depressive disorder with insomnia is due to or the result of service-connected disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder with insomnia on a secondary causation basis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1997 to January 2017.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of the Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Board notes that evidence was associated with the claims file after the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, which was during a period of time that is outside the applicable evidentiary window.  Therefore, the Board has not considered that evidence in its present decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider the additional evidence that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and identify the evidence for the AOJ's consideration.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder with insomnia, as secondary to service-connected degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder with insomnia is warranted.

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis where a disability is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Service connection on a secondary basis is warranted if there is (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical evidence establishing a nexus (i.e., link) between the current disability and the service-connected disability.  Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509 (1998).  A nexus is established when medical evidence shows that the current disability was either caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

Any finding favorable to the claimant made by either a VA adjudicator, or by the Board is binding on all subsequent AOJ and Board adjudicators, unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  A finding means a conclusion either on a question of fact or an application of law to facts made by an adjudicator concerning the issue(s) under review.  See 38 C.F.R.   § 3.104.

The first element of service connection on a secondary basis is evidence of a current disability.  A November 2024 rating decision found a current disability of depressive disorder with insomnia.  The Board does not find evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in that favorable finding.  Thus, that favorable finding is binding on the Board.  Therefore, the first element has been established.

The second element of service connection on a secondary basis is evidence of a service-connected disability.  The Veteran is service connected for degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease, which was previously rated as a cervical strain.  See November 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Therefore, the second element has been established.

The third and final element of service connection on a secondary basis is medical evidence establishing a nexus (i.e., link) between the current disability and the service-connected disability.  A November 2024 rating decision found that the Veteran's depressive disorder with insomnia was due to the service-connected cervical strain (now rated as degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease).  The rating decision also found that anxiety is a symptom of the Veteran's depressive disorder with insomnia.  The Board does not find evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in those favorable findings.  Thus, those favorable findings are binding on the Board.  Therefore, the third and final element has been established.

The Board notes a recent decision by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC).  That decision dealt with the issue of whether the grant of service connection by the AOJ rendered moot a claim for service connection for the same disability before the Board.  That decision stated that once an appeal is in appellate status, the appeal can only be resolved by the Board.  Thus, a subsequent grant of service connection in a separate claim stream does not moot the service connection issue pending in a different claim stream.  See Johnson v. Collins, No. 23-7589 (Decided March 26, 2025).  As such, instead of dismissing the claim as moot, the Board is granting the claim.

The Board also notes the Veteran's report that he is only seeking service connection for depression, insomnia, and anxiety.  See November 2024 Correspondence.  As noted above, service connection is being granted for depressive disorder with insomnia and anxiety was found to be one of the symptoms of that disability.    

Therefore, entitlement to service connection for depressive disorder with insomnia, as secondary to service-connected degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease, is granted.

 

 

J. Abrams

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dougan, Adam T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.