Citation Nr: A25030405
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-456507
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to toxic exposure and secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1992 to August 1996.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in October 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran contends entitlement to service connection for hypertension as secondary to service-connected disability, as due to toxic exposure, and as directly service connected. 

As favorably found by the AOJ, the Veteran has a current hypertension disability, as confirmed by a VA exam and medical treatment records. 

For VA purposes, hypertension means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm. or greater. 38 C.F.R. §4.104 Diagnostic Code 7101, Note 1. The Veteran's service treatment records do not reflect that his diastolic blood pressure was predominantly 90mm. or greater during service. Non-VA medical records indicate that the Veteran was first diagnosed with hypertension in approximately 2011 or 2012. The Board finds the record is adequate for adjudication as it relates to direct service connection at this time. 

The record reflects the Veteran is in receipt of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), migraines, obstructive sleep apnea, temporomandibular joint disorder, and tinnitus. VA has obtained medical opinions as it relates to the Veteran's assertions that his hypertension is secondary to service-connected migraines or tinnitus. The Veteran and his representative have not asserted and the record does not reasonably raise that the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to service-connected obstructive sleep apnea or temporomandibular joint disorder. 

In September 2022 the Veteran first averred that his hypertension may be secondary to his service-connected PTSD. At a November 2022 informal conference, he explained this contention by stating that his doctor advised him that increased stress could relate to high blood pressure. In the subsequent adjudication of the claim, the AOJ found there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in failing to develop this theory of entitlement and encouraged the Veteran to submit a supplemental claim so that this theory of entitlement could be adjudicated. Shortly thereafter, the Veteran submitted a letter from his non-VA primary care provider who stated that his PTSD may also be contributing to his elevated blood pressure. The Veteran also submitted a supplemental claim providing a medical authorization form and medical treatment information for non-VA providers as further discussed below. 

Despite this, the AOJ did not develop or discuss whether the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to his PTSD in the subsequent adjudication in October 2023, which is also the rating decision on appeal. While the non-VA primary care provider's statement is not adequate to support an award of secondary service connection, it clearly triggers VA's duty to assist and obtain a VA medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to his PTSD. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). Failure to obtain a VA medical opinion and further adjudicate whether the Veteran's hypertension is secondary to his service-connected PTSD under the circumstances is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted to correct it. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Additionally, the record reflects the Veteran treated with a non-VA primary care provider located in Vienna, Virginia, from early 2000 to 2011, and upon relocating in approximately 2011, that he started seeing another non-VA primary care provider located in Warrenton, Virginia. Limited medical records from both of these providers submitted by the Veteran provide an indication that he may have received treatment for hypertension from both non-VA providers. The record reflects the Veteran provided VA with contact information for both providers and an authorization for VA to obtain his medical records before the rating decision on appeal was issued. 

Despite this, VA never attempted to obtain complete medical records from either non-VA primary care provider. The records are relevant as they pertain to the diagnosis of and treatment for the disability at issue. Failure to attempt to obtain the non-VA primary care provider records from either provider is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand is warranted to correct it. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Request that the Veteran complete the appropriate medical authorization form(s) for VA to obtain the non-VA primary care medical treatment records from the two different providers discussed above from discharge to the present. Once obtained, make at least two requests for the authorized records, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile. 

The Veteran is informed now and should be informed again by the AOJ that he may obtain and submit the records himself. 

Associate all development related to this directive and any responses or medical records from the Veteran or the non-VA providers related to this directive with the record. 

2. After completing action one above, forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate medical professional for an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. Following a review of the relevant record, the medical professional is asked to address the following:

Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension is 1) due to or caused by his PTSD or 2) aggravated by his PTSD? 

The medical professional must address the non-VA primary care provider's November 2022 statement relating to this inquiry. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sasha Larie Boersma

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.