Citation Nr: A25030391
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 231116-394639
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture is granted.  

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is caused by his service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture, with obesity as an intermediate step.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1984 to January 1987. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In May 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of a service connection claim for obstructive sleep apnea most recently addressed in a June 2021 rating decision. In July 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the October 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In the October 2023 supplemental claim decision on appeal, the AOJ found new and relevant evidence was received.

In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that in June 2021, an Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative (VA Form 21-22a) was received appointing an attorney as the Veteran's representative. In February 2022, the attorney submitted a Motion to Withdraw as the Veteran's representative but since then has continued to submit documents on the Veteran's behalf. In February 2025, the Board sent a letter to the Veteran to verify his representation. The letter stated that if the Board did not hear from him or his new representative within 30 days, it would assume that he wished to remain represented by the attorney. The Board did not receive a response to the letter. Therefore, the Veteran remains represented by the private attorney. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture is granted. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to his service connected disabilities. See May 2021 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). Specifically, the Veteran contends that his obesity was caused and/or aggravated by his service connected major depressive disorder and that the resultant obesity was a substantial factor in the Veteran developing obstructive sleep apnea. See May 2021 Statement in Support of Claim (VA Form 21-4138).  

December 2022 and October 2023 rating decisions made favorable findings that new and relevant evidence was received, that the claimed primary disability was service connected and that the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in a June 2020 VA treatment record; the Board is bound by these favorable findings.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Direct service connection may be granted based on evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). VA has amended 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 to explicitly incorporate the holding in Allen, except that it will not concede aggravation unless a baseline for the claimed disability can be established with evidence created prior to any aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

Obesity may serve as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020); VAOPGCPREC-1-2017. In Walsh, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) further held that the Board needs to consider the obesity-intermediate step theory predicated on aggravation where appropriate. The Court held that proper interpretation of G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity/aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence that it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991).

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature. Id.; see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The determination as to whether the requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a); Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints of, treatment for, or diagnoses of obstructive sleep apnea or a respiratory disorder during active service. Post service treatment records confirm a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. See e.g., VA treatment record, June 2020. Post-service treatment records also confirm a diagnosis of obesity. See October 2023 VA treatment record.

Turning to the question of whether there is an etiological relationship between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and a service connected disability, the Board notes that the record contains the below etiology opinions which must be considered and weighed. See Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60, 69-70 (1993). When faced with conflicting medical opinions, the Board may favor one medical opinion over the other. See Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 22, 30 (1998). The Board will consider the opinions below.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2021. At that time, the VA examiner diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea with additional diagnoses that pertain to sleep apnea of hypertension, diabetes mellitus type II and obesity. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected major depressive disorder. The rationale provided was that the conditions of sleep apnea and depression are not medically related. The examiner stated that a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. Therefore, the VA examiner concluded that a nexus was not established.  

The Board finds the May 2021 VA medical opinion inadequate to decide the claim. The examiner did not consider the theory of obesity as an intermediate step, specifically, whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities led to his obesity which, in turn, led to his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. Walsh v. Wilkie, supra. Regarding this, the VA examiner noted obesity as a related diagnosis to obstructive sleep apnea. Moreover, the VA examiner failed to provide an opinion as to whether obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by the Veteran's service connected disabilities. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013). This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the claim. 

A July 2021 private medical opinion was submitted by M.B., PA-C, MPLC that was associated with the claim file in May 2022. The provider opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service connected disabilities to include major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture with subsequent sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity. The provider noted that they had reviewed all available pertinent medical records to include documentation of lay statements inclusive of obstructive sleep apnea symptomatology. The provider discussed the medical literature documenting that mental health disorders to include major depressive disorder often lead to social isolation, impaired functioning, and weight gain. The provider noted that due to the Veteran's service connected degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture, the Veteran experienced pain, painful range of motion and associated sleep disturbance related to the pain. The provider indicated that due to the chronic pain in the Veteran's right lower extremity and left lower extremity, he participated in less physical activities and had led a more sedentary lifestyle, which is a contributing factor to his weight gain. The provider discussed medical literature supporting a relationship between chronic pain and weight gain in obese patients. The provider noted the Veteran's previously submitted lay statement that he gained 130 pounds since separation from service. The provider discussed that medical literature confirms a nexus between body weight and weight gain with obstructive sleep apnea. Therefore, the provider concluded that the Veteran's service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture promoted sleep disturbance and weight gain and led to his current obesity which then led to his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Board finds the July 2021 private opinion to be probative. In this regard, the provider reviewed the medical evidence and medical literature and provided an adequate supporting rationale for the conclusions reached when attributing the obstructive sleep apnea to the Veteran's service connected disabilities when rendering the opinion. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). In addition, the provider provided clear conclusions and supporting data, as well as reasoned medical explanations that connected the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea to his service connected disabilities. Id. Accordingly, this opinion is afforded probative weight. 

Thereafter, a VA medical opinion was obtained in June 2022. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or caused by the Veteran's service connected disabilities. The rationale provided was that at the time of the sleep study the Veteran had a body mass index above 25 in either the overweight or obese category which is a majority cause of obstructive sleep apnea. Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's service connected disabilities did not cause his obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Board finds the June 2022 VA medical opinion inadequate to decide the claim. The examiner did not consider the theory of obesity as an intermediate step, specifically, whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities led to his obesity which, in turn, led to his diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. Walsh v. Wilkie, supra. Moreover, the VA examiner failed to provide an opinion as to whether obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by the Veteran's service connected disabilities. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra. This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the claim.  

Thereafter, a VA medical opinion was obtained in March 2023. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by service. The rationale provided was that the Veteran did not have sleep apnea during service. The examiner discussed the July 2021 private opinion and cited to medical literature finding that while obesity is a significant risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea, a substantial portion of patients with obstructive sleep apnea are not obese. The examiner discussed medical literature noting that the relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and depression is unclear. The examiner found that the Veteran's obesity was more a factor of diet, sedentary lifestyle and culture than his service connected disabilities. 

The Board finds the March 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate to decide the claim. The VA examiner did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusions reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The medical opinion primarily listed medical literature before listing its conclusion. Dennis v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 18, 22 (2007). Moreover, the VA examiner failed to provide an opinion as to whether obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by the Veteran's service connected disabilities. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra. This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the claim.  

Thereafter, a VA medical opinion was obtained in July 2023. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not proximately due to or caused by the Veteran's service connected disabilities. The examiner also concluded that an aggravation beyond the natural progression was not found. The rationale provided was that medical literature shows that even when musculoskeletal conditions inhibit the ability to participate in high impact activities such as running or jumping, low impact options are available such as swimming and eating a healthy diet. The examiner cited to medical literature noting that there are doubts as to the significance of the relationship between depression and obesity and that most individuals with depression are not obese. The examiner noted that the obesity is more a factor of diet, sedentary lifestyle and culture than his service connected depression. 

The Board finds the July 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate to decide the claim. The VA examiner did not provide a supporting rationale for the conclusions reached. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra. The medical opinion primarily listed medical literature before listing its conclusion. Dennis v. Nicholson, supra. Moreover, the VA opinions for causation and aggravation were identical without providing separate rationales. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, supra. This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the claim.  

In sum, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The only probative opinion of record is in support of the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection. Moreover, there is no sufficient basis for the Board to reject this supportive opinion and to further develop the claim. Cf. Mariano v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 305, 312 (2003) (holding that, because it is not permissible for VA to undertake additional development to obtain evidence against an appellant's case, VA must provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases for its decision to pursue such development where such development could be reasonably construed as obtaining additional evidence for that purpose).

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to service connected major depressive disorder, degenerative arthritis, left knee, status post meniscectomy, degenerative arthritis, right knee, status post meniscectomy and right ankle degenerative arthritis with right Achilles tendonitis/tendon rupture is warranted. The appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Kuhn, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.