Citation Nr: A25030264
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 250109-500056
DATE: April 2, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to essential tremors, claimed as Parkinson's Disease, to include as due to exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that the abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder is related to exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1956 to September 1960. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the abnormal MRI claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the essential tremor claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Finally, the Board notes in a recent decision, the Court determined that generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363 (Vet. App. June 21, 2024). 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later; unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303.

In January 2025, the Board sent the Veteran a letter which asked whether he would like to waive his right to switch dockets. In February 2025, he replied that he waived that right and wished that the Board would decide his appeal as soon as possible. Accordingly, the Board will proceed with appellate review.

1. Entitlement to abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service - the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In addition, service connection for certain chronic diseases may be established on a presumptive basis by showing that the condition manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 271-72 (2015). Although the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumptive period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

Additionally, for certain chronic diseases with potential onset during service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Finally, Veterans who served no less than 30 days at Camp Lejeune during the period beginning on August 1, 1953, and ending on December 31, 1987, are presumed to have been exposed during such service to contaminants in the water supply, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the individual was not exposed to contaminants in the water supply during that service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(7)(iii). For Veterans meeting these service requirements, the following diseases shall be service connected if manifested to a compensable degree at any time after service even though there is no record of such disease during service: kidney cancer, liver cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, adult leukemia, multiple myeloma, Parkinson's disease, aplastic anemia and other myelodysplastic syndromes, and bladder cancer. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(f).

Discussion

The Veteran alleges that he has a disorder which he claims is related to Parkinson's disease, which is related to in-service exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune.

First, the Board finds that there is a current disability. See Holton, 557 F.3d at 1366; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). The Veteran underwent a VA examination in November 2023 which found a diagnosis of essential tremor. A January 2024 VA examiner found no diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. And a July 2024 VA examiner found that there was a diagnosis of abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder. Accordingly, the first element of service connection is met.

Second, the Board finds that there was an in-service event, injury, or disease. See Holton, 557 F.3d at 1366; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). A careful review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) is silent for any complaints or, or treatment for any Parkinson's like symptoms; however, his military personnel records, to include the DD-214, confirmed that he had service at Camp LeJeune from 1957 to 1960.  The Board finds the Veteran's statements competent as they are capable of lay observation. 38?U.S.C. §?1154(a); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005) (noting that a lay witness is competent to report to factual matters of which he or she has first-hand knowledge). Further, these statements have been corroborated by the military personnel records. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995) (noting that the probative value of a witness statement may be affected by inconsistency with other evidence), aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). Accordingly, the second element of service connection is met.

Third, the Board finds that the evidence of record does support a finding that the abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder is related to active service.  

The February 2024 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion in which they found that the essential tremors were less likely than not caused by toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Additionally, they concluded that essential tremors are primarily due to genetic factors, and that a review of the medical and scientific literature did not demonstrate a definitive causal relationship between the claimed condition and toxic exposure risk activities.

The July 2024 VA examiner provided a mixed nexus opinion, in which they noted that there was no formal diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, or parkinsonism, but acknowledged the diagnoses of REM behavior sleep disorder, sleep apnea, and periodic limb movements (PLMDB), which would explain his abnormal sleep patterns. They indicated that Parkinson's is often associated with basal ganglia lesions, but that they could also be seen in aging, or other neurocognitive disorders. The examiner noted the Veteran's report of difficulty starting movement in the upper extremities but found that this possibly could be related to a cervical spine condition. They stated that there was no evidence of essential or resting tremor on examination, but that any related symptoms could also be related to the cervical spine condition. 

The examiner continued and acknowledged that the abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder can be associated with Parkinson's and parkinsonism. They cited to research which showed that generally 50 to 70 percent of patients with idiopathic REM behavior sleep disorder will go on to develop Parkinson's disease with 10 years. The examiner explained that the ventriculomegaly, which was beyond what is expected of his age, and that while there was no testing yet for normal pressure hydrocephalus, it is associated with parkinsonism due to several proposed mechanisms. They cited to research which suggested that the parkinsonism manifestations in normal pressure hydrocephalus resulted from mechanical basal ganglia disruption, which leads to inadequate blood flow to the brain. Therefore, the examiner concluded that given the association of REM behavior sleep disorder with Parkinson's, and the presumptive association of Parkinson's like conditions with contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune, it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran had an abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder that was caused by the toxic exposures risk activities at Camp Lejeune.

In August 2024, the AOJ obtained an addendum medical opinion to address the inconsistencies in the July 2024 opinions. This examiner opined that in the absence of a formal diagnosis of Parkinson's disease or parkinsonism, it was less likely than not that the abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder were related to service, to include Camp Lejeune service, as these have other potential contributing factors, to include age, severe sleep apnea, and service and lumbar spine conditions. They noted that the Veteran was not treated for these conditions during service, and that he did not have the key clinical features typically associated with Parkinson's disease. 

Regarding the tremors, the examiner noted that two physicians had confirmed that the Veteran did not display any tremor on examination, which further supports the absence of a Parkinson's disease or Parkinsonism diagnosis.  They explained that the moderate intracranial atrophy observed in the veteran is considered a normal part of aging and cannot be specifically linked to the toxic exposure risk activity exposure. 

The Board affords the July 2024 medical opinion significant probative value, in relevant part, as it was conducted by a medical professional with consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, and specific facts in this case, and was supported by well-reasoned rationale. Factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion include the thoroughness and detail of the opinion. Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000). A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

Low probative value is assigned to the August 2024 VA addendum opinion. Although they concluded that the Veteran had other potential risk factors which could have contributed to the current symptoms, they neglected to provide any supporting rationale to explain why those risk factors were more likely than exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune. Id.

Low probative value is also assigned to the February 2024 opinion. First, the examination did not contain a medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's essential tremors are otherwise related to service, apart from exposure to contaminates in the water at Camp Lejeune. Additionally, the examiner opined the Veteran's essential tremors are due primarily to genetic factors without identifying such factors or applying them to the Veteran's specific circumstances. See Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 18, 22 (2007) (a bare conclusion, even one reached by a healthcare professional, is not probative without a factual predicate in the record).

Additionally, the examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statement that no family history exists of essential tremors. Similarly, the VA examiner did not address any statements made by the Veteran regarding symptomology, or lack thereof, such as when any initially manifested or progressed. See Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (noting that a medical opinion which does not consider the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history, even if recorded in the course of the examination, is inadequate). Lastly, the examiner provided a link to a scientific journal article without describing its relevancy to the opinion.

Low probative value is also assigned to the portion of the July 2024 medical opinion which addressed the lack of a tremor diagnosis, as well as the August 2024 addendum opinion. The requirement for service connection that there be a current disability is satisfied when the disability is shown at the time of the claim or during the pendency of the claim, even though the disability subsequently resolves. McClain v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?319?(2007). The November 2023 VA examiner found a diagnosis of essential tremor. The Veteran has not asserted that the tremors were constant. That they were not evident on examination in July 2024 does not necessarily eliminate any possibility that there is still a current diagnosis which is related to service.

Finally, the Board notes that although the August 2024 examiner suggested that two physicians now had confirmed that there was no tremor demonstrated on examination, the November 2023 examiner was a Nurse Practitioner, the July 2024 examiner was a Physician's Assistant, and the August 2024 examiner was a Medical Doctor. Additionally, again, the November 2023 examiner found tremors. The August 2024 examiner did not actually meet the Veteran. A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Accordingly, as the probative evidence of record is in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the criteria for the claim of entitlement to service connection for abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder have been met, and to that extent, the appeal is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to essential tremors, claimed as Parkinson's Disease, to include as due to exposure to contaminated drinking water at Camp Lejeune, is remanded.

The Board directs attention to the discussion above regarding errors in the July, and August 2024 opinions. Although this appeal includes a grant of entitlement to service connection to abnormal brain MRI (bilateral basal ganglia lesions, ventriculomegaly, and moderate atrophy) with REM behavior sleep disorder, this is not a grant in whole as it does not include the Veteran's primary complaint of essential tremors, which he claimed as Parkinson's disease. Again, the November 2023 VA examiner found a diagnosis of essential tremors. The July, and August 2024 examiners determined that there was no diagnosis of essential tremors and provided negative nexus opinions in part based on the lack of a diagnosis but neglected to address the previous diagnosis. Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified, and remand is required. 

By this remand the Board makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any statements on file.

?

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the essential tremors from a VA examiner. The entire claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner. If an examination is deemed necessary, it shall be provided. An explanation for all opinions expressed must be provided.

NOTE (1): An adequate medical opinion may not be predicated solely on the absence of an in-service diagnosis or documented complaints.

NOTE (2): If any medical history is rejected, a complete explanation is required.

NOTE (3): The examiner is reminded that the requirement for service connection that there be a current disability is satisfied when the disability is shown at the time of the claim or during the pendency of the claim, even though the disability subsequently resolves.

(a)	The examiner must provide an opinion regarding whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher, that the essential tremors had onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service, including, but not limited to exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated drinking water.

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the fact essential tremors are not on the list of diseases that are presumptively associated with exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.

(b)	The examiner should consider the following: 1) the November 2023 VA examination which included a diagnosis of essential tremor, and the Veteran's description of symptoms; 2) July and August 2024 VA medical opinions; and 3) the statement that there is no family history of essential tremors. 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rogos, John M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.