Citation Nr: A25030757
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240519-441113
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1988 to November 1991.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD, the additional evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of that claim.

Service Connection Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

In December 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for anxiety, depression, and PTSD.  A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records reflects diagnoses for generalized anxiety disorder, major depression, and adjustment disorder with depressed mood.  There is also a positive PTSD screening, and a note to rule out PTSD in conjunction with a diagnosis for major depressive disorder.  Thus, as the Veteran's record reflects multiple diagnoses for psychiatric disorders and raises the possibility of a diagnosis for PTSD, the Veteran's claim has been recharacterized as service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

In this case, the record reflects that the Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in March 2023 regarding his claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, however, he was a "no show."  Following the missed examination, the Veteran did call requesting to reschedule the examination.  He indicated that he had missed the examination because he had requested the wrong date for the examination and relayed that he would make the rescheduled examination.  An additional examination for May 2023 was indicated to have been cancelled because the Veteran was unavailable.  The record does not show any further attempts to reschedule the examination for a date the Veteran would be available.  Thus, the Veteran has not been provided with a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed psychiatric disorder.  Here, the record shows the Veteran's willingness to attend a VA examination, however, there appeared to be unresolved scheduling conflicts.  Thus, a remand is necessary due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error to work together with the Veteran to find a time that he is available and schedule him for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Board notes in conjunction with remanding the claim for a VA examination, that while VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating his claim, it is the Veteran's responsibility to report for examinations and to cooperate in the development of his claim, as the duty to assist is not a one-way street.  See Woods v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 214, 224 (2000). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, and PTSD.  The examiner should first reconcile the Veteran's psychiatric diagnoses, in particular with regard to whether the Veteran has a diagnosis for PTSD.  The examiner should then answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Lutgens-Staley, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.