Citation Nr: A25030197
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240705-455103
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine-headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the United States Air Force from June 1994 to June 1998. 

The Veteran timely appealed a July 31, 2023, decision to the Board and selected Direct Review in a July 2024 VA Form 10182. 

Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of July 31, 2023-the date of the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after July 31, 2023, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran asserts service connection for sinusitis/chronic sinusitis. 

The Veteran underwent an examination for her sinusitis claim in September 2022. See 9/28/2022, C&P Exam. The examiner found the Veteran did not have a sinus, nose, throat, larynx, or pharynx condition. However, the examiner also noted that the Veteran had sinusitis. The Veteran acknowledged constant use of Flonase for sinus problems. The examiner also indicated they were unable to confirm chronic sinusitis based on the examination and evidence of record. A September 2022 sinus x-ray reflects normal paranasal sinuses. 

In this matter, the Board finds that a remand is required to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board acknowledges that while the Veteran was scheduled for and completed an examination, the findings are inconsistent with other relevant evidence reported in the examination. For example, the examiner indicated the Veteran did not have chronic sinusitis; however, the examiner also documented the Veteran had sinusitis. The Veteran also used Flonase for her sinuses. The examiner did not reconcile their findings with the Veteran's lay statements at the examination or the inconsistency regarding a sinusitis diagnosis. As such, the Board finds that an additional examination is warranted as such is necessary to address these inconsistencies/inadequacies in the examination reports and to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Also, the claims file shows the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service. See 5/16/2023, Other. A remand is also necessary to provide an opinion that complies with the statutory duty imposed by the PACT Act for an opinion consistent with a TERA. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1117, 1168. As such, addendum opinions are necessary.

2. Entitlement to service connection for migraine-headaches is remanded.

The Veteran asserts service connection for migraine-headaches. 

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of migraines, to include as reported in the June 2023 VA examination (associated with the claims file in July 2023). See 7/3/2023, C&P Exam. 

The June 2023 examiner found the Veteran's migraines were due to her sinusitis. See 7/3/2023, C&P Exam. 

Based on this, the claim for entitlement to migraines is intertwined with the above remanded claim for service connection for sinusitis. Therefore, the Board finds adjudication of entitlement to migraines would be premature because it is inextricably intertwined with the above remanded claim. See Harris v. Derwinksi, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (noting that two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision on one issue cannot be rendered until the other issue has been considered). As such, this issue is deferred on this basis.

However, as noted above, the claims file shows the Veteran participated in a TERA during service. See 5/16/2023, Other. A remand is also necessary to provide an opinion that complies with the statutory duty imposed by the PACT Act for an opinion consistent with a TERA. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1117, 1168. The June 2023 examiner did not provide a TERA opinion. As such, an addendum opinion is necessary.

These matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination for her sinusitis claim. Send the file to an appropriate examiner and ask the clinician to review the claims file to become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history.

--Identify all sinusitis diagnoses during the period on appeal (September 2022 onward). If the examiner disagrees with a prior diagnosis, he or she must clearly explain why. Then, the examiner is to address the following:

(a.) For each disability, the examiner is to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any of the Veteran's current (present at any time since September 2022) disabilities, is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include participation in toxic exposure risk activity or activities? 

A comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided.  All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered.  If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Obtain an addendum opinion or schedule the Veteran for an examination, if necessary, by an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology the Veteran's migraines. Then, address whether: 

(a.) It is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that her disorder is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include participation in toxic exposure risk activity or activities? 

In forming an opinion, the examiner must consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

Inform the examiner that a comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided. All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.M., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.