Citation Nr: A25030849
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 240720-457160
DATE: April 3, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic skin condition, to include dermatitis herpetiformis, folliculitis, and eczema is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1990 to June 1990 and from November 1990 to May 1991.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic skin condition, to include dermatitis herpetiformis, folliculitis, and eczema is remanded.

The Board is not able to make a fully informed decision regarding the issue of service connection for chronic skin condition, to include dermatitis herpetiformis, folliculitis, and eczema.

The Veteran contends that a chronic skin condition is related to his service in Saudi Arabia.  He asserts that he never suffered from any skin condition until his return back from the war.  July 23, 2023, Correspondence.  The Veteran submitted July 2023 buddy statements from his older brother and childhood friend who state that the Veteran started having chronic skin conditions after he returned from Saudi Arabia and did not have any skin condition as a child growing up.  In a July 2023 statement from the Veteran's spouse, she indicated that the Veteran's mother told her that the Veteran's skin condition started after he returned from his service at war.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023.  The examiner diagnosed dermatitis herpetiformis.  The examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion and reasoned that dermatitis herpetiformis is a chronic, autoimmune, blistering disease that is associated with gluten-sensitive enteropathy.  She noted a history of cellulitis over years following active duty in 1998 and concluded that there is insufficient evidence to suggest the Veteran's condition is related to toxic exposure risk activities.

The Board finds that the medical opinion is inadequate because the examiner does not acknowledge and consider the July 2023 lay statements of record regarding the onset of chronic skin condition.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not consider the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history).  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the nature and etiology of any chronic skin condition, to include dermatitis herpetiformis, folliculitis, and eczema.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner should review the claims file and address the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, i.e., nearly equal probability) that a chronic skin condition, to include dermatitis herpetiformis, folliculitis, and eczema manifested during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include conceded participation in toxic exposure risk activity.

Any examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report in-service events, his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  Lay statements of record cannot be disregarded solely due to lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.

A thorough rationale, to include reference to relevant evidence of record as appropriate, should be provided for all opinions expressed.  If the examiner is unable to provide a requested opinion, a supporting rationale must be given concerning why the opinion cannot be provided. 

 

K. Parakkal

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B Jackson, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.