Citation Nr: A25030463
Decision Date: 04/02/25	Archive Date: 04/02/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452977
DATE: April 2, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 2001 to June 2005.   

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from July 2023 and December 2023 Modernization Act (AMA) higher-level review rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The rating decisions were higher-level review of earlier August 2022 rating decision for the issue of service connection for a cervical spine disability and March 2023 rating decision for the issue of service connection for OSA.  

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) with the July 2023 and December 2023 higher-level review rating decisions.  The Veteran selected the direct review docket on each NOD.  As this is an AMA case on the direct review docket and the rating decisions on appeal are higher-level review, the Board may only consider the evidence already of record at the time of the VA's initial August 2022 and March 2023 rating decisions, respectively.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

Regarding the Veteran's claim for a neck disability, in a June 2022 correspondence, the Veteran stated that he had strained his neck while installing a radar during service.  Since separation he had continued to have varying degrees of pain and issues with his neck.  He described the pain as pulling and aching.  A private medical note dated in January 2020 shows complaints of neck pain and a diagnosis of neck pain was provided.    

The Board notes that one of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim of service connection.  Here, the record is insufficient to deny or grant the claim for service connection and the evidence triggering VA's duty to obtain an examination is of record.  The Board finds that the failure of the VA to provide the Veteran with a VA examination as to the nature and etiology of his claimed neck disability amounts to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  As such, the Board finds that remand is necessary for a VA examination.  See Mclendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(c)(4).

Regarding the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA, in a December 2022 correspondence, the Veteran stated that due to his service-connected mental health condition, he experienced insomnia.  He also noted that he had symptoms related to sleep apnea, to include snoring, trouble sleeping with frequent awakenings, headaches, daytime fatigue, poor concentration and difficulty completing tasks.  A private medical record, received in December 2022, shows that a diagnosis of OSA was provided.  

The Veteran underwent a VA sleep apnea examination in December 2022.  Upon examination, the VA examiner did not find that the Veteran had a OSA diagnosis.  The VA examiner stated that no diagnosis was warranted.  A sleep study performed did not note sleep apnea.  Abnormal reported symptoms due to other sleep conditions or illnesses was noted.    

The Board notes that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  In this case, the medical evidence of records reflects that during the pendency of the appeal, the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA.  The criteria for having a current disability are met if the Veteran has had a disability at any time during the pendency of the appeal, even if such disability is now resolved.  See McLain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).  As the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA during the appeal period, the Board finds that the failure of VA to obtain an opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed sleep apnea disability amounts to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  As such, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum.  Id.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed neck disability.  The entire claim file must be reviewed by examiner.  All indicated tests and studies should be conducted.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., there is at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any neck disability found upon examination had its clinical onset during, or is related to, the Veteran's active duty service.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached.

2. Return the Veteran's claim folder to the examiner who provided the April 2021 VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of his claimed sleep apnea for an addendum opinion.  If an additional examination is necessary, one should be scheduled.  If the prior examiner is not available, the file must be forwarded to another examiner to obtain the requested opinion.

The examiner is asked to specifically address the following:

(a) Identify all sleep apnea conditions diagnosed during the period on appeal. 

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any diagnosed sleep apnea (from anytime during the appeal process, even if now resolved) is etiologically related to service?

(c) Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any diagnosed sleep apnea (from anytime during the appeal process, even if now resolved) was caused by the Veteran's PTSD.  

(d) Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any that any diagnosed sleep apnea was aggravated by the Veteran's PTSD?  If aggravation is found, the examiner should provide the baseline manifestations of the Veteran's sleep apnea prior to aggravation by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.