Citation Nr: A25030068
Decision Date: 04/01/25	Archive Date: 04/01/25

DOCKET NO. 231226-404106
DATE: April 1, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an ulcer condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The most persuasive evidence demonstrates that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of an ulcer condition .

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an ulcer condition  have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from June 2002 to June 2006.  

An October 2023 VA Memorandum showed that the Veteran had qualifying service as a "Persian Gulf War Veteran" with service in Kuwait from February 2003 through July 2003 and from January 2005 through April 2005.  

This matter came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in the herein decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement for service connection for a stomach condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the December 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also requested to appeal the denial of a claim for service connection for headaches.   However, this issue was last adjudicated in a July 2013 rating decision, more than one year prior to the December 2023 VA Form 10182.  As such, the Board finds that this issue is not before the Board in this appeal.  However, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 if he wishes to have the agency review this matter.  This decision addresses the remaining issues.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for an ulcer condition is denied. 

The Veteran generally asserts that he warrants service connection for an ulcer condition.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval or air service. 38 U.S.C.§§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The evidence must show: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010). 

To satisfy the current disability element of a service connection claim, an appellant must have had the claimed disability at the time he filed the claim for VA disability compensation or develop that disability during the pendency of that claim. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 19 (2007); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  

The question before the Board is whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis for an ulcer condition. Based on a careful review of all the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence weighs against finding service connection for an ulcer condition is warranted.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not document any findings related to any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for any ulcer related problems.

Post-service VA treatment records do not document any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for symptoms related to an ulcer.

A November 2023 VA stomach conditions examination report reflects that after considering the Veteran's lay statements and a review of the claims file, that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis for any type of ulcer condition. 

No underlying disability has been clinically diagnosed during the appeal period or proximate thereto. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

The Board has considered the Veteran's assertions that he suffered from ulcers, but there is nothing in the VA treatment records to show such a diagnosis.  There is no evidence of imaging or testing showing ulcers or that the Veteran has been treated for such.  However, the Veteran has not demonstrated that he has the requisite specialized knowledge to diagnose an ulcer. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Veteran has not presented any competent and credible evidence of a current diagnosis for an ulcer condition, and the available evidence does not support that the Veteran had any persistent symptomatology that would suggest that he had an underlying chronic disability. Accordingly, the Veteran's assertions that he has a current a diagnosis for an ulcer have little probative. 

In summary, the evidence is neither evenly balanced or approximately so with regard to whether the Veteran's claim for service connection for an ulcer condition is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against service connection for an ulcer condition. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application as to this claim. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). Accordingly, the service connection claim for an ulcer condition is denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach condition is remanded.

In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, VA denied service connection for a stomach condition, noting no evidence of a currently diagnosed disability; however, for the reasons stated herein, the Board finds that additional development must be undertaken to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the November 2023 AMA rating decision, warranting a remand. 

In November 2023, VA obtained an opinion from a VA examiner who conducted a "records review" finding no objective evidence of a current stomach disability.  The records listed by the VA examiner as having been reviewed did not include any VA Medical Center Records. However, the Board notes that within the record there are VA Medical Records El Paso from December 2012, which showed that the Veteran had complained of a stomach or digestive problem, including diarrhea, and noted with a diagnosis of "IBS vs. fructose intolerance." These records, which show a potential relevant past diagnosis, were within the possession of the AOJ and should have been reviewed by the VA examiner before rendering an opinion on whether there was a present disability.  A medical opinion is not adequate to decide a claim if it does not consider all the relevant evidence of record. See Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. (2008) 295, 295 (2008)

Secondly, the Board notes that that the Veteran has qualifying service as Persian Gulf Veteran.  See October 2023 VA Memorandum.  Thus, to the extent that the examiner finds that the record does not show a diagnosis, the VA examiner should have considered whether the Veteran's complaints were indicative of a qualifying chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  However, there is no indication that the VA examiner made these findings.  To be adequate, a medical opinion should consider all raised theories of entitlement. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).  

Here, the VA opinion was not complete or adequate as it did not consider all relevant evidence nor all theories of entitlement.  VA's failure to obtain an adequate opinion is a pre-decisional error, warranting remand.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination and obtain a VA opinion from an appropriately qualified examiner WHO HAS NOT PREVIOUSLY PROVIDED AN OPINION IN THIS CASE regarding the nature and etiology of any stomach/intestinal conditions. The examiner must review the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND and this review should be noted in the opinion provided. The examiner must respond to the following:

(a.) Identify all current stomach/intestinal conditions. 

(b.) For each diagnosis, is the pathophysiology of the disability, (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood? The pathophysiology is the actual biochemical processes that occur in the body as part of a specific disease.

This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(c.) The VA examiner should also opine whether the Veteran's stomach/ intestinal conditions is a "functional gastrointestinal disorder" (which excludes structural gastrointestinal diseases), based on consideration of the Veteran's individual circumstances, in order to demonstrate the existence of a MUCMI.

VA defines "functional gastrointestinal disorders" as a group of conditions characterized by chronic or recurrent symptoms that are unexplained by any structural, endoscopic, laboratory, or other objective signs of injury or disease and may be related to any part of the gastrointestinal tract. Specific functional gastrointestinal disorders include, but are not limited to, irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, functional vomiting, functional constipation, functional bloating, functional abdominal pain syndrome, and functional dysphagia. These disorders are commonly characterized by symptoms including abdominal pain, substernal burning or pain, nausea, vomiting, altered bowel habits (including diarrhea, constipation), indigestion, bloating, postprandial fullness, and painful or difficult swallowing.

(d.) IF BOTH THE ETIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY ARE PARTIALLY UNDERSTOOD OR FULLY UNDERSTOOD, then opine whether any diagnosed stomach/intestinal disability was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, his active service, to include his conceded exposure to burn pits and other toxins during his deployment to Southwest Asia.

In this regard, the examiner is advised that the Veteran's conceded exposure to burn pits and other toxins is considered a toxic exposure risk activity, and thus, in providing this opinion, the VA examiner must consider and address the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments, as well as the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, he/she should indicate whether this inability is due to lack of knowledge among the medical community or based on the lack of procurable information.

 

 

LESLEY A. REIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fuller, L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.