Citation Nr: A25030910
Decision Date: 04/03/25	Archive Date: 04/03/25

DOCKET NO. 220204-217136
DATE: April 3, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cholesterol is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for cirrhosis of the liver is dismissed.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 23, 2017, for the grant of service connection for tinnitus is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than August 23, 2017, for the grant of service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 40 percent for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for stage III kidney disease is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for adrenal gland tumors is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for intestinal polyps is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the October 2024 Board hearing, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, the Board received notification from the Veteran that he wished to withdrawal his appeal as to entitlement to service connection for cholesterol.   

2. A November 2024 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) granted service connection for cirrhosis of the liver; as the benefit sought on appeal was granted in full in the November 2024 rating decision, there remains no controversy on appeal.

3. The Veteran's original claim for service connection for tinnitus was received by VA on August 23, 2017; there were no formal or informal claims for tinnitus prior to that date.

4. The Veteran's original claim for service connection for bilateral hearing loss was received by VA on August 23, 2017; there were no formal or informal claims for tinnitus prior to that date.

5. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's hearing loss is manifested by no more than Level V hearing in the left ear and Level X hearing in the right ear.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal service connection for entitlement to service connection for cholesterol have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. As the claim for entitlement to service connection for cirrhosis of the liver was granted in full, there remains no allegation of error of fact or law for appellate consideration. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for an effective date prior to August 23, 2017, for the award of service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).

4. The criteria for an effective date prior to August 23, 2017, for the award of service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a).

5. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 40 percent for bilateral hearing loss are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Part 4, Diagnostic Code 6100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1981 to October 1983 in the United States Army. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) issued in February 2021 and July 2021.

In the February 2022, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing Review docket. A hearing was held on October 9, 2024. The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the claim on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at time of the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  Thus, the Board has not considered evidence received outside of this evidentiary window.  

Regarding the issue of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that a TDIU claim is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when such claim is raised by the record. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). As such, the issue is before the Board for consideration.

1. Withdrawal

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. An appeal withdrawal is effective when received by the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205 (b)(3). Withdrawal may be made by the Veteran or by her authorized representative. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

In the present case, the Veteran knowingly testified at his Board hearing that he wished to withdraw his claim of entitlement to service connection for cholesterol. The Veterans Law Judge presiding over his hearing explained the consequences of withdrawal, and the Veteran indicated that he understood such consequences. Given the Veteran's expressed desire, the Board concludes that his intent was to withdraw this claim and further action concerning his claim is not appropriate. 

The Board finds that the criteria for withdrawal of this appeal have been met as the Veteran's withdrawal is in compliance with 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Applying the relevant VA regulation, the Board finds the Veteran properly withdrew his claim. Thus, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration. Accordingly, the appeal and it is dismissed.

2. Entitlement to service connection for cirrhosis of the liver 

A November 2024 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for cirrhosis of the liver. As the claim has been granted in full, there remains before the Board no controversy to resolve. Thus, the appeal as to this issue must be dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for tinnitus

4. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an effective date prior to August 23, 2017, for the grant of service connection for tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss. 

On August 23, 2017, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 21-0966 Intent to File. On February 24, 2018, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, requesting service connection for tinnitus and service connection for hearing loss. Service connection was initially granted for tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss in the July 2021 rating decision. The disability ratings were assigned effective August 23, 2017, the earliest date the RO determined that the Veteran's claim for benefits was received.

After thoroughly reviewing the record, the Board finds that prior to August 23, 2017, there were no pending and unadjudicated claims for service connection for tinnitus or bilateral hearing loss. 

While the Veteran has contended that an earlier effective date should be granted, he has not indicated why an earlier effective date is warranted based on the evidence of record, to include identifying a claim for service connection for tinnitus or bilateral hearing loss filed prior to August 23, 2017.

Accordingly, August 23, 2017, is the appropriate effective date for service connection for tinnitus and service connection for bilateral hearing loss, and the Veteran's claim of an effective date prior August 23, 2017, for the grant of service connection for tinnitus and service connection for bilateral hearing loss must be denied.

5. Entitlement to a higher disability rating for bilateral hearing loss

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a Veteran's present symptomatology with criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  See generally, 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  In general, the degree of impairment resulting from a disability is a factual determination and the Board's primary focus in such cases is upon the current severity of the disability.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 57-58 (1994); Solomon v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 396, 402 (1994).  However, staged ratings are appropriate in any initial rating/increased-rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-127 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

In evaluating service-connected hearing impairment, disability ratings are derived by a mechanical application of the rating schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered.  See Acevedo-Escobar v. West, 12 Vet. App. 9, 10 (1998); Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992).  The schedule provides a table (Table VI) to determine a Roman numeral designation (I through XI) for hearing impairment.  Testing for hearing loss is conducted by a state-licensed audiologist, including a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC).

The evaluation is based upon a combination of the percent of speech discrimination and the puretone threshold average which is the sum of the puretone thresholds at 1000, 2000, 3000 and 4000 Hertz, divided by four.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.85.  Table VII in the schedule is used to determine the percentage evaluation by combining the Roman numeral designations for hearing impairment of each ear, the horizontal rows representing the ear having better hearing and the vertical columns the ear having the poorer hearing.  The percentage evaluation is indicated where the row and column intersect.  Table VIa is used when the examiner certifies that the use of speech discrimination test is not appropriate because of language difficulties, inconsistent speech discrimination scores, etc., or when indicated under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.86.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(c).  

When the puretone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz) is 55 decibels or more, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  Each ear will be evaluated separately.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a).  When the puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  That numeral will then be elevated to the next higher Roman numeral.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(b).

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran was service connected for bilateral hearing loss at a 40 percent disability rating from August 23, 2017. See July 2021 Rating Decision.

In his February 2022 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran contended that he met the criteria for an increased disability rating for his service-connected bilateral hearing loss. 

In July 2021, the Veteran was afforded another VA audiological examination.  On the authorized audiological evaluation, puretone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

			HERTZ		

	1000	2000	3000	4000	average

RIGHT	90	100	110	110+	102.5

LEFT	55	60	70	85	67.5

The examiner indicated that the Veteran had sensorineural hearing loss of the bilateral ears.  Speech audiometry tested speech recognition ability with the Maryland CNC Test and revealed 92 for the right ear and 100 for the left ear. The examiner found that use of speech discrimination scores was appropriate for the Veteran.  

Under the rating criteria, the examination results constitute Level II hearing in the left ear and level IV hearing in the right ear.  When considered together, the result is a noncompensable (0 percent) disability evaluation. However, the Board finds that 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a) is applicable as the puretone threshold at each of the four specified frequencies (1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz) are 55 decibels or more bilaterally. Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a), the examination results constitute Level V hearing in the left ear and level X hearing in the right ear.  When considered together, the result is a 40 percent disability evaluation. The Board further finds that 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(b) is not for application as the puretone threshold is not 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz, and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a higher rating for his hearing loss disability. Notwithstanding the Veteran's contentions, the audiology examination yielded results that warrant a 40 percent disability evaluation. To the extent that his hearing is impaired, the fact that the Veteran's hearing acuity is diminished does not in and of itself establish entitlement to a higher disability rating.  To the contrary, it is clear from the Rating Schedule that a higher rating can be awarded only when loss of hearing has reached a specified measurable level.  The medical evidence does not support the assignment of ratings higher than those assigned during the entire appeal period.  

The Board in no way discounts the difficulties that the Veteran experiences as a result of his hearing loss.  However, as was explained above, the assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment is derived by a mechanical application of the rating schedule to the numeric designation assigned after audiometry results are obtained.  Hence, the Board has no discretion in this matter and must predicate its determination on the basis of the results of the audiology results of record.  See Lendenmann, 3 Vet. App. at 345.  In other words, the Board is bound by law to apply VA's rating schedule based on the Veteran's audiometry results.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence does not support the assignment of a disability rating in excess of 40 percent.  Therefore, entitlement to an increased rating for the impairment associated with bilateral hearing loss is not warranted. The Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine; however, because the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim for a higher rating and there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, that doctrine is not applicable here.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53-56 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for stage III kidney disease is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for adrenal gland tumors is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for intestinal polyps is remanded. 

Unfortunately, a remand is required with regard to these claims. Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, it is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The RO rendered favorable findings that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension, chronic kidney disease, adrenal tumor (by history), and sigmoid colon polyp. See February 2021 Rating Decision. Notably, a March 2019 private treatment note indicated that the Veteran had adrenal gland tumors that were inoperable. See February 2020 Medical Treatment Record, page 32.  In the absence of clear and unmistakable error, those findings are binding on the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In December 2024, private positive nexus opinions were provided for the Veteran's hypertension and kidney disease on a secondary basis. The author also noted that the Veteran's service-connected hepatitis C may have caused other health problems, such as his intestinal polyps and adrenal gland tumors. The opinions did not include the authors qualifications, certifications, or education. No header included the author's practice name, address, and the provided email address was to a generic email provider. Thus, the Board finds that it is unable to assign weight to the opinions as it is not known that the author is a medical professional providing a professional opinion. Further, these opinions are conclusory, without fully articulated explanatory rationales. Also, there is no indication that the private provider performed a physical examination or any diagnostic tests to confirm the presence of osteoarthritis. 

Nevertheless, based on the record before the Board, the Board finds that the matters must be remanded to afford the Veteran VA examinations in accordance with VA's duty to assist and the AOJ's failure to do so constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded

7. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded

8. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded

9. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is remanded

10. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded

11. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded

12. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded

Unfortunately, a remand is required with regard to these claims. Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, it is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The Veteran contends that service connection is warranted for bilateral shoulder disabilities, bilateral hip disabilities, bilateral knee disabilities, and bilateral ankle disabilities. He was provided VA examinations and medical opinions in July 2021. The VA examiner evaluated the Veteran and determined that the Veteran is not diagnosed to have a bilateral shoulder disorder, bilateral hip disorder, bilateral knee disorder, and/or bilateral ankle disorder. The Veteran refused X-rays, asserting that there were recent X-rays showing arthritis diagnoses in his file; however, the examiner was unable to find any x-rays of the Veteran's shoulders, hips, knees, or ankles. The Veteran reported onset of shoulder, hip, knee, and ankle pain during active service and residual pain and discomfort since. The pain was noted to cause shoulder, hip, knee, and ankle functional impairment. The VA examiner opined that the claimed conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, illness, or injury. The examiner reasoned that the object examination was normal and that there was no chronic diagnosis made for the shoulders, hips, knees, or ankles. 

However, the opinion is inadequate as it was based on an inaccurate factual premise. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). Notably, the examiner stated that there was no chronic diagnosis made for the shoulders, hips, knees, or ankles; however, the examiner noted shoulder, hip, knee, and ankle pain and discomfort since onset during active service. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 Fed. Cir. 1356 (2018) (holding that pain could constitute a disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 if it amounted to a functional impairment). Moreover, the examiner's opinion was based exclusively on the lack of objective evidence and did not address lay statements regarding shoulder, hip, knee, and ankle pain since military service. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's report of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a veteran's service medical records to provide a negative opinion). 

The Board notes that there is a private nexus opinion from Dr. E.S., which was received in February 2020, that opines that the Veteran's parachuting contributed to his osteoarthritis of the shoulders, hips, knees, and ankles. The Board notes, that this private medical opinion is of little probative value, however, the examiner provided no rationale for the finding that the Veteran had ostearthritis and did not reference or indicate that he conducted diagnostic tests to confirm the presence of osteoarthritis.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that the AOJ's failure to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA examination was a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting remand.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007) ("[O]nce the Secretary undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim . . . , he must provide an adequate one."); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

13. Entitlement to TDIU is remanded.

Throughout the appeal, the Veteran asserted that the combination of his service-connected disabilities, to include his bilateral hearing loss, has rendered him unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment. The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's individual disabilities cause a decrease in his ability to perform a full range of work, but there is no assessment of the collective impact of all his service-connected disabilities on his functional abilities with regard to activities of employment. The Board therefore finds this constitutes a duty to assist error under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4).  See also 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral shoulder disabilities, bilateral hip disabilities, bilateral knee disabilities, and bilateral ankle disabilities. 

The examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the bilateral shoulder disabilities, bilateral hip disabilities, bilateral knee disabilities, and/or bilateral ankle disabilities began during service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include the Veteran's reports of pain during and since active service. 

The examiner must also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the bilateral shoulder disabilities, bilateral hip disabilities, bilateral knee disabilities, and/or bilateral ankle disabilities are caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities.  

The examiner is advised that, even in the absence of a diagnosis, pain, in and of itself, may constitute a disability if it reaches the level of functional impairment of earning capacity. So, if a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment of earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" in providing the above requested medical opinions.  

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a medical basis for doing so.  Here, the record includes the Veteran's reports of pain during and since active service.

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.   

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his hypertension. The examiner must note review of the complete claims file, including this remand. Examination of the Veteran is not required, unless the VA examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary to provide the below-requested opinion.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether:

It is at least as likely as not that hypertension began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

It least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities.  

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a medical basis for doing so.  

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his stage III kidney disease. The examiner must note review of the complete claims file, including this remand. Examination of the Veteran is not required, unless the VA examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary to provide the below-requested opinion.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether:

It is at least as likely as not that stage III kidney disease began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

It least as likely as not that the Veteran's Stage III kidney disease is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities.   

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a medical basis for doing so.  

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his intestinal polyps. The examiner must note review of the complete claims file, including this remand. Examination of the Veteran is not required, unless the VA examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary to provide the below-requested opinion.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether:

It is at least as likely as not that intestinal polyps began during service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

It least as likely as not that the Veteran's intestinal polyps are caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a medical basis for doing so.  

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

5. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his adrenal gland tumors. The examiner must note review of the complete claims file, including this remand. Examination of the Veteran is not required, unless the VA examiner determines an in-person examination is necessary to provide the below-requested opinion.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether:

It is at least as likely as not that adrenal gland tumors began during service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

It least as likely as not that the Veteran's i adrenal gland tumors are caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities. 

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why this is so. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and that his reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinions. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a medical basis for doing so.

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

6.   Schedule the Veteran for the appropriate VA examination(s) to ascertain the level of functional impairment caused by all of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. The record, to include a complete copy of this Remand must be made available to the examiner, and all necessary tests should be accomplished. 

After reviewing the file, the Veteran's educational and occupational history, and examination findings, the examiner should provide an opinion addressing the functional impairment caused by all of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, and to what extent the Veteran's disabilities affected his ability to perform gainful occupational tasks.

The examiner is asked to comment on and describe the functional impairment caused solely by the service-connected disabilities as it pertains to the Veteran's ability to function in an occupational environment. For example, the examiner should describe the limitations and restrictions imposed by his service-connected impairments on such work activities

A clear rationale for all opinions rendered should be provided and a discussion of the facts and medical principals involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Costello, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.